CIK: 1001082
Company Name: ECHOSTAR COMMUNICATIONS CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-03-16


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Continued additional charges could be incurred in the future to reflect differences between estimated and actual collections. Income taxes . Our income tax policy is to record the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, as well as operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We follow the guidelines set forth in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes regarding the recoverability of any tax assets recorded on the balance sheet and provide any necessary valuation allowances as required. Determining necessary valuation allowances requires us to make assessments about the timing of future events, including the probability of expected future taxable income and available tax planning opportunities. In accordance with SFAS 109, we periodically evaluate our need for a valuation allowance based on both historical evidence, including trends, and future expectations in each reporting period. Future performance could have a significant effect on the realization of tax benefits, or reversals of valuation allowances, as reported in our results of operations. Reversing our current recorded valuation allowance would have a material positive impact on our Net income (loss) for future periods. Contingent liabilities . A significant amount of management judgment is required in determining when, or if, an accrual should be recorded for a contingency and the amount of such accrual. Estimates are developed in consultation with outside counsel and are based on an analysis of potential outcomes. Due to the uncertainty of determining the likelihood of a future event occurring and the potential financial statement impact of such an event, it is possible that upon further development or resolution of a contingency matter, a charge could be recorded in a future period that would be material to our consolidated results of operations and financial position. New Accounting Pronouncements In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (Revised 2004), Share Based Payment ( SFAS 123 ) which (i) revises SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation, ( SFAS 123 ) to eliminate the disclosure only provisions of that statement and the alternative to follow the intrinsic value method of accounting under Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees ( APB 25 ) and its related implementation guidance, and (ii) requires a public entity to measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments, including grants of employee stock options, based on the grant-date fair value of the award and recognize that cost in its results of operations over the period during which an employee is required to provide the requisite service in exchange for that award. The statement is effective for financial statements as of the beginning of the first interim period that begins after June 15, 2005. Companies may elect to apply this statement either prospectively, or on a modified version of retrospective application under which financial statements for prior periods are adjusted on a basis consistent with the pro forma disclosures required for those periods under SFAS 123. We are currently evaluating which transitional provision and fair value methodology we will follow. However, we expect that any expense associated with the adoption of the provisions of SFAS 123 will have a material negative impact on our results of operations. Seasonality Our revenues vary throughout the year. As is typical in the subscription television service industry, the first half of the year generally produces fewer new subscribers than the second half of the year. Our operating results in any period may be affected by the incurrence of advertising and promotion expenses that do not necessarily produce commensurate revenues until the impact of such advertising and promotion is realized in future periods. Inflation Inflation has not materially affected our operations during the past three years. We believe that our ability to increase the prices charged for our products and services in future periods will depend primarily on competitive pressures. We do not have any material backlog of our products. 60 Table of Contents Item 7A.QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK Market Risks Associated With Financial Instruments As of December 31, 2004, our restricted and unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities had a fair market value of approximately $1.213 billion. Of that amount, a total of approximately $1.039 billion was invested in: (a) cash; (b) debt instruments of the U.S. Government and its agencies; (c) commercial paper and notes with an overall average maturity of less than one year and rated in one of the four highest rating categories by at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations; and (d) instruments with similar risk characteristics to the commercial paper described above. The primary purpose of these investing activities has been to preserve principal until the cash is required to, among other things, fund operations, make strategic investments and expand the business. Consequently, the size of this portfolio fluctuates significantly as cash is received and used in our business. Our restricted and unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities had an average annual return for the year ended December 31, 2004 of approximately 2.1%. A hypothetical 10.0% decrease in interest rates would result in a decrease of approximately $4.2 million in annual interest income. The value of certain of the investments in this portfolio can be impacted by, among other things, the risk of adverse changes in securities and economic markets generally, as well as the risks related to the performance of the companies whose commercial paper and other instruments we hold. However, the high quality of these investments (as assessed by independent rating agencies), reduces these risks. The value of these investments can also be impacted by interest rate fluctuations. At December 31, 2004, all of the $1.039 billion was invested in fixed or variable rate instruments or money market type accounts. While an increase in interest rates would ordinarily adversely impact the fair market value of fixed and variable rate investments, we normally hold these investments to maturity. Consequently, neither interest rate fluctuations nor other market risks typically result in significant realized gains or losses to this portfolio. A decrease in interest rates has the effect of reducing our future annual interest income from this portfolio, since funds would be re-invested at lower rates as the instruments mature. Over time, any net percentage decrease in interest rates could be reflected in a corresponding net percentage decrease in our interest income. Included in our marketable securities portfolio balance is debt and equity of public and private companies we hold for strategic and financial purposes. As of December 31, 2004, we held strategic and financial debt and equity investments of public companies with a fair market value of approximately $174.3 million. We may make additional strategic and financial investments in debt and other equity securities in the future. The fair market value of our strategic and financial debt and equity investments can be significantly impacted by the risk of adverse changes in securities markets generally, as well as risks related to the performance of the companies whose securities we have invested in, risks associated with specific industries, and other factors. These investments are subject to significant fluctuations in fair market value due to the volatility of the securities markets and of the underlying businesses. A hypothetical 10.0% adverse change in the price of our public strategic debt and equity investments would result in approximately a $17.4 million decrease in the fair market value of that portfolio. The fair market value of our strategic debt investments are currently not materially impacted by interest rate fluctuations due to the nature of these investments. We currently classify all marketable investment securities as available-for-sale. We adjust the carrying value of our available-for-sale securities to fair market value and report the related temporary unrealized gains and losses as a separate component of Accumulated other comprehensive income within Total stockholders equity (deficit), net of related deferred income tax. Declines in the fair market value of a marketable investment security which are estimated to be other than temporary are recognized in the consolidated statement of operations, thus establishing a new cost basis for such investment. We evaluate our marketable investment securities portfolio on a quarterly basis to determine whether declines in the fair market value of these securities are other than temporary. This quarterly evaluation consists of reviewing, among other things, the fair market value of our marketable investment securities compared to the carrying amount, the historical volatility of the price of each security and any market and company specific factors related to each security. Generally, absent specific factors to the contrary, declines in the fair market value of investments below cost basis for a period of less than six months are considered to be temporary. Declines in the fair market value of investments for a period of six to nine months are evaluated on a case by case basis to determine whether any company or market-specific factors exist which would indicate that such declines are other than temporary. Declines in the fair market value of investments below cost basis for greater than nine months are considered other than temporary and are recorded as charges to earnings, absent specific factors to the contrary. 61 Table of Contents 
