CIK: 1001082
Company Name: ECHOSTAR COMMUNICATIONS CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-03-15


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Continued New Accounting Pronouncements In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (R) (As Amended), Share-Based Payment ( SFAS 123(R) ) which (i) revises SFAS 123 to eliminate both the disclosure only provisions of that statement and the alternative to follow the intrinsic value method of accounting under Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees and related interpretations, and (ii) requires the cost resulting from all share-based payment transactions with employees be recognized in the results of operations over the period during which an employee provides the requisite service in exchange for the award and establishes fair value as the measurement basis of the cost of such transactions. Effective January 1, 2006, we adopted SFAS 123(R) under the modified prospective method. We expect the adoption of SFAS 123(R) to impact our results of operation and earnings per share similar to our pro forma disclosure in Note 2 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Seasonality Our revenues vary throughout the year. As is typical in the subscription television service industry, the first half of the year generally produces fewer new subscribers than the second half of the year. Our operating results in any period may be affected by the incurrence of advertising and promotion expenses that do not necessarily produce commensurate revenues until the impact of such advertising and promotion is realized in future periods. Inflation Inflation has not materially affected our operations during the past three years. We believe that our ability to increase the prices charged for our products and services in future periods will depend primarily on competitive pressures. We do not have any material backlog of our products. 76 Table of Contents Item 7A.QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK Market Risks Associated With Financial Instruments As of December 31, 2005, our restricted and unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities had a fair value of approximately $1.248 billion. Of that amount, a total of approximately $1.095 billion was invested in: (a) cash; (b) debt instruments of the U.S. Government and its agencies; (c) commercial paper and notes with an overall average maturity of less than one year and rated in one of the four highest rating categories by at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations; and (d) instruments with similar risk characteristics to the commercial paper described above. The primary purpose of these investing activities has been to preserve principal until the cash is required to, among other things, fund operations, make strategic investments and expand the business. Consequently, the size of this portfolio fluctuates significantly as cash is received and used in our business. Our restricted and unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities had an average annual return for the year ended December 31, 2005 of approximately 3.4%. A hypothetical 10.0% decrease in interest rates would result in a decrease of approximately $4.4 million in annual interest income. The value of certain of the investments in this portfolio can be impacted by, among other things, the risk of adverse changes in securities and economic markets generally, as well as the risks related to the performance of the companies whose commercial paper and other instruments we hold. However, the high quality of these investments (as assessed by independent rating agencies), reduces these risks. The value of these investments can also be impacted by interest rate fluctuations. At December 31, 2005, all of the $1.095 billion was invested in fixed or variable rate instruments or money market type accounts. While an increase in interest rates would ordinarily adversely impact the fair value of fixed and variable rate investments, we normally hold these investments to maturity. Consequently, neither interest rate fluctuations nor other market risks typically result in significant realized gains or losses to this portfolio. A decrease in interest rates has the effect of reducing our future annual interest income from this portfolio, since funds would be re-invested at lower rates as the instruments mature. Over time, any net percentage decrease in interest rates could be reflected in a corresponding net percentage decrease in our interest income. Included in our marketable investment securities portfolio balance is debt and equity of public and private companies we hold for strategic and financial purposes. As of December 31, 2005, we held strategic and financial debt and equity investments of public companies with a fair value of approximately $148.5 million. We may make additional strategic and financial investments in debt and other equity securities in the future. The fair value of our strategic and financial debt and equity investments can be significantly impacted by the risk of adverse changes in securities markets generally, as well as risks related to the performance of the companies whose securities we have invested in, risks associated with specific industries, and other factors. These investments are subject to significant fluctuations in fair value due to the volatility of the securities markets and of the underlying businesses. A hypothetical 10.0% adverse change in the price of our public strategic debt and equity investments would result in approximately a $14.9 million decrease in the fair value of that portfolio. The fair value of our strategic debt investments are currently not materially impacted by interest rate fluctuations due to the nature of these investments. We currently classify all marketable investment securities as available-for-sale. We adjust the carrying value of our available-for-sale securities to fair value and report the related temporary unrealized gains and losses as a separate component of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within Total stockholders equity (deficit), net of related deferred income tax. Declines in the fair value of a marketable investment security which are estimated to be other than temporary are recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss), thus establishing a new cost basis for such investment. We evaluate our marketable investment securities portfolio on a quarterly basis to determine whether declines in the fair value of these securities are other than temporary. This quarterly evaluation consists of reviewing, among other things, the fair value of our marketable investment securities compared to the carrying amount, the historical volatility of the price of each security and any market and company specific factors related to each security. Generally, absent specific factors to the contrary, declines in the fair value of investments below cost basis for a period of less than six months are considered to be temporary. Declines in the fair value of investments for a period of six to nine months are evaluated on a case by case basis to determine whether any company or market-specific factors exist which would indicate that such declines are other than temporary. Declines in the fair value of investments below cost basis for greater than nine months are considered other than temporary and are recorded as charges to earnings, absent specific factors to the contrary. 77 Table of Contents Item 7A.QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK As of December 31, 2005, we had unrealized gains net of related tax effect of approximately $3.3 million as a part of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within Total stockholders equity (deficit). During the year ended December 31, 2005, we recorded $25.4 million in charges to earnings for other than temporary declines in the fair value of our marketable investment securities. In addition, during 2005, we realized net gains of approximately $34.3 million on sales of marketable and non-marketable investment securities and conversion of bond instruments into common stock. Realized gains and losses are accounted for on the specific identification method. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, our portfolio generally, and our strategic investments particularly, has experienced and continues to experience volatility. If the fair value of our strategic marketable investment securities portfolio does not remain above cost basis or if we become aware of any market or company specific factors that indicate that the carrying value of certain of our securities is impaired, we may be required to record charges to earnings in future periods equal to the amount of the decline in fair value. We also have strategic equity investments in certain non-marketable investment securities which are included in Other noncurrent assets, net in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We account for our unconsolidated equity investments under either the equity method or cost method of accounting. These equity securities are not publicly traded and accordingly, it is not practical to regularly estimate the fair value of the investments; however, these investments are subject to an evaluation for other than temporary impairment on a quarterly basis. This quarterly evaluation consists of reviewing, among other things, company business plans and current financial statements, if available, for factors that may indicate an impairment of our investment. Such factors may include, but are not limited to, cash flow concerns, material litigation, violations of debt covenants and changes in business strategy. The fair value of these equity investments is not estimated unless there are identified changes in circumstances that may indicate an impairment exists and are likely to have a significant adverse effect on the fair value of the investment. For the year ended December 31, 2005, we had $94.2 million aggregate carrying amount of non-marketable and unconsolidated strategic equity investments, of which $52.7 million is accounted for under the cost method. During the year ended December 31, 2005, we did not record any impairment charges with respect to these investments. We also have a strategic investment in the non-public preferred stock and convertible debt of a public company which is included in Other noncurrent assets, net on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The investment is convertible into the issuer common shares. We account for this available for sale investment at fair value with changes in fair value reported each period as unrealized gains or losses in Other income or expense in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). We estimate the fair value of the investment using certain assumptions and judgments in applying a discounted cash flow analysis and the Black-Scholes option pricing model. As of December 31, 2005, the fair value of the investment was approximately $42.3 million based on the trading price of the issuer shares on that date, and we recognized a pre-tax unrealized gain of approximately $38.8 million for the change in the fair value of the investment. Among other factors, as the result of the relatively large number of shares we would hold upon conversion compared to the issuer limited public trading volume, there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain full value for our investment upon a sale of the common shares. The issuer publicly traded shares have experienced, and will continue to experience volatility. The fair value of this investment can be significantly impacted by the risk of adverse changes in the issuer share price, currency exchange rates, and to a lesser extent, interest rates. A hypothetical 10% adverse change in the price of the issuer common shares, or in the Euro to U.S. dollar currency exchange rate, would result in an approximate $4.2 million decrease in the fair value of this investment. Our ability to realize value from our strategic investments in companies that are not publicly traded is dependent on the success of their business and their ability to obtain sufficient capital to execute their business plans. Since private markets are not as liquid as public markets, there is also increased risk that we will not be able to sell these investments, or that when we desire to sell them we will not be able to obtain full value for them. As of December 31, 2005, we estimated the fair value of our variable and fixed-rate debt, mortgages and other notes payable to be approximately $5.357 billion using quoted market prices where available, and third party valuations or discounted cash flow analyses when it was practicable to do so. The interest rates assumed in these discounted cash flow analyses reflect interest rates currently being offered for loans with similar terms to borrowers of similar credit quality. The fair value of our fixed-rate debt and mortgages is affected by fluctuations in interest rates. A hypothetical 10.0% decrease in assumed interest rates would increase the fair value of our debt by approximately $140.6 million. To the extent interest rates increase, our costs of financing would increase at such time as we are required to refinance our debt. As of December 31, 2005, a hypothetical 10.0% increase in assumed interest rates would increase our annual interest expense by approximately $34.2 million. 78 Table of Contents 
