CIK: 1001082
Company Name: DISH NETWORK CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-02-26


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - Continued Inflation Inflation has not materially affected our operations during the past three years. We believe that our ability to increase the prices charged for our products and services in future periods will depend primarily on competitive pressures. We do not have any material backlog of our products. Item 7A. QUAN TITA TIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK Market Risks Associated With Financial Instruments As of December 31, 2007, our restricted and unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities had a fair value of $2.961 billion. Of that amount, a total of $2.384 billion was invested in: (a) cash; (b) debt instruments of the U.S. Government and its agencies; (c) commercial paper and notes with an overall average maturity of less than one year and rated in one of the four highest rating categories by at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations; and (d) instruments with similar risk characteristics to the commercial paper described above. The primary purpose of these investing activities has been to preserve principal until the cash is required to, among other things, fund operations, make strategic investments and expand the business. Consequently, the size of this portfolio fluctuates significantly as cash is received and used in our business. In connection with the Spin-off, we contributed $1.0 billion of our cash and cash equivalents to EchoStar on January 1, 2008. Our restricted and unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities had an average annual return for the year ended December 31, 2007 of 5.7%. A hypothetical 10% decrease in interest rates would result in a decrease of approximately $14 million in annual interest income. The value of certain of the investments in this portfolio can be impacted by, among other things, the risk of adverse changes in securities and economic markets, as well as the risks related to the performance of the companies whose commercial paper and other instruments we hold. However, the high quality of these investments (as assessed by independent rating agencies) reduces these risks. The value of these investments can also be impacted by interest rate fluctuations. At December 31, 2007, all of the $2.384 billion was invested in fixed or variable rate instruments or money market type accounts. While an increase in interest rates would ordinarily adversely impact the fair value of fixed and variable rate investments, we normally hold these investments to maturity. Consequently, neither interest rate fluctuations nor other market risks typically result in significant realized gains or losses to this portfolio. A decrease in interest rates has the effect of reducing our future annual interest income from this portfolio, since funds would be re-invested at lower rates as the instruments mature. Included in our marketable investment securities portfolio balance is debt and equity of public companies we hold for strategic and financial purposes. As of December 31, 2007, we held strategic and financial debt and equity investments of public companies with a fair value of $577 million. These investments are highly speculative and are concentrated in a small number of companies. During the same period, our strategic investments experienced volatility, which is likely to continue. The fair value of our strategic and financial debt and equity investments can be significantly impacted by the risk of adverse changes in securities markets, as well as risks related to the performance of the companies whose securities we have invested in, risks associated with specific industries, and other factors. These investments are subject to significant fluctuations in fair value due to the volatility of the securities markets and of the underlying businesses. A hypothetical 10% adverse change in the price of our public strategic debt and equity investments would result in approximately a $58 million decrease in the fair value of that portfolio. The fair value of our strategic debt investments are currently not materially impacted by interest rate fluctuations due to the nature of these investments. We currently classify all marketable investment securities as available-for-sale. We adjust the carrying value of our available-for-sale securities to fair value and report the related temporary unrealized gains and losses as a separate component of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within Total stockholders equity (deficit), net of related deferred income tax. Declines in the fair value of a marketable investment security which are estimated to be other than temporary are recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss), thus establishing a new cost basis for such investment. We evaluate our marketable investment securities portfolio on a quarterly basis to determine whether declines in the fair value of these securities are other than temporary. This quarterly evaluation consists of reviewing, among other things, the fair value of our marketable investment securities compared to the carrying amount, the historical volatility of the price of each security and any market and company specific factors related to each security. Generally, absent specific factors to the contrary, declines in the fair value of investments below cost basis for a continuous period of less than six months are considered to be temporary. Declines in the fair value of investments for a continuous period of six to nine months are evaluated on a case by case basis to determine whether any company or market-specific factors exist which would indicate that such declines are other than temporary. Declines in the fair value of investments below cost basis for a continuous period greater than nine months are considered other than temporary and are recorded as charges to earnings, absent specific factors to the contrary. 65 Table of Contents Item 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK Continued As of December 31, 2007, we had unrealized gains net of related tax effect of $30 million as a part of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within Total stockholders equity (deficit). During the year ended December 31, 2007, we did not record any charge to earnings for other than temporary declines in the fair value of our marketable investment securities. In addition, during the year ended December 31, 2007, we recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) realized and unrealized net gains on marketable investment securities of $22 million. During the year ended December 31, 2007, our strategic investments have experienced and continue to experience volatility. If the fair value of our strategic marketable investment securities portfolio does not remain above cost basis or if we become aware of any market or company specific factors that indicate that the carrying value of certain of our securities is impaired, we may be required to record charges to earnings in future periods equal to the amount of the decline in fair value. We also have several strategic investments in certain equity securities which are included in Other noncurrent assets, net on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Our other investment securities consist of the following: As of December 31, Other Investment Securities 2007 (In thousands) Cost method $ 108,355 Equity method 68,127 Fair value method 11,404 Total $ 187,886 Generally, we account for our unconsolidated equity investments under either the equity method or cost method of accounting. Because these equity securities are generally not publicly traded, it is not practical to regularly estimate the fair value of the investments; however, these investments are subject to an evaluation for other than temporary impairment on a quarterly basis. This quarterly evaluation consists of reviewing, among other things, company business plans and current financial statements, if available, for factors that may indicate an impairment of our investment. Such factors may include, but are not limited to, cash flow concerns, material litigation, violations of debt covenants and changes in business strategy. The fair value of these equity investments is not estimated unless there are identified changes in circumstances that may indicate an impairment exists and these changes are likely to have a significant adverse effect on the fair value of the investment. We also have a strategic investment in non-public preferred stock, public common stock and convertible debt of a foreign public company. The debt which is convertible into the issuer publicly traded common shares is accounted for under the fair value method with changes in fair value reported each period as unrealized gains or losses in Other income or expense in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). We estimate the fair value of the convertible debt using certain assumptions and judgments in applying a discounted cash flow analysis and the Black-Scholes option pricing model including the fair market value of the underlying common stock price as of that date. During 2006, we converted a portion of the convertible debt to public common shares and determined that we have the ability to significantly influence the operating decisions of the issuer. Consequently, we account for the common share component of this investment under the equity method of accounting. As a result of our change to equity method accounting, we evaluate the common share component of this investment on a quarterly basis to determine whether there has been a decline in the value that is other than temporary. Because the shares are publicly traded, this quarterly evaluation considers the fair market value of the common shares in addition to the other factors described above for equity and cost method investments. 66 Table of Contents 
