CIK: 1001082
Company Name: DISH NETWORK CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-02-20


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS - Continued Seasonality Historically, the first half of the year generally produces fewer gross new subscriber activations than the second half of the year, as is typical in the pay-TV service industry. In addition, the first and fourth quarter generally produce a lower churn rate than the second and third quarter. However, we cannot provide assurance that this will continue in the future. Inflation Inflation has not materially affected our operations during the past three years. We believe that our ability to increase the prices charged for our products and services in future periods will depend primarily on competitive pressures. Backlog We do not have any material backlog of our products. 84 Table of Contents Item 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK Market Risks Associated With Financial Instruments Our investments and debt are exposed to market risks, discussed below. Cash, Cash Equivalents and Current Marketable Investment Securities As of December 31, 2012, our cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities had a fair value of $7.238 billion. Of that amount, a total of $5.977 billion was invested in: (a) cash; (b) VRDNs convertible into cash at par value plus accrued interest generally in five business days or less; (c) debt instruments of the United States Government and its agencies; (d) commercial paper and corporate notes with an overall average maturity of less than one year and rated in one of the four highest rating categories by at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations; and/or (e) instruments with similar risk, duration and credit quality characteristics to the commercial paper and corporate obligations described above. The primary purpose of these investing activities has been to preserve principal until the cash is required to, among other things, fund operations, make strategic investments and expand the business. Consequently, the size of this portfolio fluctuates significantly as cash is received and used in our business. The value of this portfolio is negatively impacted by credit losses; however, this risk is mitigated through diversification that limits our exposure to any one issuer. Interest Rate Risk A change in interest rates would affect the fair value of our cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities portfolio, however, we normally hold these investments to maturity. Based on our December 31, 2012 current non-strategic investment portfolio of $5.977 billion, a hypothetical 10% change in average interest rates would not have a material impact on the fair value due to the limited duration of our investments. Our cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities had an average annual rate of return for the year ended December 31, 2012 of 0.6%. A change in interest rates would affect our future annual interest income from this portfolio, since funds would be re-invested at different rates as the instruments mature. A hypothetical 10% decrease in average interest rates during 2012 would result in a decrease of approximately $2 million in annual interest income. Strategic Marketable Investment Securities As of December 31, 2012, we held strategic and financial debt and equity investments of public companies with a fair value of $1.261 billion. These investments, which are held for strategic and financial purposes, are concentrated in a small number of companies, are highly speculative and have experienced and continue to experience volatility. In addition, a significant portion of the value of these investments is concentrated in the debt securities of a single issuer. The fair value of the securities of that single issuer as of December 31, 2012 was $951 million. These debt securities have a call option, held by the issuer, upon 30 days notice after December 1, 2012. The call option price is less than the fair market value of these debt securities and, if exercised, proceeds would be less than our recorded fair market value and therefore, reduce our unrealized gains recorded as a separate component of Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within Total stockholders equity (deficit), on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. This potential reduction in our unrealized gain related to the call option on these debt securities would have no impact on our results of operations. In addition, this single issuer has indicated that it will need substantial additional capital to meet its business and financial obligations beyond the next 12 months. The fair value of certain of the debt securities in our investment portfolio, including those of that single issuer, can be adversely impacted by, among other things, the issuers respective performance and ability to obtain any necessary additional financing on acceptable terms, or at all. The fair value of our strategic and financial debt and equity investments can be significantly impacted by the risk of adverse changes in securities markets generally, as well as risks related to the performance of the companies whose securities we have invested in, risks associated with specific industries, and other factors. These investments are subject to significant fluctuations in fair value due to the volatility of the securities markets and of the underlying businesses. In general, the debt instruments held in our strategic marketable investment securities portfolio are not significantly impacted by interest rate fluctuations as their value is more closely related to factors specific to the 85 Table of Contents 
