CIK: 1001082
Company Name: DISH NETWORK CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-03-01


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Continued uncertainty of determining the likelihood of a future event occurring and the potential financial statement impact of such an event, it is possible that upon further development or resolution of a contingent matter, a charge could be recorded in a future period to General and administrative expenses on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) that would be material to our consolidated results of operations and financial position. New Accounting Pronouncements Revenue Recognition Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements In October 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update 2009-13 ( ASU 2009-13 ), Revenue Recognition Multiple-Deliverable Revenue Arrangements. ASU 2009-13 changes the requirements for establishing separate units of accounting in a multiple element arrangement and requires the allocation of arrangement consideration to each deliverable to be based on the relative selling price. We are currently evaluating the impact, if any, ASU 2009-13 will have on our consolidated financial statements, when adopted, as required, on January 1, 2011. Seasonality Historically, the first half of the year generally produces fewer new subscribers than the second half of the year, as is typical in the pay-TV service industry. However, we can not provide assurance that this will continue in the future. Inflation Inflation has not materially affected our operations during the past three years. We believe that our ability to increase the prices charged for our products and services in future periods will depend primarily on competitive pressures. Backlog We do not have any material backlog of our products. Item 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK Market Risks Associated With Financial Instruments Our investments and debt are exposed to market risks, discussed below. Cash, Cash Equivalents and Current Marketable Investment Securities As of December 31, 2009, our cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities had a fair value of $2.139 billion. Of that amount, a total of $1.975 billion was invested in: (a) cash; (b) VRDNs convertible into cash at par value plus accrued interest in five business days or less; (c) debt instruments of the United States Government and its agencies; (d) commercial paper and corporate notes with an overall average maturity of less than one year and rated in one of the four highest rating categories by at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations; and (e) instruments with similar risk, duration and credit quality characteristics to the commercial paper and corporate obligations described above. The primary purpose of these investing activities has been to preserve principal until the cash is required to, among other things, fund operations, make strategic investments and expand the business. Consequently, the size of this portfolio fluctuates significantly as cash is received and used in our business. The value of this portfolio is negatively impacted by credit losses; however, this risk is mitigated through diversification that limits our exposure to any one issuer. Interest Rate Risk A change in interest rates would affect the fair value of our cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities portfolio. Based on our December 31, 2009 current non-strategic investment portfolio of $1.975 billion, a hypothetical 10% increase in average interest rates would result in a decrease of approximately $33 67 Table of Contents Item 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK Continued million in fair value of this portfolio. We normally hold these investments to maturity; however, the hypothetical loss in fair value would be realized if we sold the investments prior to maturity. Our cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities had an average annual rate of return for the year ended December 31, 2009 of 0.8%. A change in interest rates would affect our future annual interest income from this portfolio, since funds would be re-invested at different rates as the instruments mature. A hypothetical 10% decrease in average interest rates during 2009 would result in a decrease of approximately $1 million in annual interest income. Strategic Marketable Investment Securities As of December 31, 2009, we held strategic and financial debt and equity investments of public companies with a fair value of $164 million. These investments, which are held for strategic and financial purposes, are concentrated in a small number of companies, are highly speculative and have experienced and continue to experience volatility. The fair value of our strategic and financial debt and equity investments can be significantly impacted by the risk of adverse changes in securities markets generally, as well as risks related to the performance of the companies whose securities we have invested in, risks associated with specific industries, and other factors. These investments are subject to significant fluctuations in fair value due to the volatility of the securities markets and of the underlying businesses. In general, the debt instruments held in our strategic marketable investment securities portfolio are not significantly impacted by interest rate fluctuations as their value is more closely related to factors specific to the underlying business. A hypothetical 10% adverse change in the price of our public strategic debt and equity investments would result in a decrease of approximately $16 million in the fair value of these investments. Restricted Cash and Marketable Investment Securities and Noncurrent Marketable and Other Investment Securities Restricted Cash and Marketable Investment Securities As of December 31, 2009, we had $141 million of restricted cash and marketable investment securities invested in: (a) cash; (b) debt instruments of the United States Government and its agencies; (c) commercial paper and corporate notes with an overall average maturity of less than one year and rated in one of the four highest rating categories by at least two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations; and (d) instruments with similar risk, duration and credit quality characteristics to the commercial paper described above. Based on our December 31, 2009 investment portfolio, a hypothetical 10% increase in average interest rates would not have a material impact in the fair value of our restricted cash and marketable investment securities. Noncurrent Auction Rate and Mortgage Backed Securities As of December 31, 2009, we held investments in auction rate securities ( ARS ) and mortgage backed securities ( MBS ) of $121 million, which are reported at fair value. Events in the credit markets have reduced or eliminated current liquidity for certain of our ARS and MBS investments. As a result, we classify these investments as noncurrent assets as we intend to hold these investments until they recover or mature, and therefore interest rate risk associated with these securities is mitigated. A hypothetical 10% adverse change in the price of these investments would result in a decrease of approximately $12 million in the fair value of these investments. Other Investment Securities As of December 31, 2009, we had $50 million of nonpublic debt and equity instruments that we hold for strategic business purposes. We account for these investments under the cost, equity and fair value methods of accounting. Our ability to realize value from our strategic investments in companies that are not publicly traded depends on the success of those companies businesses and their ability to obtain sufficient capital to execute their business plans. Because private markets are not as liquid as public markets, there is also increased risk that we will not be able to sell these investments, or that when we desire to sell them we will not be able to obtain fair value for them. A hypothetical 10% adverse change in the price of these nonpublic debt and equity instruments would result in a decrease of approximately $5 million in the fair value of these investments. 68 Table of Contents 
