CIK: 1001082
Company Name: DISH NETWORK CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2019-02-13


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION S You should read the following management discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This management discussion and analysis is intended to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of our operations and contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed under the caption Item 1A. Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Furthermore, such forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and we expressly disclaim any obligation to update any forward-looking statements. Overview Our business strategy is to be the best provider of video services in the United States by providing products with the best technology, outstanding customer service, and great value. We promote our Pay-TV services as providing our subscribers with a better price-to-value relationship than those available from other subscription television service providers. In connection with the growth in OTT industry, we promote our Sling TV services primarily to consumers who do not subscribe to traditional satellite and cable pay-TV services. As the pay-TV industry is mature, our DISH TV strategy has included an emphasis on acquiring and retaining higher quality subscribers, including subscribers in markets underserved by pay-TV services, even if it means that we will acquire and retain fewer overall subscribers. We evaluate the quality of subscribers based upon a number of factors, including, among others, profitability. Our DISH TV subscriber base has been declining due to, among other things, this strategy. There can be no assurance that our DISH TV subscriber base will not continue to decline and that the pace of such decline will not accelerate. Our revenue and profit is primarily derived from Pay-TV programming services that we provide to our subscribers. We also generate revenue from equipment rental fees and other hardware related fees, including DVRs and fees from subscribers with multiple receivers; advertising services; fees earned from our Smart Home service operations; broadband services; warranty services; and sales of digital receivers and related equipment to third-party pay-TV providers. Our subscriber-related revenue has been declining due to, among other things, the continuing decline in our DISH TV subscriber base. We expect this trend to continue. Our most significant expenses are subscriber-related expenses, which are primarily related to programming, subscriber acquisition costs and depreciation and amortization. Financial Highlights 2018 Consolidated Results of Operations and Key Operating Metrics Revenue of $13.621 billion Net income attributable to DISH Network of $1.575 billion and basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock of $3.37 and $3.00, respectively Loss of approximately 920,000 net Pay-TV subscribers Loss of approximately 1.125 million net DISH TV subscribers Addition of approximately 205,000 net Sling TV subscribers Pay-TV ARPU of $85.46 Gross new DISH TV subscriber activations of approximately 1.114 million DISH TV churn rate of 1.78% DISH TV SAC of $759 66 Table of Contents Consolidated Financial Condition as of December 31, 2018 Cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities of $2.069 billion Total assets of $30.587 billion Total long-term debt and capital lease obligations of $15.153 billion Business Segments We currently operate two primary business segments: (1) Pay-TV; and (2) Wireless. Pay-TV We are the nation fourth largest pay-TV provider and offer Pay-TV services under the DISH brand, and the Sling brand. As of December 31, 2018, we had 12.322 million Pay-TV subscribers in the United States, including 9.905 million DISH TV subscribers and 2.417 million Sling TV subscribers. Competition has intensified in recent years as the pay-TV industry has matured. To differentiate our DISH TV services from our competitors, we offer the Hopper whole-home DVR and have continued to add functionality and simplicity for a more intuitive user experience. Our Hopper and Joey whole-home DVR promotes a suite of integrated features and functionality designed to maximize the convenience and ease of watching TV anytime and anywhere. It also has several innovative features that a consumer can use, at his or her option, to watch and record television programming, through their televisions, tablets, phones and computers. The Hopper 3, among other things, features 16 tuners, delivers an enhanced 4K Ultra HD experience, and supports up to seven TVs simultaneously. We market our Sling TV services primarily to consumers who do not subscribe to traditional satellite and cable pay-TV services. Our Sling TV services require an Internet connection and are available on multiple streaming-capable devices including streaming media devices, TVs, tablets, computers, game consoles and phones. We offer Sling International, Sling Latino and Sling domestic video programming services. Our domestic Sling TV services have a single-stream service branded Sling Orange and a multi-stream service branded Sling Blue, which includes, among other things, the ability to stream on up to three devices simultaneously. We face competition from providers of digital media, including, among others, Netflix, Hulu, Apple, Amazon, Alphabet, Verizon, DirecTV, Sony, YouTube, Fubo, Philo and Pluto that offer online services distributing movies, television shows and other video programming as well as programmers, such as HBO, CBS, Univision, STARZ and SHOWTIME, that began selling content directly to consumers over the Internet. Some of these companies have larger customer bases, stronger brand recognition and greater financial, marketing and other resources than we do. In addition, traditional providers of video entertainment, including broadcasters, cable channels and MVPDs, are increasing their Internet-based video offerings. Some of these services charge nominal or no fees for access to their content, which could adversely affect demand for our Pay-TV services. Moreover, new technologies have been, and will likely continue to be, developed that further increase the number of competitors we face with respect to video services, including competition from piracy-based video offerings. This competition, among other things, has caused the rate of growth in subscribers to our Sling TV services to decrease. In June 2018, we launched additional Sling TV services which include offering consumers a la carte channel subscriptions, access to pay-per-view events and movies, and access to free content. There can be no assurance that these additional services will positively affect our results of operations or our net Sling TV subscribers. In addition, we historically offered broadband services under the dishNET brand, which includes satellite broadband services that utilize advanced technology and high-powered satellites launched by Hughes and ViaSat and wireline broadband services. However, as of the first quarter 2018, we have transitioned our broadband business focus from wholesale to authorized representative arrangements, and we are no longer marketing dishNET broadband services. Our existing broadband subscribers will decline through customer attrition. Generally, under these authorized representative arrangements, we will receive certain payments for each broadband service activation generated and installation performed, and we will not incur subscriber acquisition costs for these activations. 67 Table of Contents As a result of the completion of the Share Exchange with EchoStar, described below, we also design, develop and distribute receiver systems and provide digital broadcast operations, including satellite uplinking/downlinking, transmission and other services to third-party pay-TV providers. Share Exchange Agreement On February 28, 2017, we and EchoStar and certain of our respective subsidiaries completed the Share Exchange pursuant to which EchoStar transferred to us the Transferred Businesses and in exchange, we transferred to EchoStar the Tracking Stock, that tracked the residential retail satellite broadband business of HNS. See Note 18 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K on our Related Party Transactions with EchoStar for further information. As the Share Exchange was a transaction between entities that are under common control accounting rules require that our Consolidated Financial Statements include the results of the Transferred Businesses for all periods presented, including periods prior to the completion of the Share Exchange. We initially recorded the Transferred Businesses at EchoStar historical cost basis. The difference between the historical cost basis of the Transferred Businesses and the net carrying value of the Tracking Stock was recorded in Additional paid-in capital on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The results of the Transferred Businesses were prepared from separate records maintained by EchoStar for the periods prior to March 1, 2017, and may not necessarily be indicative of the conditions that would have existed, or the results of operations, if the Transferred Businesses had been operated on a combined basis with our subsidiaries. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. Wireless Since 2008, we have directly invested over $11 billion to acquire certain wireless spectrum licenses and related assets and made over $10 billion in non-controlling investments in certain entities, for a total of over $21 billion, as described further below. DISH Network Spectrum We have directly invested over $11 billion to acquire certain wireless spectrum licenses and related assets. These wireless spectrum licenses are subject to certain interim and final build-out requirements, as well as certain renewal requirements. In March 2017, we notified the FCC that we plan to deploy a next-generation 5G-capable network, focused on supporting narrowband IoT. We expect to complete the First Phase by March 2020, with subsequent phases to be completed thereafter. As of December 31, 2018, we had entered into vendor contracts with multiple parties for, among other things, base stations, chipsets, modules, tower leases, the core network, RF design, and deployment services for the First Phase. Among other things, initial RF design in connection with the First Phase is now complete, we have secured certain tower sites, and we are in the process of identifying and securing additional tower sites. The core network has been installed and commissioned. We installed the first base stations on sites in 2018, and plan to continue deployment until complete. We currently expect expenditures for our wireless projects to be between $500 million and $1.0 billion through 2020. We expect the Second Phase to follow o nce the 3GPP Release 16 is standardized and as our plans for our other spectrum holdings develop, we plan to upgrade and expand our network to full 5G to support new use cases. We currently expect expenditures for the Second Phase to be approximately $10 billion. We will need to make significant additional investments or partner with others to, among other things, commercialize, build-out, and integrate these licenses and related assets, and any additional acquired licenses and related assets; and comply with regulations applicable to such licenses. Depending on the nature and scope of such commercialization, build-out, integration efforts, and regulatory compliance, any such investments or partnerships could vary significantly. In addition, as we consider our options for the commercialization of our wireless spectrum, we will incur significant additional expenses and will have to make significant investments related to, among other things, research and development, wireless testing and wireless network infrastructure. We may also determine that additional wireless spectrum licenses may be required to commercialize our wireless business and to compete with other wireless service providers. See Note 14 Commitments and Contingencies Commitments Wireless DISH Network Spectrum in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. 68 Table of Contents DISH Network Non-Controlling Investments in the Northstar Entities and the SNR Entities Related to AWS-3 Wireless Spectrum Licenses During 2015, through our wholly-owned subsidiaries American II and American III, we initially made over $10 billion in certain non-controlling investments in Northstar Spectrum, the parent company of Northstar Wireless, and in SNR HoldCo, the parent company of SNR Wireless, respectively. On October 27, 2015, the FCC granted certain AWS-3 Licenses to Northstar Wireless and to SNR Wireless, respectively, which are recorded in FCC authorizations on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Under the applicable accounting guidance in ASC 810, Northstar Spectrum and SNR HoldCo are considered variable interest entities and, based on the characteristics of the structure of these entities and in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance, we consolidate these entities into our financial statements. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. The AWS-3 Licenses are subject to certain interim and final build-out requirements, as well as certain renewal requirements. The Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities may need to raise significant additional capital in the future, which may be obtained from third party sources or from us, so that the Northstar Entities and the SNR Entities may commercialize, build-out and integrate these AWS-3 Licenses, comply with regulations applicable to such AWS-3 Licenses, and make any potential Northstar Re-Auction Payment and SNR Re-Auction Payment for the AWS-3 licenses retained by the FCC. Depending upon the nature and scope of such commercialization, build-out, integration efforts, regulatory compliance, and potential Northstar Re-Auction Payment and SNR Re-Auction Payment, any loans, equity contributions or partnerships could vary significantly. See Note 14 Commitments and Contingencies Commitments Wireless DISH Network Non-Controlling Investments in the Northstar Entities and the SNR Entities Related to AWS-3 Wireless Spectrum Licenses in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. We may need to raise significant additional capital in the future to fund the efforts described above, which may not be available on acceptable terms or at all. There can be no assurance that we, the Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities will be able to develop and implement business models that will realize a return on these wireless spectrum licenses or that we, the Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities will be able to profitably deploy the assets represented by these wireless spectrum licenses, which may affect the carrying amount of these assets and our future financial condition or results of operations. See Note 14 Commitments and Contingencies Commitments Wireless in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. Recent Developments Mergers and acquisitions, joint ventures and alliances among cable television providers, telecommunications companies, programming providers and others may result in, among other things, greater scale and financial leverage and increase the availability of offerings from providers capable of bundling video, broadband and/or wireless services in competition with our services, and may exacerbate the risks described in our public filings. In October 2016, AT&T announced its acquisition of Time Warner, which was completed in June 2018. In December 2017, Walt Disney Company announced its acquisition of certain assets of Twenty-First Century Fox, Inc. These transactions may affect us adversely by, among other things, making it more difficult for us to obtain access to certain programming networks on nondiscriminatory and fair terms, or at all. For example, in connection with AT&T acquisition of Time Warner, Turner sent all of its distributors written, irrevocable offers to submit disputes over the price and other terms of Turner programming to binding arbitration and to guarantee continued access to that programming while any arbitration is pending. However, in October 2018, AT&T removed its HBO and Cinemax channels, which are not part of Turner, from our DISH TV and Sling TV programming lineup, as we and AT&T have been unable to negotiate the terms and conditions of a new programming carriage contract. Also, in April 2018, T-Mobile announced its acquisition of Sprint. We filed a petition to deny the transaction with the FCC. We cannot predict the practical effect of the impact on us of T-Mobile acquisition of Sprint (if approved), including without limitation, the impact of any conditions on us (if any conditions are imposed). However, it is possible that the outcomes resulting from this acquisition (if approved, with or without conditions) could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition or otherwise disrupt our business. 69 Table of Contents Trends in our Pay-TV Segment Competition Competition has intensified in recent years as the pay-TV industry has matured. With respect to our DISH TV services, we and our competitors increasingly must seek to attract a greater proportion of new subscribers from each other existing subscriber bases rather than from first-time purchasers of pay-TV services. We incur significant costs to retain our existing DISH TV subscribers, mostly as a result of upgrading their equipment to next generation receivers, primarily including our Hopper receivers, and by providing retention credits. Our DISH TV subscriber retention costs may vary significantly from period to period. Many of our competitors have been especially aggressive by offering discounted programming and services for both new and existing subscribers, including bundled offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other promotional offers. Certain competitors have been able to subsidize the price of video services with the price of broadband and/or wireless services. Our Pay-TV services also face increased competition from programmers and other companies who distribute video directly to consumers over the Internet. Our Sling TV services face increased competition from content providers and other companies, as well as traditional satellite television providers, cable companies and large telecommunications companies, that are increasing their Internet-based video offerings. Competition from video content distributed over the Internet includes services with live-linear television programming, single programmer offerings and offerings of large libraries of on-demand content, including in many cases original content. Furthermore, our DISH TV services face increased competition as programming offered over the Internet has become more prevalent and consumers are spending an increasing amount of time accessing video content via the Internet on their mobile devices. Significant changes in consumer behavior with regard to the means by which consumers obtain video entertainment and information in response to digital media competition could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition or otherwise disrupt our business. In particular, consumers have shown increased interest in viewing certain video programming in any place, at any time and/or on any broadband-connected device they choose. Online content providers may cause our subscribers to disconnect our DISH TV services ( cord cutting ), downgrade to smaller, less expensive programming packages ( cord shaving ) or elect to purchase through these online content providers a certain portion of the services that they would have historically purchased from us, such as pay per view movies, resulting in less revenue to us. We implement new marketing promotions from time to time that are intended to increase our Pay-TV subscriber activations. For our DISH TV services, we have launched various marketing promotions offering certain DISH TV programming packages without a price increase for a commitment period. We also launched our Flex Pack skinny bundle with a core package of programming consisting of more than 50 channels and the choice of one of nine themed add-on channel packs, which include, among others, local broadcast networks and kids and general entertainment programming. Subscribers can also add or remove additional channel packs to best suit their entertainment needs. During 2017, we launched Tuned In To You and the accompanying Spokeslistener campaign. While we plan to implement these and other new marketing efforts for our DISH TV services, there can be no assurance that we will ultimately be successful in increasing our gross new DISH TV subscriber activations. Additionally, in response to our efforts, we may face increased competitive pressures, including aggressive marketing and retention efforts, bundled discount offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other discounted promotional offers. For our Sling TV services, we offer a personalized TV experience with a customized channel line-up and two of the lowest priced multichannel live-linear online streaming services in the industry, our Sling Orange service and our Sling Blue service. During 2018, we launched our We are Slingers campaign. While we plan to implement these and other new marketing efforts for our Sling TV services, there can be no assurance that we will ultimately be successful in increasing our net Sling TV subscriber activations. 70 Table of Contents Our DISH TV subscriber base has been declining due to, among other things, the factors described above. There can be no assurance that our DISH TV subscriber base will not continue to decline and that the pace of such decline will not accelerate. As our DISH TV subscriber base continues to decline, it could have a material adverse long-term effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flow. Programming Our ability to compete successfully will depend, among other things, on our ability to continue to obtain desirable programming and deliver it to our subscribers at competitive prices. Programming costs represent a large percentage of our Subscriber-related expenses and the largest component of our total expense. We expect these costs to continue to increase due to contractual price increases and the renewal of long-term programming contracts on less favorable pricing terms and certain programming costs are rising at a much faster rate than wages or inflation. In particular, the rates we are charged for retransmitting local broadcast channels have been increasing substantially and may exceed our ability to increase our prices to our customers. Going forward, our margins may face pressure if we are unable to renew our long-term programming contracts on acceptable pricing and other economic terms or if we are unable to pass these increased programming costs on to our customers. Increases in programming costs have caused us to increase the rates that we charge to our subscribers, which could in turn cause our existing Pay-TV subscribers to disconnect our service or cause potential new Pay-TV subscribers to choose not to subscribe to our service. Additionally, even if our subscribers do not disconnect our services, they may purchase through new and existing online content providers a certain portion of the services that they would have historically purchased from us, such as pay-per-view movies, resulting in less revenue to us. Furthermore, our net Pay-TV subscriber additions, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, and DISH TV churn rate may be negatively impacted if we are unable to renew our long-term programming carriage contracts before they expire. In the past, our net Pay-TV subscriber additions, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, and DISH TV churn rate have been negatively impacted as a result of programming interruptions and threatened programming interruptions in connection with the scheduled expiration of programming carriage contracts with content providers. In June 2018 and November 2018, Univision Communications Inc. ( Univision ) removed certain of its channels from our DISH TV and Sling TV programming lineup, as we and Univision have been unable to negotiate the terms and conditions of a new programming carriage contract. In light of, among other things, certain Univision programming being available to consumers through alternative methods including over the air antennas and directly from Univision over the Internet, the current state of our negotiations with Univision and the duration of the absence of these Univision channels from our programming lineups, this removal may be permanent. Univision removal of certain of its channels from our programming lineup will continue to negatively impact our DISH TV churn rate, net DISH TV subscriber losses, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and net Sling TV subscriber additions in the short-term. However, over the long term, we anticipate that we will be able to provide more compelling offers to our subscribers, particularly containing Latino programming because of, among other things, our ability to provide more flexible and lower cost programming and because certain Univision programming is also available through alternative methods including over the air antennas and directly from Univision over the Internet. In addition, in October 2018, AT&T removed its HBO and Cinemax channels from our DISH TV and Sling TV programming lineup, as we and AT&T have been unable to negotiate the terms and conditions of a new programming carriage contract. AT&T offers its programming, including its HBO and Cinemax channels, directly to consumers over the Internet and provides HBO for free to subscribers of its streaming service AT&T Watch TV. We experienced a higher DISH TV churn rate, higher net Pay-TV subscriber losses and lower gross new DISH TV subscriber activations during the third and fourth quarter 2018 and continuing into the first quarter 2019, when Univision and AT&T removed certain of their channels from our DISH TV and Sling TV programming lineup. As a result, there can be no assurance that the removal of these channels will not have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition or otherwise disrupt our business. We cannot predict with any certainty the impact to our net Pay-TV subscriber additions, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, and DISH TV churn rate resulting from additional programming interruptions or threatened programming interruptions that may occur in the future. As a result, we may at times suffer from periods of lower net Pay-TV subscriber additions or higher net Pay-TV subscriber losses. 71 Table of Contents Operations and Customer Service While competitive factors have impacted the entire pay-TV industry, our relative performance has also been driven by issues specific to us. In the past, our subscriber growth has been adversely affected by signal theft and other forms of fraud and by our operational inefficiencies. For our DISH TV services, in order to combat signal theft and improve the security of our broadcast system, we use microchips embedded in credit card sized access cards, called smart cards, or security chips in our DBS receiver systems to control access to authorized programming content ( Security Access Devices ). We expect that future replacements of these devices may be necessary to keep our system secure. To combat other forms of fraud, among other things, we monitor our independent third-party distributors and independent third-party retailers adherence to our business rules. Furthermore, for our Sling TV services, we encrypt programming content and use digital rights management software to, among other things, prevent unauthorized access to our programming content. While we have made improvements in responding to and dealing with customer service issues, we continue to focus on the prevention of these issues, which is critical to our business, financial condition and results of operations. To improve our operational performance, we continue to make investments in staffing, training, information systems, and other initiatives, primarily in our call center and in-home service operations. These investments are intended to help combat inefficiencies introduced by the increasing complexity of our business, improve customer satisfaction, reduce churn, increase productivity, and allow us to scale better over the long run. We cannot be certain, however, that our spending will ultimately be successful in improving our operational performance. Changes in our Technology We have been deploying DBS receivers for our DISH TV services that utilize 8PSK modulation technology with MPEG-4 compression technology for several years. These technologies, when fully deployed, will allow improved broadcast efficiency, and therefore allow increased programming capacity. Many of our customers today, however, do not have DBS receivers that use MPEG-4 compression technology. In addition, given that all of our HD content is broadcast in MPEG-4, any growth in HD penetration will naturally accelerate our transition to these newer technologies and may increase our retention costs. All new DBS receivers have MPEG-4 compression with 8PSK modulation technology. In addition, from time to time, we change equipment for certain subscribers to make more efficient use of transponder capacity in support of HD and other initiatives. We believe that the benefit from the increase in available transponder capacity outweighs the short-term cost of these equipment changes. EXPLANATION OF KEY METRICS AND OTHER ITEMS Subscriber-related revenue . Subscriber-related revenue consists principally of revenue from basic, local, premium movie, pay-per-view, Latino and international subscriptions; equipment rental fees and other hardware related fees, including DVRs and fees from subscribers with multiple receivers; advertising services; fees earned from our Smart Home service operations; broadband services; warranty services; and other subscriber revenue. Certain of the amounts included in Subscriber-related revenue are not recurring on a monthly basis. Equipment sales and other revenue . Equipment sales and other revenue principally includes the non-subsidized sales of DBS accessories to independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distributors of our equipment, sales of digital receivers and related components to third-party pay-TV providers and revenue from services and other agreements with EchoStar. Subscriber-related expenses . Subscriber-related expenses principally include programming expenses, which represent a substantial majority of these expenses. Subscriber-related expenses also include costs for Pay-TV and broadband services incurred in connection with our subscriber retention, Smart Home service and call center operations, billing costs, refurbishment and repair costs related to DBS receiver systems, other variable subscriber expenses and monthly wholesale fees paid to broadband providers. 72 Table of Contents Satellite and transmission expenses . Satellite and transmission expenses includes the cost of leasing satellite and transponder capacity from EchoStar and the cost of telemetry, tracking and control and other professional services provided to us by EchoStar. Satellite and transmission expenses also includes the cost of digital broadcast operations, executory costs associated with capital leases and costs associated with transponder leases and other related services. In addition, Satellite and transmission expenses includes costs associated with our Sling TV services including, among other things, streaming delivery technology and infrastructure. Cost of sales - equipment and other. Cost of sales - equipment and other primarily includes the cost of non-subsidized sales of DBS accessories to independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distributors of our equipment, costs associated with sales of digital receivers and related components to third-party pay-TV providers and costs related to services and other agreements with EchoStar. Subscriber acquisition costs . While we primarily lease DBS receiver systems, we also subsidize certain costs to attract new subscribers. Our Subscriber acquisition costs include the cost of subsidized sales of DBS receiver systems to independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distributors of our equipment, the cost of subsidized sales of DBS receiver systems directly by us to subscribers, including net costs related to our promotional incentives, costs related to our direct sales efforts and costs related to installation and acquisition advertising. Our Subscriber acquisition costs also includes costs associated with acquiring Sling TV subscribers including, among other things, costs related to acquisition advertising and our direct sales efforts and commissions. Subsequent to the adoption of ASU 2014-09 on January 1, 2018, we capitalize payments made under certain sales incentive programs, including those with our independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distributors, which were previously expensed as Subscriber acquisition costs. These amounts are now initially capitalized in Other current assets and Other noncurrent assets, net on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, and then amortized in Other subscriber acquisition costs on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. DISH TV SAC. Subscriber acquisition cost measures are commonly used by those evaluating traditional companies in the pay-TV industry. We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating the average subscriber acquisition costs per new DISH TV subscriber activation, or DISH TV SAC, and we believe presentations of pay-TV SAC may not be calculated consistently by different companies in the same or similar businesses. Our DISH TV SAC has historically been calculated as Subscriber acquisition costs, excluding Subscriber acquisition costs associated with our broadband services and Sling TV services, plus the value of equipment capitalized under our lease program for new DISH TV subscribers, divided by gross new DISH TV subscriber activations. Subsequent to the adoption of ASU 2014-09 on January 1, 2018, we capitalize payments made under certain sales incentive programs, including those with our independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distributors, which were previously expensed as Subscriber acquisition costs. These amounts are now initially capitalized in Other current assets and Other noncurrent assets, net on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, and then amortized in Other subscriber acquisition costs on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). As such, as of January 1, 2018 our DISH TV SAC is calculated as Subscriber acquisition costs, excluding Subscriber acquisition costs associated with our broadband services and Sling TV services, plus capitalized payments made under certain sales incentive programs, excluding amortization related to these payments, plus the value of equipment capitalized under our lease program for new DISH TV subscribers, divided by gross new DISH TV subscriber activations. We include all the costs of acquiring DISH TV subscribers (e.g., subsidized and capitalized equipment) as we believe it is a more comprehensive measure of how much we are spending to acquire subscribers. We also include all new DISH TV subscribers in our calculation, including DISH TV subscribers added with little or no subscriber acquisition costs. General and administrative expenses . General and administrative expenses consists primarily of employee-related costs associated with administrative services such as legal, information systems, and accounting and finance. It also includes outside professional fees (e.g., legal, information systems and accounting services) and other items associated with facilities and administration. Litigation expense. Litigation expense primarily consists of certain significant legal settlements, judgments and/or accruals. 73 Table of Contents Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized primarily includes interest expense (net of capitalized interest), prepayment premiums, amortization of debt discounts and debt issuance costs associated with our long-term debt, and interest expense associated with our capital lease obligations. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding our capitalized interest policy. Other, net. The main components of Other, net are gains and losses realized on the sale and/or conversion of marketable and non-marketable investment securities and derivative financial instruments, impairment of marketable and non-marketable investment securities, unrealized gains and losses from changes in fair value of certain marketable investment securities and derivative financial instruments, and equity in earnings and losses of our affiliates. Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA ). EBITDA is defined as Net income (loss) attributable to DISH Network plus Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized net of Interest income, Income tax (provision) benefit, net and Depreciation and amortization. This non-GAAP measure is reconciled to Net income (loss) attributable to DISH Network in our discussion of Results of Operations below. DISH TV subscribers. We include customers obtained through direct sales, independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distribution relationships in our DISH TV subscriber count. We also provide DISH TV services to hotels, motels and other commercial accounts. For certain of these commercial accounts, we divide our total revenue for these commercial accounts by an amount approximately equal to the retail price of our Flex Pack programming package, and include the resulting number, which is substantially smaller than the actual number of commercial units served, in our DISH TV subscriber count. The retail price of the Flex Pack programming package as of December 31, 2018 was $34.99, and we intend to continue to use this price as the denominator in our calculation. Sling TV subscribers. We include customers obtained through direct sales and third-party marketing agreements in our Sling TV subscriber count. Sling TV subscribers are recorded net of disconnects. Sling TV customers receiving service for no charge, under certain new subscriber promotions, are excluded from our Sling TV subscriber count. For customers who subscribe to multiple Sling TV packages, including, among others, Sling TV Blue, Sling TV Orange and Sling Latino, each customer is only counted as one Sling TV subscriber. Pay-TV subscribers. Our Pay-TV subscriber count includes all DISH TV and Sling TV subscribers discussed above. For customers who subscribe to both our DISH TV services and our Sling TV services, each subscription is counted as a separate Pay-TV subscriber. Pay-TV average monthly revenue per subscriber ( Pay-TV ARPU ). We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating ARPU and believe presentations of ARPU may not be calculated consistently by other companies in the same or similar businesses. We calculate Pay-TV average monthly revenue per Pay-TV subscriber, or Pay-TV ARPU, by dividing average monthly Subscriber-related revenue, excluding revenue from broadband services, for the period by our average number of Pay-TV subscribers for the period. The average number of Pay-TV subscribers is calculated for the period by adding the average number of Pay-TV subscribers for each month and dividing by the number of months in the period. The average number of Pay-TV subscribers for each month is calculated by adding the beginning and ending Pay-TV subscribers for the month and dividing by two. Sling TV subscribers on average purchase lower priced programming services than DISH TV subscribers, and therefore, as Sling TV subscribers increase, it has had a negative impact on Pay-TV ARPU. DISH TV average monthly subscriber churn rate ( DISH TV churn rate ). We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating subscriber churn rate and believe presentations of subscriber churn rates may not be calculated consistently by different companies in the same or similar businesses. We calculate DISH TV churn rate for any period by dividing the number of DISH TV subscribers who terminated service during the period by the average number of DISH TV subscribers for the same period, and further dividing by the number of months in the period. The average number of DISH TV subscribers is calculated for the period by adding the average number of DISH TV subscribers for each month and dividing by the number of months in the period. The average number of DISH TV subscribers for each month is calculated by adding the beginning and ending DISH TV subscribers for the month and dividing by two. Free cash flow . We define free cash flow as Net cash flows from operating activities less Purchases of property and equipment and Capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations, as shown on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. 74 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Year Ended December 31, 2018 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2017. For the Years Ended December 31, Variance Statements of Operations Data 2018 2017 Amount % (In thousands) Revenue: Subscriber-related revenue $ 13,456,088 $ 14,260,412 $ (804,324) (5.6) Equipment sales and other revenue 165,214 130,963 34,251 26.2 Total revenue 13,621,302 14,391,375 (770,073) (5.4) Costs and Expenses: Subscriber-related expenses 8,544,577 8,919,985 (375,408) (4.2) % of Subscriber-related revenue 63.5 % 62.6 % Satellite and transmission expenses 576,568 658,017 (81,449) (12.4) % of Subscriber-related revenue 4.3 % 4.6 % Cost of sales - equipment and other 145,604 95,116 50,488 53.1 Subscriber acquisition costs 769,307 1,204,261 (434,954) (36.1) General and administrative expenses 725,601 687,054 38,547 5.6 % of Total revenue 5.3 % 4.8 % Litigation expense 295,695 (295,695) * Depreciation and amortization 712,024 817,564 (105,540) (12.9) Impairment of long-lived assets (Note 8) 145,918 (145,918) * Total costs and expenses 11,473,681 12,823,610 (1,349,929) (10.5) Operating income (loss) 2,147,621 1,567,765 579,856 37.0 Other Income (Expense): Interest income 44,759 41,006 3,753 9.2 Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized (15,006) (63,172) 48,166 76.2 Other, net 11,801 104,488 (92,687) (88.7) Total other income (expense) 41,554 82,322 (40,768) (49.5) Income (loss) before income taxes 2,189,175 1,650,087 539,088 32.7 Income tax (provision) benefit, net (533,684) 515,320 (1,049,004) * Effective tax rate 24.4 % (31.2) % Net income (loss) 1,655,491 2,165,407 (509,916) (23.5) Less: Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests, net of tax 80,400 66,718 13,682 20.5 Net income (loss) attributable to DISH Network $ 1,575,091 $ 2,098,689 $ (523,598) (24.9) Other Data: Pay-TV subscribers, as of period end (in millions) 12.322 13.242 (0.920) (6.9) DISH TV subscribers, as of period end (in millions) 9.905 11.030 (1.125) (10.2) Sling TV subscribers, as of period end (in millions) 2.417 2.212 0.205 9.3 Pay-TV subscriber additions (losses), net (in millions) (0.920) (0.284) (0.636) * DISH TV subscriber additions (losses), net (in millions) (1.125) (0.995) (0.130) (13.1) Sling TV subscriber additions (losses), net (in millions) 0.205 0.711 (0.506) (71.2) Pay-TV ARPU $ 85.46 $ 86.43 $ (0.97) (1.1) DISH TV subscriber additions, gross (in millions) 1.114 1.477 (0.363) (24.6) DISH TV churn rate 1.78 % 1.78 % % * DISH TV SAC $ 759 $ 751 $ 8 1.1 EBITDA $ 2,791,046 $ 2,423,099 $ 367,947 15.2 * Percentage is not meaningful. 75 Table of Contents Pay-TV subscribers . We lost approximately 920,000 net Pay-TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the loss of approximately 284,000 net Pay-TV subscribers during the same period in 2017. The increase in net Pay-TV subscriber losses during the year ended December 31, 2018 resulted from higher net DISH TV subscriber losses and fewer net Sling TV subscriber additions. Our net Pay-TV subscriber losses during the year ended December 31, 2018 were negatively impacted by Univision and AT&T removal of certain of their channels from our DISH TV and Sling TV programming lineup. As a result, we experienced higher net Pay-TV subscriber losses beginning in the third quarter 2018 and continuing into the fourth quarter 2018. With respect to the Univision removal, in light of, among other things, certain Univision programming being available to consumers through alternative methods including over the air antennas and directly from Univision over the Internet, the current state of our negotiations with Univision and the duration of the absence of these channels from our programming lineups, this removal may be permanent. We lost approximately 1.125 million net DISH TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the loss of approximately 995,000 net DISH TV subscribers during the same period in 2017. This increase in net DISH TV subscriber losses resulted from lower gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, partially offset by a lower number of customer disconnects. We added approximately 205,000 net Sling TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the addition of approximately 711,000 net Sling TV subscribers during the same period in 2017. This decrease in net Sling TV subscriber additions is primarily related to increased competition, including competition from other OTT service providers and to a higher number of customer disconnects on a larger Sling TV subscriber base, including the impact from Univision and AT&T removal of certain of their channels from our programming lineup, discussed above. Our DISH TV churn rate for both the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 was 1.78%. Our DISH TV churn rate for the year ended December 31, 2018 was negatively impacted by Univision and AT&T removal of certain of their channels from our programming lineup, discussed above, offset by the positive impact from our emphasis on acquiring and retaining higher quality subscribers. Our DISH TV churn rate continues to be adversely impacted by external factors, such as, among other things, increased competitive pressures, including aggressive marketing, bundled discount offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other discounted promotional offers, as well as cord cutting. Our DISH TV churn rate is also impacted by internal factors, such as, among other things, our ability to consistently provide outstanding customer service, price increases, programming interruptions in connection with the scheduled expiration of certain programming carriage contracts, our ability to control piracy and other forms of fraud and the level of our retention efforts. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we activated approximately 1.114 million gross new DISH TV subscribers compared to approximately 1.477 million gross new DISH TV subscribers during the same period in 2017, a decrease of 24.6%. This decrease in our gross new DISH TV subscriber activations was primarily impacted by stricter customer acquisition policies for our DISH TV subscribers, including an emphasis on acquiring higher quality subscribers; increased competitive pressures, including aggressive short term introductory pricing and bundled offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other discounted promotional offers; and Univision and AT&T removal of certain of their channels from our programming lineup, discussed above. During September 2017, Hurricane Maria caused extraordinary damage in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, resulting in a widespread loss of power and infrastructure. Given the devastation and loss of power, substantially all customers in those areas were unable to receive our service as of September 30, 2017. In an effort to ensure customers would not be charged for services they were unable to receive, we proactively paused service for those customers. Accordingly, we removed approximately 145,000 subscribers, representing all of our subscribers in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, from our ending Pay-TV subscriber count as of September 30, 2017. During the fourth quarter 2017, 75,000 of these customers reactivated. During the year ended December 31, 2018, 31,000 of these customers reactivated. We incurred certain costs in connection with the re-activation of these returning subscribers, and accordingly, these returning customers were recorded as gross new DISH TV subscriber activations with the corresponding costs recorded in Subscriber acquisition costs on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) and/or in Purchases of property and equipment on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We cannot predict with any certainty the impact to our net Pay-TV subscriber additions, gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, and DISH TV subscriber churn rate resulting from programming interruptions or threatened programming interruptions that may occur in the future. As a result, we may at times suffer from periods of lower net Pay-TV subscriber additions or higher net Pay-TV subscriber losses. 76 Table of Contents We have not always met our own standards for performing high-quality installations, effectively resolving subscriber issues when they arise, answering subscriber calls in an acceptable timeframe, effectively communicating with our subscriber base, reducing calls driven by the complexity of our business, improving the reliability of certain systems and subscriber equipment and aligning the interests of certain independent third-party retailers and installers to provide high-quality service. Most of these factors have affected both gross new DISH TV subscriber activations as well as DISH TV subscriber churn rate. Our future gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and our DISH TV subscriber churn rate may be negatively impacted by these factors, which could in turn adversely affect our revenue. Subscriber-related revenue. Subscriber-related revenue totaled $13.456 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $804 million or 5.6% compared to the same period in 2017. The decrease in Subscriber-related revenue from the same period in 2017 was primarily related to a lower average Pay-TV subscriber base and the decrease in Pay-TV ARPU discussed below. We expect these trends in Subscriber-related revenue to continue. Pay-TV ARPU. Pay-TV ARPU was $85.46 during the year ended December 31, 2018 versus $86.43 during the same period in 2017. The $0.97 or 1.1% decrease in Pay-TV ARPU was primarily attributable to an increase in Sling TV subscribers as a percentage of our total Pay-TV subscriber base, a shift in DISH TV programming package mix to lower priced programming packages and a decrease in revenue related to premium channels and pay-per-view boxing events. Sling TV subscribers on average purchase lower priced programming services than DISH TV subscribers, and therefore, the increase in Sling TV subscribers had a negative impact on Pay-TV ARPU. We expect this trend to continue. These decreases were partially offset by DISH TV programming package price increases in the first quarter 2018 and 2017 and an increase in revenue per subscriber related to our Sling TV services. Subscriber-related expenses. Subscriber-related expenses totaled $8.545 billion during the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $375 million or 4.2% compared to the same period in 2017. The decrease in Subscriber-related expenses was primarily attributable to a lower average Pay-TV subscriber base and a decrease in variable costs per subscriber, partially offset by higher programming costs per subscriber. Programming costs per subscriber increased due to rate increases in certain of our programming contracts, including the renewal of certain contracts at higher rates, particularly for local broadcast channels. These programming rate increases were partially offset by the reduction in programming costs per subscriber related to Univision and AT&T removal of certain of their channels from our programming lineup and lower costs related to pay-per-view boxing events. Subscriber-related expenses represented 63.5% and 62.6% of Subscriber-related revenue during the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The increase in this expense to revenue ratio primarily resulted from lower subscriber-related revenue and higher programming costs per subscriber, discussed above. In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts to purchase programming content in which our payment obligations are generally contingent on the number of Pay-TV subscribers to whom we provide the respective content. Our Subscriber-related expenses have and will continue to face further upward pressure from price increases and the renewal of long-term programming contracts on less favorable pricing terms. In addition, our programming expenses will increase to the extent we are successful in growing our Pay-TV subscriber base. Satellite and transmission expenses. Satellite and transmission expenses totaled $577 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $81 million or 12.4% compared to the same period in 2017. The decrease in Satellite and transmission expenses was primarily related to a decrease in transponder capacity leased from EchoStar, related to our DISH TV service and decreased costs in our digital broadcast operations. Subscriber acquisition costs. Subscriber acquisition costs totaled $769 million for the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $435 million or 36.1% compared to the same period in 2017. This change was primarily attributable to fewer gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and a $158 million positive impact related to the adoption of ASU 2014-09. Subsequent to the adoption of ASU 2014-09 on January 1, 2018, we capitalize payments made under certain sales incentive programs, including those with our independent third-party retailers and other independent third-party distributors. These amounts were previously expensed as Subscriber acquisition costs. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. 77 Table of Contents DISH TV SAC. DISH TV SAC was $759 during the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to $751 during the same period in 2017, an increase of $8 or 1.1%. This change was primarily attributable to an increase in hardware costs and commissions paid to independent third-party retailers per activation, partially offset by a decrease in advertising costs per activation. The increase in hardware costs and commissions paid to independent third-party retailers resulted from our emphasis on acquiring higher quality subscribers who activate with higher priced receivers, such as the Hopper 3, and a lower percentage of remanufactured receivers being activated on new subscriber accounts. In addition, we had more Puerto Rico subscribers reactivate in 2017 as compared to 2018 which increased our DISH TV SAC during 2018. The expenses we incurred for the reactivation of subscribers in Puerto Rico were lower on a per subscriber basis than those incurred for the remaining gross new DISH TV subscriber activations. During the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, the amount of equipment capitalized under our lease program for new DISH TV subscribers totaled $120 million and $137 million, respectively. This decrease in capital expenditures under our lease program for new DISH TV subscribers resulted primarily from fewer gross new DISH TV subscriber activations discussed above. To remain competitive, we upgrade or replace subscriber equipment periodically as technology changes, and the costs associated with these upgrades may be substantial. To the extent technological changes render a portion of our existing equipment obsolete, we would be unable to redeploy all returned equipment and consequently would realize less benefit from the DISH TV SAC reduction associated with redeployment of that returned lease equipment. Our Subscriber acquisition costs and DISH TV SAC may materially increase in the future to the extent that we, among other things, transition to newer technologies, introduce more aggressive promotions, or provide greater equipment subsidies. See further information under Liquidity and Capital Resources Subscriber Acquisition and Retention Costs. Litigation expense. Litigation expense related to certain significant legal settlements, judgments and/or accruals totaled $296 million during the year ended December 31, 2017. See Note 14 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense totaled $712 million during the years ended December 31, 2018, a $106 million or 12.9% decrease compared to the same period in 2017. This change was primarily driven by a decrease in depreciation expense from equipment leased to new and existing DISH TV subscribers. Impairment of long-lived assets. Impairment of long-lived assets of $146 million during the year ended December 31, 2017 resulted from an impairment of the T1 satellite. See Note 8 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized totaled $15 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, a decrease of $48 million or 76.2% compared to the same period in 2017. This decrease was primarily related to a reduction in interest expense resulting from debt redemptions during 2018 and 2017. On June 14, 2017, the FCC issued an order granting our application to acquire the 600 MHz Licenses. The addition of the carrying amount of these licenses, together with the carrying amount of current wireless spectrum licenses, exceeded the amount of long-term debt and capital lease obligations on our Consolidated Balance Sheets since June 14, 2017. Therefore, beginning June 14, 2017, materially all of our interest expense is being capitalized. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. 78 Table of Contents Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization . EBITDA was $2.791 billion during the year ended December 31, 2018, an increase of $368 million or 15.2% compared to the same period in 2017. The increase in EBITDA was primarily attributable to the changes in operating income discussed above, excluding the change in Depreciation and amortization. These changes in operating income include a $154 million positive impact for the year ended December 31, 2018 related to the adoption of ASU 2014-09. EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2017 was negatively impacted by Litigation expense of $296 million and Impairment of long-lived assets of $146 million. The following table reconciles EBITDA to the accompanying financial statements. For the Years Ended December 31, 2018 2017 (In thousands) EBITDA $ 2,791,046 $ 2,423,099 Interest, net 29,753 (22,166) Income tax (provision) benefit, net (533,684) 515,320 Depreciation and amortization (712,024) (817,564) Net income (loss) attributable to DISH Network $ 1,575,091 $ 2,098,689 EBITDA is not a measure determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ) and should not be considered a substitute for operating income, net income or any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA is used as a measurement of operating efficiency and overall financial performance and we believe it to be a helpful measure for those evaluating companies in the pay-TV industry. Conceptually, EBITDA measures the amount of income generated each period that could be used to service debt, pay taxes and fund capital expenditures. EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Income tax (provision) benefit, net . Our income tax provision was $534 million during the year ended December 31, 2018, compared to an income tax benefit of $515 million for the same period in 2017. On December 22, 2017, the Tax Reform Act was enacted, which, among other things, lowered the federal statutory corporate tax rate effective January 1, 2018 from 35% to 21%. Consequently, we remeasured our deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2017 which positively impacted our Income tax (provision) benefit, net by approximately $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2017. 79 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, 2017 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2016. For the Years Ended December 31, Variance Statements of Operations Data 2017 2016 Amount % (In thousands) Revenue: Subscriber-related revenue $ 14,260,412 $ 15,033,939 $ (773,527) (5.1) Equipment sales and other revenue 130,963 178,363 (47,400) (26.6) Total revenue 14,391,375 15,212,302 (820,927) (5.4) Costs and Expenses: Subscriber-related expenses 8,919,985 8,913,624 6,361 0.1 % of Subscriber-related revenue 62.6 % 59.3 % Satellite and transmission expenses 658,017 710,719 (52,702) (7.4) % of Subscriber-related revenue 4.6 % 4.7 % Cost of sales - equipment and other 95,116 133,902 (38,786) (29.0) Subscriber acquisition costs 1,204,261 1,456,492 (252,231) (17.3) General and administrative expenses 687,054 735,954 (48,900) (6.6) % of Total revenue 4.8 % 4.8 % Litigation expense 295,695 21,148 274,547 * Depreciation and amortization 817,564 921,202 (103,638) (11.3) Impairment of long-lived assets (Note 8) 145,918 145,918 * Total costs and expenses 12,823,610 12,893,041 (69,431) (0.5) Operating income (loss) 1,567,765 2,319,261 (751,496) (32.4) Other Income (Expense): Interest income 41,006 31,168 9,838 31.6 Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized (63,172) (53,141) (10,031) (18.9) Other, net 104,488 119,315 (14,827) (12.4) Total other income (expense) 82,322 97,342 (15,020) (15.4) Income (loss) before income taxes 1,650,087 2,416,603 (766,516) (31.7) Income tax (provision) benefit, net 515,320 (865,818) 1,381,138 * Effective tax rate (31.2) % 35.8 % Net income (loss) 2,165,407 1,550,785 614,622 39.6 Less: Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests, net of tax 66,718 52,846 13,872 26.2 Net income (loss) attributable to DISH Network $ 2,098,689 $ 1,497,939 $ 600,750 40.1 Other Data: Pay-TV subscribers, as of period end (in millions) *** 13.242 13.671 ** (0.429) (3.1) DISH TV subscribers, as of period end (in millions) *** 11.030 12.170 (1.140) (9.4) Sling TV subscribers, as of period end (in millions) 2.212 1.501 0.711 47.4 Pay-TV subscriber additions (losses), net (in millions) *** (0.284) (0.392) 0.108 27.6 DISH TV subscriber additions (losses), net (in millions) *** (0.995) (1.270) 0.275 21.7 Sling TV subscriber additions (losses), net (in millions) 0.711 0.878 (0.167) (19.0) Pay-TV ARPU $ 86.43 $ 88.66 $ (2.23) (2.5) DISH TV subscriber additions, gross (in millions) 1.477 1.736 (0.259) (14.9) DISH TV churn rate 1.78 % 1.97 % (0.19) % (9.6) DISH TV SAC $ 751 $ 832 $ (81) (9.7) EBITDA $ 2,423,099 $ 3,306,932 $ (883,833) (26.7) * Percentage is not meaningful. ** Our ending Pay-TV subscriber count increased by approximately 166,000 subscribers during the third quarter 2016 as a result of the change in our calculation for our commercial accounts. *** During the third quarter 2017, as a result of Hurricane Maria, we removed approximately 145,000 subscribers representing all of our subscribers in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, from our ending Pay-TV subscriber count. The effect of the removal of these 145,000 subscribers as of September 30, 2017 was excluded from the calculation of our net DISH TV subscriber additions/losses and DISH TV churn rate for the year ended December 31, 2017. See Results of Operations Pay-TV subscribers for further information. 80 Table of Contents Pay-TV subscribers . We lost approximately 284,000 net Pay-TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2017 compared to the loss of approximately 392,000 net Pay-TV subscribers during the same period in 2016. The decrease in net Pay-TV subscriber losses during the year ended December 31, 2017 resulted from fewer net DISH TV subscriber losses, partially offset by fewer net Sling TV subscriber additions. We lost approximately 995,000 net DISH TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2017 compared to the loss of approximately 1.270 million net DISH TV subscribers during the same period in 2016. This decrease in net DISH TV subscriber losses primarily resulted from a lower DISH TV churn rate, partially offset by lower gross new DISH TV subscriber activations. We added approximately 711,000 net Sling TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2017 compared to the addition of approximately 878,000 net Sling TV subscribers during the same period in 2016. This decrease in net Sling TV subscriber additions is primarily related to a higher number of customer disconnects on a larger Sling TV subscriber base and from increased competition, including competition from other OTT service providers. Our DISH TV churn rate for the year ended December 31, 2017 was 1.78% compared to 1.97% for the same period in 2016. This decrease primarily resulted from our emphasis on acquiring and retaining higher quality subscribers. See below for discussion regarding the impacts of Hurricane Maria on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands during September 2017. While our DISH TV churn rate improved during the year ended December 31, 2017, it continues to be adversely affected by increased competitive pressures, including aggressive marketing, bundled discount offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other discounted promotional offers, as well as cord cutting. Our DISH TV churn rate is also impacted by, among other things, our ability to consistently provide outstanding customer service, price increases, programming interruptions in connection with the scheduled expiration of certain programming carriage contracts, our ability to control piracy and other forms of fraud and the level of our retention efforts. During the year ended December 31, 2017, we activated approximately 1.477 million gross new DISH TV subscribers compared to approximately 1.736 million gross new DISH TV subscribers during the same period in 2016, a decrease of 14.9%. This decrease in our gross new DISH TV subscriber activations was primarily impacted by increased competitive pressures, including aggressive marketing and retention efforts, bundled discount offers combining broadband, video and/or wireless services and other discounted promotional offers, as well as stricter customer acquisition policies for our DISH TV subscribers, including an emphasis on acquiring higher quality subscribers. During September 2017, Hurricane Maria caused extraordinary damage in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, resulting in a widespread loss of power and infrastructure. Given the devastation and loss of power, substantially all customers in those areas were unable to receive our service as of September 30, 2017. In an effort to ensure customers would not be charged for services they were unable to receive, we proactively paused service for those customers. Accordingly, we removed approximately 145,000 subscribers, representing all of our subscribers in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, from our ending Pay-TV subscriber count as of September 30, 2017. The effect of the removal of these 145,000 subscribers as of September 30, 2017 was excluded from the calculation of our net DISH TV subscriber additions/losses and DISH TV churn rate for the year ended December 31, 2017. During the fourth quarter 2017, 75,000 of these customers reactivated. We incurred certain costs in connection with the re-activation of these returning subscribers, and accordingly, these returning customers were recorded as gross new DISH TV subscriber activations for the year ended December 31, 2017 with the corresponding costs recorded in Subscriber acquisition costs in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) and/or in Purchases of property and equipment in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We cannot predict when the remaining subscribers in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands discussed above will be able to receive service, how many will return or when they may return to active subscriber status, and there can be no assurance that they will return. Although we continue to assess the potential impact of Hurricane Maria on our subscriber base, the impact of the hurricane did not have a material effect on our overall financial position or results of operations. Subscriber-related revenue. Subscriber-related revenue totaled $14.260 billion for the year ended December 31, 2017, a decrease of $774 million or 5.1% compared to the same period in 2016. The decrease in Subscriber-related revenue from the same period in 2016 was primarily related to the decrease in Pay-TV ARPU discussed below and a lower average Pay-TV subscriber base. We expect these trends in Subscriber-related revenue to continue. 81 Table of Contents Pay-TV ARPU. Pay-TV ARPU was $86.43 during the year ended December 31, 2017 versus $88.66 during the same period in 2016. The $2.23 or 2.5% decrease in Pay-TV ARPU was primarily attributable to an increase in Sling TV subscribers as a percentage of our total Pay-TV subscriber base and a shift in DISH TV programming package mix to lower priced programming packages. Sling TV subscribers on average purchase lower priced programming services than DISH TV subscribers, and therefore, the increase in Sling TV subscribers had a negative impact on Pay-TV ARPU. These decreases were partially offset by DISH TV programming package price increases in the first quarter 2017 and 2016 and an increase in Sling TV subscribers with higher priced Sling TV programming packages. Subscriber-related expenses. Subscriber-related expenses totaled $8.920 billion during the year ended December 31, 2017, an increase of $6 million or 0.1% compared to the same period in 2016. The increase in Subscriber-related expenses was primarily attributable to higher programming costs per subscriber, partially offset by a lower average Pay-TV subscriber base and a decrease in variable costs per subscriber. The increase in programming costs per subscriber was driven by rate increases in certain of our programming contracts, including the renewal of certain contracts at higher rates, particularly for local broadcast channels. Subscriber-related expenses represented 62.6% and 59.3% of Subscriber-related revenue during the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. The increase in this expense to revenue ratio primarily resulted from lower subscriber-related revenue and higher programming costs, discussed above. Subscriber acquisition costs. Subscriber acquisition costs totaled $1.204 billion for the year ended December 31, 2017, a decrease of $252 million or 17.3% compared to the same period in 2016. This change was primarily attributable to fewer gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and a decrease in DISH TV SAC, discussed below. DISH TV SAC. DISH TV SAC was $751 during the year ended December 31, 2017 compared to $832 during the same period in 2016, a decrease of $81 or 9.7%. This change was primarily attributable to a decrease in hardware costs per activation, a decrease in advertising costs per activation and the reactivation of subscribers in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands in fourth quarter 2017. The expenses we incurred for the reactivation of subscribers in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands were lower on a per subscriber basis than those incurred for the remaining gross new DISH TV activations during the year ended December 31, 2017. The decrease in hardware costs per activation was primarily due to a reduction in manufacturing costs related to certain receiver systems and a higher percentage of remanufactured receivers being activated on new DISH TV subscriber accounts. During the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, the amount of equipment capitalized under our lease program for new DISH TV subscribers totaled $137 million and $243 million, respectively. This decrease in capital expenditures under our lease program for new DISH TV subscribers resulted primarily from fewer gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and a decrease in hardware costs per activation, discussed above. Litigation expense. Litigation expense related to certain significant legal settlements, judgments and/or accruals totaled $296 million during the year ended December 31, 2017, an increase of $275 million compared to the same period in 2016. See Note 14 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization expense totaled $818 million during the year ended December 31, 2017, a $104 million or 11.3% decrease compared to the same period in 2016. This change was primarily driven by a decrease in depreciation expense from equipment leased to new and existing DISH TV subscribers, partially offset by the increase in depreciation expense associated with our EchoStar XVIII satellite, which became operational during the third quarter 2016. Impairment of long-lived assets. Impairment of long-lived assets of $146 million during the year ended December 31, 2017 resulted from an impairment of the T1 satellite. See Note 8 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. 82 Table of Contents Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized totaled $63 million during the year ended December 31, 2017, an increase of $10 million or 18.9% compared to the same period in 2016. This increase was primarily related to interest expense associated with debt issuances during 2016 and 2017, partially offset by an increase of $172 million in capitalized interest principally associated with the commercialization of our wireless spectrum and a reduction in interest expense from debt redemptions during 2016 and 2017. On June 14, 2017, the FCC issued an order granting our application to acquire the 600 MHz Licenses. The addition of the carrying amount of these licenses, together with the carrying amount of current wireless spectrum licenses, exceeded the amount of long-term debt and capital lease obligations on our Consolidated Balance Sheets since June 14, 2017. Therefore, beginning June 14, 2017, materially all of our interest expense is being capitalized. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization . EBITDA was $2.423 billion during the year ended December 31, 2017, a decrease of $884 million or 26.7% compared to the same period in 2016. EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2017 was negatively impacted by Litigation expense of $296 million and Impairment of long-lived assets of $146 million. The following table reconciles EBITDA to the accompanying financial statements. For the Years Ended December 31, 2017 2016 (In thousands) EBITDA $ 2,423,099 $ 3,306,932 Interest, net (22,166) (21,973) Income tax (provision) benefit, net 515,320 (865,818) Depreciation and amortization (817,564) (921,202) Net income (loss) attributable to DISH Network $ 2,098,689 $ 1,497,939 EBITDA is not a measure determined in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered a substitute for operating income, net income or any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP. EBITDA is used as a measurement of operating efficiency and overall financial performance and we believe it to be a helpful measure for those evaluating companies in the pay-TV industry. Conceptually, EBITDA measures the amount of income generated each period that could be used to service debt, pay taxes and fund capital expenditures. EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Income tax (provision) benefit, net . Our income tax benefit was $515 million during the year ended December 31, 2017, compared to an income tax provision of $866 million for the same period in 2016. On December 22, 2017, the Tax Reform Act was enacted, which, among other things, lowered the federal statutory corporate tax rate effective for us in future periods from 35% to 21%. Consequently, we remeasured our deferred tax assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2017 which positively impacted our Income tax (provision) benefit, net by approximately $1.2 billion. Our effective tax rate was negatively impacted by $255 million of Litigation expense related to the FTC Action during the year ended December 31, 2017, as any eventual payments of this expense may not be deductible for income tax purposes. The tax deductibility of any eventual payments may change based upon, among other things, further developments in the FTC Action, including final adjudication of the FTC Action. See Note 14 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. 83 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash, Cash Equivalents and Current Marketable Investment Securities We consider all liquid investments purchased within 90 days of their maturity to be cash equivalents. See Note 6 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information regarding our marketable investment securities. As of December 31, 2018, our cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities totaled $2.069 billion compared to $1.981 billion as of December 31, 2017, an increase of $88 million. This increase in cash, cash equivalents and current marketable investment securities primarily resulted from cash generated from operating activities of $2.518 billion, partially offset by the redemption and repurchases of our 4 1/4% Senior Notes due 2018 with an aggregate principal balance of $1.026 billion, $82 million of repurchases of our 7 7/8% Senior Notes due 2019 in open market trades and capital expenditures of $1.317 billion (including capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations). Debt Maturity Our 7 1/8% Senior Notes with an aggregate principal balance of $1.5 billion were redeemed on February 1, 2016. Our 4 5/8% Senior Notes with an aggregate principal balance of $900 million were redeemed on July 17, 2017. During 2017 and 2018, we repurchased $174 million and $57 million, respectively, of our 4 1/4% Senior Notes due 2018 in open market trades. The remaining balance of $969 million were redeemed on April 2, 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we repurchased $82 million of our 7 7/8% Senior Notes due 2019 in open market trades. The remaining balance of $1.318 billion matures on September 1, 2019. We expect to fund the remaining obligation from cash and marketable investment securities balances at that time. But, depending on market conditions, we may refinance the remaining obligation in whole or in part. Cash Flow The following discussion highlights our cash flow activities during the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016. Cash flows from operating activities. We typically reinvest the cash flow from operating activities in our business primarily to grow our subscriber base, expand our infrastructure, make strategic investments, such as significant investments in wireless, including commercialization of our wireless spectrum, and repay debt obligations. For the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, we reported Net cash flows from operating activities of $2.518 billion, $2.780 billion and $2.854 billion, respectively. Net cash flows from operating activities from 2017 to 2018 decreased $262 million, primarily attributable to a decrease in cash flows resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities principally attributable to timing differences between book expense and cash payments, including income taxes. This decrease was partially offset by a $267 million increase in income adjusted to exclude non-cash charges for Realized and unrealized losses (gains) on investments, Depreciation and amortization expense, Impairment of long-lived assets and Deferred tax expense (benefit). Net cash flows from operating activities from 2016 to 2017 decreased $74 million, primarily attributable to a $317 million decrease in income adjusted to exclude non-cash charges for Realized and unrealized losses (gains) on investments, Depreciation and amortization expense, Impairment of long-lived assets and Deferred tax expense (benefit), partially offset by an increase in cash flows resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities principally attributable to timing differences between book expense and cash payments. Cash flows from investing activities. Our investing activities generally include purchases and sales of marketable investment securities, acquisitions, strategic investments, including purchases and settlements of derivative financial instruments, and purchases of wireless spectrum licenses, capital expenditures and capitalized interest. For the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, we reported outflows from Net cash flows from investing activities of $1.975 billion, $6.522 billion and $1.737 billion, respectively. 84 Table of Contents During the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, capital expenditures for new and existing DISH TV customer equipment totaled $226 million, $259 million and $387 million, respectively. The decrease in 2018 and 2017 for new and existing DISH TV customer equipment primarily resulted from fewer gross new DISH TV subscriber activations and fewer existing customer upgrades. The year ended December 31, 2018 was impacted by cash outflows primarily related to capital expenditures of $1.317 billion (including $923 million of capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations) and $674 million in net purchases of marketable investment securities. The year ended December 31, 2017 was impacted by cash outflows primarily related to a $4.711 billion payment to the FCC for the 600 MHz Licenses, $953 million of capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations, $432 million of capital expenditures and $360 million in net purchases of marketable investment securities. The year ended December 31, 2016 was impacted by cash outflows primarily related to the upfront payment related to Auction 1000 of $1.5 billion, $724 million of capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations, $614 million of capital expenditures and cash inflows related to a $562 million settlement of our derivative financial instruments and $524 million in net sales of marketable investment securities. Cash flows from financing activities. Our financing activities generally include net proceeds related to the issuance of long-term and convertible debt, cash used for the repurchase, redemption or payment of long-term debt and capital lease obligations, and repurchases of our Class A common stock. For the year ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, we reported outflows from Net cash flows from financing activities of $1.135 billion and $103 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2016, we reported inflows from Net cash flows from financing activities of $3.154 billion. The net cash outflows in 2018 primarily related to the redemption and repurchases of our 4 1/4% Senior Notes due 2018 with an aggregate principal balance of $1.026 billion and $82 million of repurchases of our 7 7/8% Senior Notes due 2019 in open market trades. The net cash outflows in 2017 primarily related to the redemption of our 4 5/8% Senior Notes with an aggregate principal balance of $900 million and the $174 million repurchases of our 4 1/4% Senior Notes due 2018 in open market trades, partially offset by approximately $994 million in net proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes due 2024. The net cash inflows in 2016 primarily related to $4.973 billion in net proceeds from the issuance of our 7 3/4% Senior Notes due 2026 and the Convertible Notes due 2026, partially offset by the redemption of our 7 1/8% Senior Notes with an aggregate principal balance of $1.5 billion and $260 million in net cost incurred in connection with the convertible note hedge and warrant transactions. Free Cash Flow We define free cash flow as Net cash flows from operating activities less Purchases of property and equipment, and Capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations, as shown on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. We believe free cash flow is an important liquidity metric because it measures, during a given period, the amount of cash generated that is available to repay debt obligations, make investments (including strategic wireless investments), fund acquisitions and for certain other activities. Free cash flow is not a measure determined in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered a substitute for Operating income, Net income, Net cash flows from operating activities or any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP. Since free cash flow includes investments in operating assets, we believe this non-GAAP liquidity measure is useful in addition to the most directly comparable GAAP measure Net cash flows from operating activities. 85 Table of Contents Free cash flow can be significantly impacted from period to period by changes in Net income (loss) adjusted to exclude certain non-cash charges, operating assets and liabilities, Purchases of property and equipment, and Capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations. These items are shown in the Net cash flows from operating activities and Net cash flows from investing activities sections on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows included herein. Operating asset and liability balances can fluctuate significantly from period to period and there can be no assurance that free cash flow will not be negatively impacted by material changes in operating assets and liabilities in future periods, since these changes depend upon, among other things, management timing of payments and control of inventory levels, and cash receipts. In addition to fluctuations resulting from changes in operating assets and liabilities, free cash flow can vary significantly from period to period depending upon, among other things, net Pay-TV subscriber additions (losses), subscriber revenue, DISH TV subscriber churn, subscriber acquisition and retention costs including amounts capitalized under our equipment lease programs for DISH TV subscribers, operating efficiencies, increases or decreases in purchases of property and equipment, expenditures related to the commercialization of our wireless spectrum and other factors. The following table reconciles free cash flow to Net cash flows from operating activities. For the Years Ended December 31, 2018 2017 2016 (In thousands) Free cash flow $ 1,201,144 $ 1,394,214 $ 1,515,863 Add back: Purchases of property and equipment (including capitalized interest related to FCC authorizations) 1,316,697 1,385,293 1,338,384 Net cash flows from operating activities $ 2,517,841 $ 2,779,507 $ 2,854,247 Operational Liquidity We make general investments in property such as satellites, set-top boxes, information technology and facilities that support our overall Pay-TV business. We also will need to make significant additional investments or partner with others to, among other things, commercialize, build-out, and integrate our wireless spectrum licenses and related assets. Moreover, since we are primarily a subscriber-based company, we also make subscriber-specific investments to acquire new subscribers and retain existing subscribers. While the general investments may be deferred without impacting the business in the short-term, the subscriber-specific investments are less discretionary. Our overall objective is to generate sufficient cash flow over the life of each subscriber to provide an adequate return against the upfront investment. Once the upfront investment has been made for each subscriber, the subsequent cash flow is generally positive, but there can be no assurances that over time we will recoup or earn a return on the upfront investment. There are a number of factors that impact our future cash flow compared to the cash flow we generate at a given point in time. The first factor is our DISH TV churn rate and how successful we are at retaining our current Pay-TV subscribers. To the extent we lose Pay-TV subscribers from our existing base, the positive cash flow from that base is correspondingly reduced. The second factor is how successful we are at maintaining our subscriber-related margins. To the extent our Subscriber-related expenses grow faster than our Subscriber-related revenue, the amount of cash flow that is generated per existing subscriber is reduced. Our subscriber-related margins have been reduced by, among other things, a shift to lower priced Pay-TV programming packages and higher programming costs. The third factor is the rate at which we acquire new subscribers. The faster we acquire new subscribers, the more our positive ongoing cash flow from existing subscribers is offset by the negative upfront cash flow associated with acquiring new subscribers. Conversely, the slower we acquire subscribers, the more our operating cash flow is enhanced in that period. Finally, our future cash flow is impacted by the rate at which we make general investments (including significant investments in wireless), incur expenditures related to the commercialization of our wireless licenses (including any expenditures associated with the deployment of our wireless networks), incur litigation expense, and any cash flow from financing activities. Recently, declines in our Pay-TV subscriber base and subscriber-related margins have negatively impacted our cash flow, which has been partially offset by the short-term benefit of less upfront cash outflows related to acquiring fewer new subscribers. There can be no assurance that the short-term benefit of less upfront cash outflows related to acquiring fewer new subscribers will continue in the future. 86 Table of Contents Subscriber Base We lost approximately 920,000 net Pay-TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the loss of approximately 284,000 net Pay-TV subscribers during the same period in 2017. The increase in net Pay-TV subscriber losses during the year ended December 31, 2018 resulted from higher net DISH TV subscriber losses and fewer net Sling TV subscriber additions. Our net Pay-TV subscriber losses during the year ended December 31, 2018 were negatively impacted by Univision and AT&T removal of certain of their channels from our DISH TV and Sling TV programming lineup. As a result, we experienced higher net Pay-TV subscriber losses beginning in the third quarter 2018 and continuing into the fourth quarter 2018. With respect to the Univision removal, in light of, among other things, certain Univision programming being available to consumers through alternative methods including over the air antennas and directly from Univision over the Internet, the current state of our negotiations with Univision and the duration of the absence of these channels from our programming lineups, this removal may be permanent. We lost approximately 1.125 million net DISH TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the loss of approximately 995,000 net DISH TV subscribers during the same period in 2017. This increase in net DISH TV subscriber losses resulted from lower gross new DISH TV subscriber activations, partially offset by a lower number of customer disconnects. We added approximately 205,000 net Sling TV subscribers during the year ended December 31, 2018 compared to the addition of approximately 711,000 net Sling TV subscribers during the same period in 2017. This decrease in net Sling TV subscriber additions is primarily related to increased competition, including competition from other OTT service providers and to a higher number of customer disconnects on a larger Sling TV subscriber base, including the impact from Univision and AT&T removal of certain of their channels from our programming lineup. See Results of Operations above for further information. Subscriber Acquisition and Retention Costs We incur significant upfront costs to acquire subscribers, including advertising, independent third-party retailer incentives, payments made to third-parties, equipment subsidies, installation services, and/or new customer promotions. While we attempt to recoup these upfront costs over the lives of their subscription, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in achieving that objective. With respect to our DISH TV services, we employ business rules such as minimum credit requirements for prospective customers and contractual commitments to receive service for a minimum term. We strive to provide outstanding customer service to increase the likelihood of customers keeping their Pay-TV services over longer periods of time. Subscriber acquisition costs for Sling TV subscribers are significantly lower than those for DISH TV subscribers. Our subscriber acquisition costs may vary significantly from period to period. We incur significant costs to retain our existing DISH TV subscribers, mostly as a result of upgrading their equipment to next generation receivers, primarily including our Hopper receivers, and by providing retention credits. As with our subscriber acquisition costs, our retention upgrade spending includes the cost of equipment and installation services. In certain circumstances, we also offer programming at no additional charge and/or promotional pricing for limited periods to existing customers in exchange for a contractual commitment to receive service for a minimum term. A component of our retention efforts includes the installation of equipment for customers who move. Our DISH TV subscriber retention costs may vary significantly from period to period. Seasonality Historically, the first half of the year generally produces fewer gross new DISH TV subscriber activations than the second half of the year, as is typical in the pay-TV industry. In addition, the first and fourth quarters generally produce a lower DISH TV churn rate than the second and third quarters. However, in recent years, as the pay-TV industry has matured, we and our competitors increasingly must seek to attract a greater proportion of new subscribers from each other existing subscriber bases rather than from first-time purchasers of pay-TV services. As a result, historical trends in seasonality described above may not be indicative of future trends. Our net Sling TV subscriber additions are impacted by, among other things, certain major sporting events and other major television events. We expect our new Sling TV subscriber additions to potentially demonstrate seasonality patterns as our Sling TV services become more established. We expect to be able to assess the seasonality patterns once we have a longer subscriber history. 87 Table of Contents Satellites Operation of our DISH TV services requires that we have adequate satellite transmission capacity for the programming that we offer. Moreover, current competitive conditions require that we continue to expand our offering of new programming. While we generally have had in-orbit satellite capacity sufficient to transmit our existing channels and some backup capacity to recover the transmission of certain critical programming, our backup capacity is limited. In the event of a failure or loss of any of our owned or leased satellites, we may need to acquire or lease additional satellite capacity or relocate one of our other satellites and use it as a replacement for the failed or lost satellite. Such a failure could result in a prolonged loss of critical programming or a significant delay in our plans to expand programming as necessary to remain competitive and cause us to expend a significant portion of our cash to acquire or lease additional satellite capacity. Security Systems Increases in theft of our signal or our competitors signals could, in addition to reducing gross new subscriber activations, also cause subscriber churn to increase. We use Security Access Devices in our DBS receiver systems to control access to authorized programming content. Furthermore, for our Sling TV services, we encrypt programming content and use digital rights management software to, among other things, prevent unauthorized access to our programming content. Our signal encryption has been compromised in the past and may be compromised in the future even though we continue to respond with significant investment in security measures, such as Security Access Device replacement programs and updates in security software, that are intended to make signal theft more difficult. It has been our prior experience that security measures may only be effective for short periods of time or not at all and that we remain susceptible to additional signal theft. We expect that future replacements of Security Access Devices may be necessary to keep our system secure. We cannot ensure that we will be successful in reducing or controlling theft of our programming content and we may incur additional costs in the future if our system security is compromised. Stock Repurchases Our Board of Directors previously authorized stock repurchases of up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding Class A common stock. On October 29, 2018, our Board of Directors extended this authorization such that we are currently authorized to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding Class A common stock through and including December 31, 2019. As of December 31, 2018, we may repurchase up to $1.0 billion under this program. During the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, there were no repurchases of our Class A common stock. Covenants and Restrictions Related to our Long-Term Debt We are subject to the covenants and restrictions set forth in the indentures related to our long-term debt. In particular, the indentures related to our outstanding senior notes issued by DISH DBS Corporation ( DISH DBS ) contain restrictive covenants that, among other things, impose limitations on the ability of DISH DBS and its restricted subsidiaries to: (i) incur additional indebtedness; (ii) enter into sale and leaseback transactions; (iii) pay dividends or make distributions on DISH DBS capital stock or repurchase DISH DBS capital stock; (iv) make certain investments; (v) create liens; (vi) enter into certain transactions with affiliates; (vii) merge or consolidate with another company; and (viii) transfer or sell assets. Should we fail to comply with these covenants, all or a portion of the debt under the senior notes and our other long-term debt could become immediately payable. The senior notes also provide that the debt may be required to be prepaid if certain change-in-control events occur. In addition, the Convertible Notes due 2026 and Convertible Notes due 2024 provide that, if a fundamental change (as defined in the related indenture) occurs, holders may require us to repurchase for cash all or part of their Convertible Notes. As of the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we and DISH DBS were in compliance with the covenants and restrictions related to our respective long-term debt. 88 Table of Contents Other We are also vulnerable to fraud, particularly in the acquisition of new subscribers. While we are addressing the impact of subscriber fraud through a number of actions, there can be no assurance that we will not continue to experience fraud, which could impact our subscriber growth and churn. Economic weakness may create greater incentive for signal theft, piracy and subscriber fraud, which could lead to higher subscriber churn and reduced revenue. Obligations and Future Capital Requirements Contractual Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As of December 31, 2018, future maturities of our long-term debt, capital lease and contractual obligations are summarized as follows: Payments due by period Total 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Thereafter (In thousands) Long-term debt obligations $ 15,957,087 $ 1,322,070 $ 1,104,503 $ 2,004,626 $ 2,004,756 $ 1,504,569 $ 8,016,563 Capital lease obligations 66,984 19,922 19,166 20,645 7,251 Interest expense on long-term debt and capital lease obligations 4,247,370 889,686 759,850 662,942 594,458 438,488 901,946 Satellite-related obligations 887,386 311,374 236,913 206,111 124,668 8,320 Operating lease obligations 162,335 38,561 25,482 20,915 16,208 10,371 50,798 Purchase obligations 1,392,861 1,296,580 48,966 29,284 18,031 Total $ 22,714,023 $ 3,878,193 $ 2,194,880 $ 2,944,523 $ 2,765,372 $ 1,961,748 $ 8,969,307 In certain circumstances the dates on which we are obligated to make these payments could be delayed. These amounts will increase to the extent that we procure launch and/or in-orbit insurance on our satellites or contract for the construction, launch or lease of additional satellites. The table above does not include $385 million of liabilities associated with unrecognized tax benefits that were accrued, as discussed in Note 10 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and are included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2018. We do not expect any portion of this amount to be paid or settled within the next twelve months. The table above does not include all potential expenses we expect to incur for our wireless projects including, among other things, our First Phase plan to deploy a next-generation 5G-capable network, focused on supporting narrowband IoT. We currently expect expenditures for our wireless projects to be between $500 million and $1.0 billion through 2020. We expect the Second Phase to follow o nce the 3GPP Release 16 is standardized and as our plans for our other spectrum holdings develop, we plan to upgrade and expand our network to full 5G to support new use cases. We currently expect expenditures for the Second Phase to be approximately $10 billion. See Note 14 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. Other than the Guarantees disclosed in Note 14 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we generally do not engage in off-balance sheet financing activities. Satellite Insurance We generally do not carry commercial launch or in-orbit insurance on any of the satellites we use, other than certain satellites leased from third parties. We generally do not use commercial insurance to mitigate the potential financial impact of launch or in-orbit failures because we believe that the cost of insurance premiums is uneconomical relative to the risk of such failures. We lease substantially all of our satellite capacity from third parties, including the vast majority of our transponder capacity from EchoStar, and we do not carry commercial insurance on any of the satellites we lease from them. While we generally have had in-orbit satellite capacity sufficient to transmit our existing channels and some backup capacity to recover the transmission of certain critical programming, our backup capacity is limited. In the event of a failure or loss of any of our owned or leased satellites, we may need to acquire or lease additional satellite capacity or relocate one of our other owned or leased satellites and use it as a replacement for the failed or lost satellite. 89 Table of Contents Purchase Obligations Our 2019 purchase obligations primarily consist of binding purchase orders for certain fixed contractual commitments to purchase programming content, receiver systems and related equipment, broadband equipment, digital broadcast operations, transmission costs, streaming delivery technology and infrastructure, engineering services, and other products and services related to the operation of our Pay-TV services. In addition, our 2019 purchase obligations also include equipment related to the network deployment for our wireless business. Our purchase obligations can fluctuate significantly from period to period due to, among other things, management timing of payments and inventory purchases, and can materially impact our future operating asset and liability balances, and our future working capital requirements. Programming Contracts In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts to purchase programming content in which our payment obligations are generally contingent on the number of Pay-TV subscribers to whom we provide the respective content. These programming commitments are not included in the Commitments table above. The terms of our contracts typically range from one to ten years with annual rate increases. Our programming expenses will increase to the extent we are successful in growing our Pay-TV subscriber base. In addition, programming costs per subscriber continue to increase due to contractual price increases and the renewal of long-term programming contracts on less favorable pricing terms. Future Capital Requirements We expect to fund our future working capital, capital expenditures and debt service requirements from cash generated from operations, existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities balances, and cash generated through raising additional capital. The amount of capital required to fund our future working capital and capital expenditure needs varies, depending on, among other things, the rate at which we acquire new subscribers and the cost of subscriber acquisition and retention, including capitalized costs associated with our new and existing subscriber equipment lease programs. Certain of our capital expenditures for 2019 are expected to be driven by the costs associated with subscriber premises equipment. These expenditures are necessary to operate and maintain our DISH TV services. Consequently, we consider them to be non-discretionary. Our capital expenditures vary depending on the number of satellites leased or under construction at any point in time, and could increase materially as a result of increased competition, significant satellite failures, or economic weakness and uncertainty. Our DISH TV subscriber base has been declining and there can be no assurance that our DISH TV subscriber base will not continue to decline and that the pace of such decline will not accelerate. In the event that our DISH TV subscriber base continues to decline, it will have a material adverse long-term effect on our cash flow. In addition, the rulings in the Telemarketing litigation requiring us to pay up to an aggregate amount of $341 million and imposing certain injunctive relief against us, if upheld, would have a material adverse effect on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities balances and our business operations. In addition, we expect to incur capital expenditures in 2019 related to the commercialization of our existing wireless spectrum licenses, including capital expenditures associated with our wireless projects and potential purchase of additional wireless spectrum licenses discussed below. The amount of capital required will also depend on the levels of investment necessary to support potential strategic initiatives that may arise from time to time. These factors, including a reduction in our available future cash flows, could require that we raise additional capital in the future. Volatility in the financial markets has made it more difficult at times for issuers of high-yield indebtedness, such as us, to access capital markets at acceptable terms. These developments may have a significant effect on our cost of financing and our liquidity position. 90 Table of Contents Wireless Since 2008, we have directly invested over $11 billion to acquire certain wireless spectrum licenses and related assets and made over $10 billion in non-controlling investments in certain entities, for a total of over $21 billion, as described further below. DISH Network Spectrum. We have directly invested over $11 billion to acquire certain wireless spectrum licenses and related assets. These wireless spectrum licenses are subject to certain interim and final build-out requirements, as well as certain renewal requirements. In March 2017, we notified the FCC that we plan to deploy a next-generation 5G-capable network, focused on supporting narrowband IoT. We expect to complete the First Phase by March 2020, with subsequent phases to be completed thereafter. As of December 31, 2018, we had entered into vendor contracts with multiple parties for, among other things, base stations, chipsets, modules, tower leases, the core network, RF design, and deployment services for the First Phase. Among other things, initial RF design in connection with the First Phase is now complete, we have secured certain tower sites, and we are in the process of identifying and securing additional tower sites. The core network has been installed and commissioned. We installed the first base stations on sites in 2018, and plan to continue deployment until complete. We currently expect expenditures for our wireless projects to be between $500 million and $1.0 billion through 2020. We expect the Second Phase to follow o nce the 3GPP Release 16 is standardized and as our plans for our other spectrum holdings develop, we plan to upgrade and expand our network to full 5G to support new use cases. We currently expect expenditures for the Second Phase to be approximately $10 billion. We will need to make significant additional investments or partner with others to, among other things, commercialize, build-out, and integrate these licenses and related assets, and any additional acquired licenses and related assets; and comply with regulations applicable to such licenses. Depending on the nature and scope of such commercialization, build-out, integration efforts, and regulatory compliance, any such investments or partnerships could vary significantly. In addition, as we consider our options for the commercialization of our wireless spectrum, we will incur significant additional expenses and will have to make significant investments related to, among other things, research and development, wireless testing and wireless network infrastructure. We may also determine that additional wireless spectrum licenses may be required to commercialize our wireless business and to compete with other wireless service providers. See Note 14 Commitments and Contingencies Commitments Wireless DISH Network Spectrum in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. DISH Network Non-Controlling Investments in the Northstar Entities and the SNR Entities Related to AWS-3 Wireless Spectrum Licenses. During 2015, through our wholly-owned subsidiaries American II and American III, we initially made over $10 billion in certain non-controlling investments in Northstar Spectrum, the parent company of Northstar Wireless, and in SNR HoldCo, the parent company of SNR Wireless, respectively. On October 27, 2015, the FCC granted certain AWS-3 Licenses to Northstar Wireless and to SNR Wireless, respectively, which are recorded in FCC authorizations on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Under the applicable accounting guidance in ASC 810, Northstar Spectrum and SNR HoldCo are considered variable interest entities and, based on the characteristics of the structure of these entities and in accordance with the applicable accounting guidance, we consolidate these entities into our financial statements. See Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. The AWS-3 Licenses are subject to certain interim and final build-out requirements, as well as certain renewal requirements. The Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities may need to raise significant additional capital in the future, which may be obtained from third party sources or from us, so that the Northstar Entities and the SNR Entities may commercialize, build-out and integrate these AWS-3 Licenses, comply with regulations applicable to such AWS-3 Licenses, and make any potential Northstar Re-Auction Payment and SNR Re-Auction Payment for the AWS-3 licenses retained by the FCC. Depending upon the nature and scope of such commercialization, build-out, integration efforts, regulatory compliance, and potential Northstar Re-Auction Payment and SNR Re-Auction Payment, any loans, equity contributions or partnerships could vary significantly. See Note 14 Commitments and Contingencies Commitments Wireless DISH Network Non-Controlling Investments in the Northstar Entities and the SNR Entities Related to AWS-3 Wireless Spectrum Licenses in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. 91 Table of Contents We may need to raise significant additional capital in the future to fund the efforts described above, which may not be available on acceptable terms or at all. There can be no assurance that we, the Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities will be able to develop and implement business models that will realize a return on these wireless spectrum licenses or that we, the Northstar Entities and/or the SNR Entities will be able to profitably deploy the assets represented by these wireless spectrum licenses, which may affect the carrying amount of these assets and our future financial condition or results of operations. See Note 14 Commitments and Contingencies Commitments Wireless in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information. Availability of Credit and Effect on Liquidity The ability to raise capital has generally existed for us despite economic weakness and uncertainty. While modest fluctuations in the cost of capital will not likely impact our current operational plans, significant fluctuations could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect amounts reported therein. Management bases its estimates, judgments and assumptions on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from previously estimated amounts, and such differences may be material to our consolidated financial statements. Estimates and assumptions are reviewed periodically, and the effects of revisions are reflected prospectively in the period they occur. The following represent what we believe are the critical accounting policies that may involve a high degree of estimation, judgment and complexity. For a summary of our significant accounting policies, including those discussed below, see Note 2 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Long-Lived Assets Useful lives of property and equipment. Since we retain ownership of certain equipment provided pursuant to our subscriber equipment lease programs for DISH TV and broadband subscribers, we capitalize and depreciate equipment costs that would otherwise be expensed at the time of sale. Such capitalized costs are depreciated over the estimated useful life of the equipment, which is based on, among other things, management judgment of the risk of technological obsolescence. Because of the inherent difficulty of making this estimate, the estimated useful life of capitalized equipment may change based on, among other things, historical experience and changes in technology as well as our response to competitive conditions. Changes in estimated useful life may impact Depreciation and amortization on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss). For example, if we had decreased the estimated useful life of our capitalized subscriber equipment by one year, annual 2018 depreciation expense would have increased by approximately $44 million. Valuation of long-lived assets. We review our long-lived assets and identifiable finite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. For assets which are held and used in operations, the asset would be impaired if the carrying amount of the asset (or asset group) exceeded its undiscounted future net cash flows. Once an impairment is determined, the actual impairment recognized is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value as estimated using one of the following approaches: income, cost and/or market. The carrying amount of a long-lived asset or asset group is considered impaired when the anticipated undiscounted cash flows from such asset or asset group is less than its carrying amount. In that event, a loss is recorded in Impairment of long-lived assets on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) based on the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the long-lived asset or asset group. Fair value, using the income approach, is determined primarily using a discounted cash flow model that uses the estimated cash flows associated with the asset or asset group under review, discounted at a rate commensurate with the risk involved. Fair value, utilizing the cost approach, is determined based on the replacement cost of the asset reduced for, among other things, depreciation and obsolescence. Fair value, utilizing the market approach, benchmarks the fair value against the carrying amount. See Note 8 in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Assets which are to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. We currently evaluate our DBS satellite fleet for impairment as one asset group whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its carrying amount may not be recoverable. 92 Table of Contents Valuation of intangible assets with indefinite lives . We evaluate the carrying amount of intangible assets with indefinite lives annually, and also when events and circumstances warrant. DBS Licenses. We combine all of our indefinite-lived DBS licenses that we currently utilize or plan to utilize in the future into a single unit of accounting. For 2018, 2017 and 2016, management performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the DBS licenses exceeds its carrying amount. In our assessment, we considered several qualitative factors, including, among others, overall financial performance, industry and market considerations, and relevant company specific events. In contemplating all factors in their totality, we concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the DBS licenses exceeds its carrying amount. As such, no further analysis was required. Wireless Spectrum Licenses. We currently combine our 600 MHz, 700 MHz, AWS-4 and H Block wireless spectrum licenses and the Northstar Licenses and SNR Licenses into a single unit of accounting. These wireless spectrum licenses were assessed quantitatively in 2018. Our quantitative assessment consisted of both an income approach and a market approach. The income approach estimated the fair value of these licenses using the Greenfield approach. The Greenfield approach values the licenses by calculating the cash flow generating potential of a hypothetical start-up company that goes into business with no assets except the licenses to be valued. A discounted cash flow analysis is used to estimate what a marketplace participant would be willing to pay to purchase the aggregated wireless licenses as of the valuation date . The market approach uses prior transactions including auctions to estimate the fair value of the licenses. In conducting this quantitative assessment, we determined that the fair value of these licenses exceeds the carrying amount of these licenses under both approaches. In 2017, management performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of these licenses exceeded the carrying amount of these licenses. In our assessment, we considered several qualitative factors, including, among others, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, relevant company specific events, and perception of the market. In contemplating all factors in their totality, we concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of these licenses exceeded the carrying amount of these licenses. As such, no further analysis was required. During 2016, our AWS-4 and H Block wireless spectrum licenses and the Northstar Licenses and SNR Licenses were combined into a single unit of accounting. For 2016, management performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of these licenses exceeded the carrying amount of these licenses. In our assessment, we considered several qualitative factors, including, among others, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, relevant company specific events, and perception of the market. In contemplating all factors in their totality, we concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of these licenses exceeded the carrying amount of these licenses. As such, no further analysis was required. During 2016, our 700 MHz wireless spectrum licenses were assessed as a single unit of accounting. For 2016, management performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of the 700 MHz wireless spectrum licenses exceeded its carrying amount. In our assessment, we considered several qualitative factors, including, among others, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, relevant company specific events, and perception of the market. In contemplating all factors in their totality, we concluded that it is more likely than not that the fair value of these licenses exceeded its carrying amount. As such, no further analysis was required. During 2018, 2017, and 2016, our MVDDS wireless spectrum licenses were assessed as a single unit of accounting. For 2018, 2017, and 2016, management assessed these licenses quantitatively. Our quantitative assessment in each year for the MVDDS wireless spectrum licenses consisted of a market approach. The market approach uses prior transactions including auctions to estimate the fair value of the licenses. In conducting these quantitative assessments, we determined that the fair value of our MVDDS wireless spectrum licenses exceeded their carrying amount. Changes in circumstances or market conditions could result in a write-down of any of the above wireless spectrum licenses in the future. 93 Table of Contents Income Taxes Our income tax policy is to record the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and amounts reported in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets, as well as operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Determining necessary valuation allowances requires us to make assessments about the timing of future events, including the probability of expected future taxable income and available tax planning opportunities. We periodically evaluate our need for a valuation allowance based on both historical evidence, including trends, and future expectations in each reporting period. Any such valuation allowance is recorded in either Income tax (provision) benefit, net on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) or Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within Stockholders equity (deficit) on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Future performance could have a significant effect on the realization of tax benefits, or reversals of valuation allowances, as reported in our consolidated results of operations. Management evaluates the recognition and measurement of uncertain tax positions based on applicable tax law, regulations, case law, administrative rulings and pronouncements and the facts and circumstances surrounding the tax position. Changes in our estimates related to the recognition and measurement of the amount recorded for uncertain tax positions could result in significant changes in our Income tax provision (benefit), net, which could be material to our consolidated results of operations. Contingent Liabilities A significant amount of management judgment is required in determining when, or if, an accrual should be recorded for a contingency and the amount of such accrual. Estimates generally are developed in consultation with counsel and are based on an analysis of potential outcomes. Due to the uncertainty of determining the likelihood of a future event occurring and the potential financial statement impact of such an event, it is possible that upon further development or resolution of a contingent matter, a charge could be recorded in a future period to General and administrative expenses or Litigation expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income (Loss) that would be material to our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. Inflation Inflation has not materially affected our operations during the past three years. We believe that our ability to increase the prices charged for our products and services in future periods will depend primarily on competitive pressures. Backlog We do not have any material backlog of our products. New Accounting Pronouncements Leases. In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02 Leases ( ASU 2016-02 ), and has modified the standard thereafter. ASU 2016-02 amends the existing accounting standards for lease accounting, including requiring that lessees recognize right of use assets and lease liabilities for the vast majority of leases. For income statement purposes, the FASB retained a dual model, requiring leases to be classified as either operating or finance. Classification is based on criteria that are largely similar to those applied in current lease accounting, but without explicit bright lines. The accounting guidance for lessors remains largely unchanged. This standard became effective for us on January 1, 2019, and we elected to adopt the standard using the modified retrospective approach. Under the modified retrospective approach, we will recognize in beginning retained earnings as of January 1, 2019 an adjustment for the cumulative effect of the adoption, which we believe will be immaterial. We will also recognize right of use assets and lease liabilities for periods ending after January 1, 2019 for the majority of our operating leases, which will be the primary impact of the standard on our results. Our operating leases consist principally of satellites, real estate, vehicles used in our in-home service operations and other equipment. 94 Table of Contents As permitted under the standard, we do not intend to recognize right of use assets or lease liabilities for leases with a term of 12 months or less. In transition, we plan to apply practical expedients that permit us not to reassess (i) whether expired or existing contracts contain a lease under the new standard, (ii) the lease classification for expired or existing leases, or (iii) whether previously-capitalized initial direct costs would qualify for capitalization under the new standard. In addition, we do not intend to use hindsight during transition. We do not expect the adoption of ASU 2016-02 to have a significant impact to our Consolidated Statements of Operations or Cash Flows. We will provide additional disclosures for periods ending in 2019 comparing the results under previous guidance to those under the new standard. Financial Instruments Credit Losses. On June 16, 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13 Financial Instruments Credit Losses, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments ( ASU 2016-13 ), which changes the way entities measure credit losses for most financial assets and certain other instruments that are not measured at fair value through net earnings. This standard will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. We are evaluating the impact the adoption of ASU 2016-13 will have on our Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures. Fair Value Measurement. On August 28, 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosure Framework Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement ( ASU 2018-13 ), which modifies the disclosure requirements on fair value measurements by adding, modifying or removing certain disclosures. This standard will be effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted. Certain disclosures in ASU 2018-13 are required to be applied on a retrospective basis and others on a prospective basis. We are evaluating the impact the adoption of ASU 2018-13 will have on our Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures. 95 Table of Contents 
