CIK: 1001082
Company Name: ECHOSTAR COMMUNICATIONS CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-03-01


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Continued We do not expect the adoption of FIN 48 to have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or effective tax rate. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements ( SFAS 157 ) which defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. This pronouncement applies to other accounting standards that require or permit fair value measurements. Accordingly, this statement does not require any new fair value measurement. This statement is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007, and interim periods within that fiscal year. We are currently evaluating the impact the adoption of SFAS 157 will have on our financial position and results of operations. In September 2006, the Securities Exchange Commission Staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 108, Considering the Effects of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Misstatements in the Current Year Financial Statements ( SAB 108 ). SAB 108 requires companies to quantify misstatements using both the balance sheet and income statement approaches and to evaluate whether either approach results in an error that is material in light of relevant quantitative and qualitative factors. SAB 108 also requires the effects of prior year uncorrected misstatements to be considered when assessing the materiality misstatements in current-year financial statements. If upon initial adoption, the cumulative effect of the misstatements is determined to be material using the new guidance of SAB 108, companies are allowed to record the effects as a cumulative effect adjustment to beginning of year retained earnings. SAB 108 is effective for the first fiscal year ending after November 15, 2006. We adopted the provisions of SAB 108 during the fourth quarter of 2006. In accordance with the transition provisions of SAB 108, we recorded a $62.3 million cumulative increase, net of tax of $37.4 million, to accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2006. Historically, while our financial statements reflected payments to certain programming and other vendors for a full year, each 12-month period included several days or weeks from the prior calendar year. This discrepancy between our calendar and fiscal year for certain vendor accruals was immaterial to prior years consolidated financial statements. However, the growth of our subscriber base over the past 10 years has increased this discrepancy resulting in a cumulative increase to opening accumulated deficit of $78.4 million for programming obligations and $21.3 million for other vendor obligations. We concluded that these adjustments are immaterial to prior years consolidated financial statements under our previous method of assessing materiality, and therefore elected, as permitted under the transition provisions of SAB 108, to reflect the effect of these adjustments in liabilities as of January 1, 2006, with the offsetting adjustment reflected as a cumulative effect adjustment to opening accumulated deficit as of January 1, 2006. Seasonality Our revenues vary throughout the year. As is typical in the subscription television service industry, the first half of the year generally produces fewer new subscribers than the second half of the year. Our operating results in any period may be affected by the incurrence of advertising and promotion expenses that do not necessarily produce commensurate revenues until the impact of such advertising and promotion is realized in future periods. Inflation Inflation has not materially affected our operations during the past three years. We believe that our ability to increase the prices charged for our products and services in future periods will depend primarily on competitive pressures. We do not have any material backlog of our products. 
