CIK: 1002047
Company Name: NETAPP INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-06-24


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the financial statements and the related notes set forth under Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data . The following discussion also contains trend information and other forward looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. The Risk Factors set forth in Item 1. Business are hereby incorporated into the discussion by reference. Overview Enterprises are generating large quantities of data. We are experiencing a worldwide proliferation of data, driven by the rapid growth of broadband Internet access, the proliferation of data devices, exponential growth of digital information, and the need to protect critical data through replication. Significant data growth, tough economic conditions, physical data center limitations, including power, heat, space, and new, agile software development methodologies continue to stress enterprise storage infrastructure. Greater global demands on data access, more complex legal requirements, increasing consequences for data outages, and the need for greater data longevity all contribute to the growing burden on IT professionals. As the volume of data grows, so does the complexity of data storage and management. Data ownership and the burdens of managing data continue to challenge our enterprise customers. In response, enterprises are looking for solutions to help simplify data storage and IT administration, improve the capabilities of storage systems and reduce total costs of ownership. Companies are migrating toward modular, unified storage systems and away from large, fixed, expensive, frame-class arrays and inefficient direct-attached storage. To maximize infrastructure efficiency, multiple dedicated servers can now be replaced by virtual servers sharing network-based resources such as common storage. There is a growing trend toward consolidating storage and serving a variety of applications from a unified storage pool. 32 Table of Contents During fiscal 2008, we continued to help customers transform their data center architectures through higher efficiencies and asset utilization, greater power and space savings, and innovative data center design and data management techniques. We also continued to make progress across many areas of the organization, including broadening and enhancing our enterprise solutions, supporting our channel and partners, and deepening our professional services coverage. We strengthened our strategic partnerships with server virtualization partners and leveraged our storage grid architecture to enable customers to scale their server and storage infrastructures, reduce costs, maximize asset utilization and keep data highly available. In March 2008, we launched a global branding and awareness campaign to increase the visibility of NetApp in the broader IT market. We believe that building our global brand awareness is a key factor to the long term success of our business in order to grow our customer base, increase our market share, and accelerate our revenue growth. The Onaro acquisition, completed on January 28, 2008, expanded our heterogeneous storage infrastructure and strengthened our storage and data management software portfolio by providing customers with new storage service management and change management capabilities. In addition, with our product introductions, we further extended our ability to help customers do more with less . Our fiscal 2008 revenue growth was driven by continued demand across the world for our solutions particularly in international markets, and increased revenue from our U.S. commercial enterprise and U.S. Federal business, partially offset by continued softness in our top enterprise accounts. Revenue growth was attributable to increased product revenue with an expanded portfolio of new products and solutions for enterprise customers, increased software entitlements and maintenance revenue, and increased service revenue and was partially offset by lower-cost-per-megabyte disks and lower average selling prices of our older generation products. We believe our products continue to offer the best price-performance value in the industry. While we reported solid results for fiscal 2008, we were not immune to macroeconomic conditions. We believe that our storage solutions provide customers with value propositions that will enable us to continue to gain market share in a more constrained spending environment. Our strategic investments are targeted at some of the strongest areas of the storage market, such as modular storage, archive and compliance, data protection, data management, data permanence, data security and privacy, iSCSI and grid computing. We believe that we are well positioned in the fastest growth segments of the storage market to capitalize on an IT spending recovery. However, if any storage market trends and emerging standards on which we are basing our assumptions do not materialize as anticipated, and if there is reduced or no demand for our products, our expected rate of revenue growth could be materially impacted. Continued revenue growth depends on the introduction and market acceptance of new products and solutions and continued market demand for our products. We will continue to invest in the people, processes, and systems necessary to best optimize our revenue growth and long-term profitability. However, we cannot assure you that such investments will result in achieving our financial objectives. Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of such statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements. Our estimates are based on historical experience and other assumptions that we consider to be appropriate in the circumstances. However, actual future results may vary from our estimates. We believe that the following accounting policies are critical as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission, in that they are both highly important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require difficult management judgments and assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain. We also have other important policies, including those related to derivative instruments and concentration of credit risk. However, these policies do not meet the definition of critical accounting policies because they do not generally require us to make estimates or judgments that are difficult or subjective. These policies are discussed in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements accompanying this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 33 Table of Contents We believe the accounting policies described below are the ones that most frequently require us to make estimates and judgments and therefore are critical to the understanding of our results of operations: Revenue recognition and allowances Valuation of goodwill and intangibles Accounting for income taxes Inventory write-downs Restructuring accruals Impairment losses on investments Accounting for stock-based compensation Loss contingencies Revenue Recognition and Allowances We apply the provisions of Statement of Position ( SOP ) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition (SOP No. 97-2), and related interpretations to our product sales, both hardware and software, because our software is essential to the performance of our hardware. We recognize revenue when: Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists: It is our customary practice to have a purchase order and/or contract prior to recognizing revenue on an arrangement from our end users, customers, value-added resellers, or distributors. Delivery has occurred: Our product is physically delivered to our customers, generally with standard transfer terms such as FOB origin. We typically do not allow for restocking rights with any of our value-added resellers or distributors. Products shipped with acceptance criteria or return rights are not recognized as revenue until all criteria are achieved. If undelivered products or services exist that are essential to the functionality of the delivered product in an arrangement, delivery is not considered to have occurred. The fee is fixed or determinable: Arrangements with payment terms extending beyond our standard terms, conditions and practices are not considered to be fixed or determinable. Revenue from such arrangements is recognized as the fees become due and payable. We typically do not allow for price-protection rights with any of our value-added resellers or distributors. Collection is probable: Probability of collection is assessed on a customer-by-customer basis. Customers are subjected to a credit review process that evaluates the customers financial position and ultimately their ability to pay. If it is determined at the outset of an arrangement that collection is not probable based upon our review process, revenue is recognized upon cash receipt. Our multiple element arrangements include our systems and one or more of the following undelivered software-related elements: software entitlements and maintenance, premium hardware maintenance, and storage review services. Our software entitlements and maintenance entitle our customers to receive unspecified product upgrades and enhancements on a when-and-if-available basis, bug fixes, and patch releases. Premium hardware maintenance services include contracts for technical support and minimum response times. Revenues from software entitlements and maintenance, premium hardware maintenance services and storage review services are recognized ratably over the contractual term, generally from one to three years. Standard hardware warranty costs are considered an obligation under SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies and expensed as a cost of service when revenue is recognized; such costs were $27.0 million in fiscal 2008, $22.1 million in fiscal 2007, and $18.5 million in fiscal 2006. We also offer extended service contracts (which extend our standard parts warranty and may include premium hardware maintenance) at the end of the warranty term; revenues from these contracts are recognized ratably over the contract term. We typically sell technical consulting services separately from any of our other revenue elements, either on a time and materials basis or for fixed price standard projects; we recognize revenue for these services as they are performed. Revenue from hardware installation services is recognized at the time of 34 Table of Contents delivery and any remaining costs are accrued, as the remaining undelivered services are considered to be inconsequential and perfunctory. For arrangements with multiple elements, we recognize as revenue the difference between the total arrangement price and the greater of fair value or stated price for any undelivered elements ( the residual method ). For our undelivered software-related elements, we apply the provisions of SOP No. 97-2 and determine fair value of these undelivered elements based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ), which for us consists of the prices charged when these services are sold separately either alone, in the case of software entitlements and maintenance, or as a bundled element which always includes software entitlements and maintenance and premium hardware maintenance, and may also include storage review services. To determine the fair value of these elements, we analyze both the selling prices when elements are sold separately as well as the concentrations of those prices. We believe those concentrations have been sufficient to enable us to establish VSOE of fair value for the undelivered elements. If VSOE cannot be obtained to establish fair value of the undelivered elements, paragraph 12 of SOP No. 97-2 would require that revenue from the entire arrangement be initially deferred and recognized ratably over the period these elements are delivered. For income statement presentation purposes, once fair value has been determined for our undelivered bundled elements, we allocate revenue first to software entitlements and maintenance, based on VSOE of its fair value with the remainder allocated to other service revenues. We record reductions to revenue for estimated sales returns at the time of shipment. Sales returns are estimated based on historical sales returns, current trends, and our expectations regarding future experience. We monitor and analyze the accuracy of sales returns estimates by reviewing actual returns and adjust them for future expectations to determine the adequacy of our current and future reserve needs. Our reserve levels have been sufficient to cover actual returns and have not required material changes in subsequent periods. While we currently have no expectations for significant changes to these reserves, if actual future returns and allowances differ from past experience, additional allowances may be required. We also maintain a separate allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses based on our assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and the aging of the accounts receivable. We analyze accounts receivable and historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer solvency, current economic and geographic trends, and changes in customer payment terms and practices when evaluating the adequacy of our current and future allowance. In circumstances where we are aware of a specific customer inability to meet its financial obligations to us, a specific allowance for bad debt is estimated and recorded, which reduces the recognized receivable to the estimated amount we believe will ultimately be collected. We monitor and analyze the accuracy of allowance for doubtful accounts estimate by reviewing past collectibility and adjust it for future expectations to determine the adequacy of our current and future allowance. Our reserve levels have generally been sufficient to cover credit losses. Our allowance for doubtful accounts as of April 25, 2008 was $2.4 million, compared to $2.6 million as of April 27, 2007. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles Identifiable intangible assets are amortized over time, while in-process research and development is recorded as a charge on the date of acquisition and goodwill is capitalized, subject to periodic review for impairment. Accordingly, the allocation of the acquisition cost to identifiable intangible assets has a significant impact on our future operating results. The allocation process requires extensive use of estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets. Should conditions be different than management current assessment, material write-downs of the fair value of intangible assets may be required. We periodically review the estimated remaining useful lives of our other intangible assets. In addition, a reduction in the estimate of remaining useful life could result in accelerated amortization expense or a write-down in future periods. As such, any future write-downs of these assets would adversely affect our gross and operating margins. We currently do not foresee changes to useful lives or write-downs to these assets. Under our accounting policy we perform an annual review in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, or more often if indicators of impairment exist. Triggering events for impairment reviews may be indicators such as adverse 35 Table of Contents industry or economic trends, restructuring actions, lower projections of profitability, or a sustained decline in our market capitalization. Evaluations of possible impairment and, if applicable, adjustments to carrying values require us to estimate, among other factors, future cash flows, useful lives, and fair market values of our reporting units and assets. When we conduct our evaluation of goodwill, the fair value of goodwill is assessed using valuation techniques that require significant management judgment. Should conditions be different from management last assessment, significant write-downs of goodwill may be required. In fiscal 2008 we performed such evaluation and found no impairment. However, any future write-downs of goodwill would adversely affect our operating margins. As of April 25, 2008, our assets included $680.1 million in goodwill. See Note 14, Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets, to our Consolidated Financial Statements. During fiscal 2008, we recorded goodwill of $79.2 million in connection with our Onaro acquisition and a decrease of goodwill for $0.2 million in connection with the escrow received from our Topio acquisition in fiscal 2007. Accounting for Income Taxes The determination of our tax provision is subject to judgments and estimates due to the complexity of the tax law that we are subject to in several tax jurisdictions. Earnings derived from our international business are generally taxed at rates that are lower than U.S. rates, resulting in a lower effective tax rate than the U.S. statutory tax rate of 35.0%. The ability to maintain our current effective tax rate is contingent on existing tax laws in both the United States and the respective countries in which our international subsidiaries are located. Future changes in domestic or international tax laws could affect the continued realization of the tax benefits we are currently receiving. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from international business or a change in the mix of international business among particular tax jurisdictions could increase our overall effective tax rate. We account for income taxes in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. SFAS No. 109 requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities be recognized for the effect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. SFAS No. 109 also requires that deferred tax assets be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have provided a valuation allowance of $28.6 million as of April 25, 2008, compared to $21.0 million as of April 27, 2007 on certain of our deferred tax assets. We adopted SFAS No. 123R effective the beginning of our fiscal year ended April 27, 2007. Under SFAS No. 123R, tax attributes related to the exercise of employee stock options should not be realized until they result in a reduction of taxes payable. Pursuant to Footnote 82 of SFAS No. 123R, on a prospective basis we no longer include unrealized stock option attributes as components of our gross deferred tax assets and corresponding valuation allowance disclosures. The tax effected amounts of gross unrealized net operating loss and business tax credit carryforwards, and their corresponding valuation allowance excluded under Footnote 82 for the years ended April 25, 2008 and April 27, 2007 are $245.1 million and $363.3 million, respectively. We are currently undergoing federal income tax audits in the United States and several foreign tax jurisdictions. The rights to some of our intellectual property ( IP ) are owned by certain of our foreign subsidiaries, and payments are made between foreign and U.S. tax jurisdictions relating to the use of this IP in a qualified cost sharing arrangement. Recently, several other U.S. companies have had their foreign IP arrangements challenged as part of IRS examinations, which have resulted in material proposed assessments and/or pending litigation. Effective September 27, 2007, the IRS Large and Mid-Sized Business Division ( LMSB ) released a Coordinated Issues Paper ( CIP ) with respect to qualified cost sharing arrangements ( CSAs ). Specifically, this CIP provides guidance to IRS personnel concerning methods that may be applied to evaluate the arm length charge (buy-in payment) for internally developed (pre-existing) as well as acquisition-related intangible property that is made available to a qualified CSA. We have evaluated the IRS positions in this CIP and have concluded that it will not have a material adverse impact on our consolidated financial position and the results of operations and cash flows. Furthermore, our management does not believe, based upon information currently known to us that the final resolution of any of our audits will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position and the results of operations and cash flows. However, if upon the conclusion of these audits the ultimate determination of 36 Table of Contents our taxes owed in any of these tax jurisdictions is for an amount in excess of the tax provision we have recorded or reserved for, our overall effective tax rate may be adversely impacted in the period of adjustment. Effective March 20, 2008, the IRS LMSB also released a CIP with respect to the cost sharing of stock based compensation. Specifically, this CIP provides guidance to IRS personnel concerning stock based compensation related to a CSA by providing that the parties to a CSA will share all costs related to intangible development of the covered intangibles, including but not limited to, salaries, bonuses, and other payroll costs and benefits. Taxpayers should include all forms of compensation in the cost pool, including those costs related to stock-based compensation. We have evaluated the IRS positions in this CIP and have concluded that it will not have a material adverse impact upon our consolidated financial position and the results of operations and cash flows. On April 28, 2007, we adopted FIN No. 48. FIN No. 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with SFAS No. 109. This interpretation prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. As a result of the implementation of FIN No. 48, we recognize the tax liability for uncertain income tax positions on the income tax return based on the two-step process prescribed in the interpretation. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that each income tax position would be sustained upon audit. The second step is to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority. Estimating these amounts requires us to determine the probability of various possible outcomes. We evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on the consideration of several factors, including changes in facts or circumstances, changes in applicable tax law, settlement of issues under audit, and new exposures. If we later determine that our exposure is lower or that the liability is not sufficient to cover our revised expectations, we adjust the liability and effect a related change in our tax provision during the period in which we make such determination. Inventory Write-Downs Our inventory balance was $70.2 million as of April 25, 2008, compared to $54.9 million as of April 27, 2007. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out basis) or market. We perform an in-depth excess and obsolete analysis of our inventory based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. We adjust the inventory value based on estimated excess and obsolete inventories determined primarily by future demand forecasts. Although we strive for accuracy in our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and commitments and on our reported results. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected, additional write-downs and other charges against earnings may be required. If actual market conditions are more favorable, we may realize higher gross margins in the period when the written-down inventory is sold. During the past few years, our inventory reserves have generally been sufficient to cover excess and obsolete exposure and have not required material changes in subsequent periods. We engage in extensive, ongoing product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers. We also provide for the estimated cost of known product failures based on known quality issues when they arise. Should actual cost of product failure differ from our estimates, revisions to the estimated liability would be required. We are subject to a variety of federal, state, local, and foreign environmental regulations relating to the use, storage, discharge, and disposal of hazardous chemicals used during our manufacturing process or requiring design changes or recycling of products we manufacture. We will continue to monitor our environmental compliance and could incur higher costs, including additional reserves for excess component inventory. Restructuring Accruals In fiscal 2002, we implemented a restructuring plan related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to our Sunnyvale headquarters. In fiscal 2006, we implemented a restructuring plan related to the move of our global service center operations. In determining restructuring charges, we analyze our 37 Table of Contents future business requirements in order to properly align and manage our business commensurate with our future revenue levels. Our restructuring costs, and any resulting accruals, involve significant estimates made by management using the best information available at the time the estimates are made, some of which may be provided by third parties. In recording severance reserves, we accrue a liability when the following conditions have been met: employees rights to receive compensation are attributable to employees services already rendered, the obligation relates to rights that vest or accumulate, payment of the compensation is probable, and the amount can be reasonably estimated. In recording the facilities lease restructuring reserve, we make various assumptions, including the time period over which the facilities are expected to be vacant, expected sublease terms, expected sublease rates, anticipated future operating expenses, and expected future use of the facilities. Our estimates involve a number of risks and uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control, including future real estate market conditions and our ability to successfully enter into subleases or lease termination agreements with terms as favorable as those assumed when arriving at our estimates. We regularly evaluate a number of factors to determine the appropriateness and reasonableness of our restructuring and lease loss accruals, including the various assumptions noted above. If actual results differ significantly from our estimates, we may be required to adjust our restructuring and lease loss accruals in the future. We estimated our facility restructuring reserve to be $1.9 million as of April 25, 2008. In fiscal 2008, we recorded charges of $0.4 million to the restructuring reserve resulting from a change in estimated operating expenses and rent escalations. In fiscal 2006, our facility restructuring reserve included a $1.3 million reduction related to the execution of a new sublease agreement for our Tewksbury facility, net of related costs. Impairment Losses on Investments All of our available-for-sale investments and nonmarketable securities are subject to a periodic impairment review. Investments are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value is judged to be other-than-temporary. This determination requires significant judgment. For publicly traded investments, impairment is determined based upon the specific facts and circumstances present at the time, including factors such as current economic and market conditions, the credit rating of the security issuer, the length of time an investment fair value has been below our carrying value, our ability and intent to hold investments to maturity or for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in fair value. If an investment decline in fair value, caused by factors other than changes in interest rates, is deemed to be other-than-temporary, we would reduce its carrying value to its estimated fair value, as determined based on quoted market prices, liquidation values or other metrics. For investments in publicly held companies, we recognize an impairment charge when the declines in the fair values of our investments in these companies are below their cost basis and are judged to be other-than-temporary. The ultimate value realized on these investments in publicly held companies is subject to market price volatility until they are sold. We actively review, along with our investment advisors, current investment ratings, company specific events, and general economic conditions in managing our investments and determining whether there is a significant decline in fair value that is other-than-temporary. We have not experienced any material losses on our available-for-sale investments. To the extent we determine that a decline in fair value is other-than-temporary, the associated investment is valued at current fair value and an impairment charge is reflected in earnings. As of April 25, 2008 and April 27, 2007, our short-term investments have been classified as available-for-sale and are carried at fair value. Currently, all marketable securities held by us are classified as available-for-sale and our entire auction rate securities (ARS) portfolio is classified as long-term investments. The ARS held by us are securities with long term nominal maturities which, in accordance with investment policy guidelines, had credit ratings of AAA and Aaa at time of purchase. Substantially all of our ARS are backed by pools of student loans guaranteed by the U.S. Department of Education. We believe that the underlying credit quality of the assets backing our ARS investments have not been impacted by the reduced liquidity of these investments. Based on an analysis of the fair value and marketability of these investments, we recorded a temporary impairment within other accumulated comprehensive income, an element of stockholders equity on our balance sheet, of approximately $3.5 million at April 25, 2008. 38 Table of Contents The valuation models used to estimate the auction rate securities fair value included numerous assumptions such as assessments of the underlying structure of each security, expected cash flows, discount rates, credit ratings, workout periods, and overall capital market liquidity. These assumptions, assessments and the interpretations of relevant market data are subject to uncertainties, are difficult to predict and require significant judgment. The use of different assumptions, applying different judgment to inherently subjective matters and changes in future market conditions could result in significantly different estimates of fair value. There is no assurance as to when the market for auction rate securities will stabilize. The fair value of our auction rate securities could change significantly based on market conditions and continued uncertainties in the credit markets. If these uncertainties continue or if these securities experience credit rating downgrades, we may incur additional temporary impairment on our auction rate securities portfolio. We will continue to monitor the fair value of our auction rate securities and relevant market conditions and will record additional temporary or other-than-temporary impairments if future circumstances warrant such charges. For nonmarketable securities, the impairment analysis requires the identification of events or circumstances that would likely have a significant adverse effect on the fair value of the investment, including revenue and earnings trends, overall business prospects, limited capital resources, limited prospects of receiving additional financing, limited prospects for liquidity of the related securities, and general market conditions in the investees industries. The carrying value of our investments in privately-held companies were $11.2 million and $8.9 million as of April 25, 2008 and April 27, 2007, respectively. During fiscal 2008, we recorded an impairment of $1.6 million for investments in privately-held companies, which was recorded in net gain (loss) on investments in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123R, Share-Based Payment , using the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our employee stock options. The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Option pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility, expected life, and forfeiture rate. Any changes in these highly subjective assumptions may significantly impact the stock-based compensation expense for the future. Loss Contingencies We are subject to the possibility of various loss contingencies arising in the course of business. We consider the likelihood of the loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset has been impaired and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. In fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, we did not identify or accrue for any loss contingencies. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted. New Accounting Standards In May 2008, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued a new final Staff Position ( FSP ) No. APB 14-1 Accounting for Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash upon Conversion (Including Partial Cash Settlements). Under the final FSP, cash settled convertible securities would be separated into their debt and equity components. The value assigned to the debt component would be the estimated fair value, as of the issuance date, of a similar debt instrument without the conversion feature, and the difference between the proceeds for the convertible debt and the amount reflected as a debt liability would be recorded as additional paid-in capital. As a result, the debt would be recorded at a discount reflecting its below-market coupon interest rate. The debt would subsequently be accreted to its par value over its expected life, with the rate of interest that reflects the market rate at issuance being reflected on the income statement. This change in methodology will affect the calculations of net income and earnings per share for many issuers of cash settled convertible securities. The final FSP requires explicit disclosure requirements and will be effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008, and interim periods within those fiscal years. This final FSP is to be applied 39 Table of Contents retrospectively to all periods presented. This standard will have an effect on the company convertible debenture sold in June 2008 as described in Note 17, Subsequent Events. In March 2008, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 161, Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities An Amendment of FASB Statement No. 133 (SFAS No. 161). SFAS No. 161 requires additional disclosures about the objectives of using derivative instruments, the method by which the derivative instruments and related hedged items are accounted for under FASB Statement No. 133 and its related interpretations, and the effect of derivative instruments and related hedged items on financial position, financial performance, and cash flows. SFAS 161 also requires disclosure of the fair value of derivative instruments and their gains and losses in a tabular format. This statement is effective for our fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. We are currently evaluating the effect, if any, that the adoption of SFAS No. 161 will have on our consolidated financial statements. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141(R), Business Combinations (SFAS No. 141(R)). SFAS No. 141(R) establishes principles and requirements for how the acquirer in a business combination recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree at the acquisition date fair value. SFAS No. 141(R) determines what information to disclose to enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial effects of the business combination. We are required to adopt SFAS No. 141(R) at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2010, which begins on April 25, 2009. We are currently evaluating the effect that the adoption of SFAS No. 141(R) will have on our consolidated financial statements. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 160, Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements, an amendment of ARB No. 51. (SFAS No. 160). SFAS No. 160 will change the accounting and reporting for minority interests, which will be recharacterized as noncontrolling interests and classified as a component of equity. This new consolidation method will significantly change the accounting for transactions with minority interest holders. We are required to adopt SFAS No. 160 at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2010, which begins on April 25, 2009. We are currently evaluating the effect, if any, that the adoption of SFAS No. 160 will have on our consolidated financial statements. Effective April 28, 2007, we adopted FASB Interpretation ( FIN ) No. 48. FIN No. 48 prescribes a comprehensive model for how a company should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in its financial statements uncertain tax positions that we have taken or expect to take on a tax return (including a decision whether to file or not to file a return in a particular jurisdiction). FIN No. 48 is applicable to all uncertain tax positions for taxes accounted for under SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, and substantially changes the applicable accounting model. There was no cumulative effect from the adoption of FIN No. 48. As a result of the implementation of FIN No. 48, we recognize the tax liability for uncertain income tax positions on the income tax return based on the two-step process prescribed in the interpretation. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that each income tax position would be sustained upon audit. The second step is to estimate and measure the tax benefit as the amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the tax authority. Estimating these amounts requires us to determine the probability of various possible outcomes. We evaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. See Note 8, Income Taxes, for further discussion. In February 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Including an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 115 Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities. SFAS No. 159 allows measurement at fair value of eligible financial assets and liabilities that are not otherwise measured at fair value. If the fair value option for an eligible item is elected, unrealized gains and losses for that item shall be reported in current earnings at each subsequent reporting date. SFAS No. 159 also establishes presentation and disclosure requirements designed to draw comparison between the different measurement attributes the company elects for similar types of assets and liabilities. We are required to adopt SFAS No. 159 at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2009, which began on April 26, 2008. The adoption of SFAS No. 159 is not expected to have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157 Fair Value Measurements. SFAS No. 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value under generally accepted accounting principles, and 40 Table of Contents expands disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 affects other accounting pronouncements that require or permit fair value measurements where the FASB has previously concluded that fair value is the relevant measurement attribute. SFAS No. 157 does not require any new fair value measurements, but may change current practice in some instances. SFAS No. 157 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007. We will adopt SFAS No. 157 in the first quarter of fiscal year 2009. In February 2008, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position No. 157-2 Effective Date of FASB Statement No. 157 ( FSP 157-2 ). FSP 157-2 permits a one-year deferral in applying the measurement provisions of SFAS 157 to non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities that are not recognized or disclosed at fair value in an entity financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). The adoption of SFAS No. 157 and FSP 157-2 is not expected to have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. Results of Operations The following table sets forth certain consolidated statements of income data as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated: Year Ended April 25, April 27, April 28, 2008 2007 2006 Revenues: Product 67.9 % 74.4 % 76.3 Software entitlements and maintenance 14.7 12.2 11.6 Service 17.4 13.4 12.1 100.0 100.0 100.0 Cost of Revenues: Cost of product 27.6 29.0 29.8 Cost of software entitlements and maintenance 0.3 0.4 0.4 Cost of service 11.2 9.8 9.0 Gross Margin 60.9 60.8 60.8 Operating Expenses: Sales and marketing 32.6 32.0 28.9 Research and development 13.7 13.7 12.2 General and administrative 5.2 5.3 4.6 Acquired in process research and development 0.2 Restructuring charges (recoveries) Gain on sale of assets (0.9 ) Total Operating Expenses 51.5 50.1 45.9 Income from Operations 9.4 10.7 14.9 Other Income (Expenses), Net: Interest income 2.0 2.5 2.1 Interest expense (0.2 ) (0.4 ) (0.1 ) Net gain (loss) on investments 0.4 (0.1 ) Other income (expenses), net 0.1 0.1 Total Other Income, Net 2.2 2.1 2.1 Income Before Income Taxes 11.6 12.8 17.0 Provision for Income Taxes 2.2 2.2 4.1 Net Income 9.4 % 10.6 % 12.9 % 41 Table of Contents Fiscal 2008 Compared to Fiscal 2007 Total Revenues Total revenues increased by 17.8% to $3,303.2 million in fiscal 2008, from $2,804.3 million in fiscal 2007. Our fiscal 2008 revenue growth was attributable to increased product revenues, software entitlements and maintenance revenues, and service revenues, and was partially offset by reduced revenues from older generation products. Sales through our indirect channels, including resellers, distributors, and OEM partners, represented 63.0% and 59.6% of total revenues for fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively. Product Revenues Product revenues increased by $156.6 million or 7.5% to $2,242.5 million in fiscal 2008, from $2,085.9 million in fiscal 2007. The increase was comprised of a net $151.2 million increase in unit volume and $5.4 million in price and product configuration. Revenues from our expanded portfolio of new products for enterprise customers (products we began shipping in the last twelve months) increased $267.9 million, while revenues from our existing products rose $657.9 million. Increased revenues from new products included our FAS 2000 entry-level systems and recent product introductions in our FAS 6000 series high-end enterprise storage systems. Increased revenues from existing products were primarily from our FAS 3000 mid-range products. These increases were partially offset by a $769.2 million decrease in shipments of our older generation products (older or end-of-life products with declining year over year revenue as well as products we no longer ship), including older generation FAS 3000 systems as well as our FAS 900 series systems and NearStore R200 systems. Our systems are highly configurable to respond to customer requirements in the open systems storage markets that we serve. This wide variation in customized configuration can significantly impact revenue, cost of revenue, and gross margin performance. Price changes, volumes, and product model mix can also impact revenue, cost of revenue and gross margin performance. Disks are a significant component of our storage systems. Industry disk pricing continues to fall every year, and we pass along those price decreases to our customers while working to maintain relatively constant margins on our disk drives. While price per petabyte continues to decline, system performance and increased capacity have an offsetting impact on product revenue. Software Entitlements and Maintenance Revenues Software entitlements and maintenance revenues increased by 42.7% to $486.9 million in fiscal 2008, from $341.3 million in fiscal 2007. The year over year increase was due to a larger installed base of customers who have purchased or renewed software entitlements and maintenance. Software entitlements and maintenance revenues represented 14.7% and 12.2% of total revenues for fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively. Service Revenues Service revenues, which include hardware support, professional services, and educational services, increased by 52.1% to $573.8 million in fiscal 2008, from $377.1 million in fiscal 2007. Professional service revenue increased by 58.8% in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007. The increase was due to higher customer demand for our professional services in connection with the integration of our solutions into their IT environments. Service maintenance revenue increased by 51.2% in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007 due to an installed base which has grown over time as a result of new customer support contracts and renewals from existing customers. While it is an element of our strategy to expand and offer more comprehensive global enterprise support and service solutions, we cannot assure you that service revenue will grow at the current rate in fiscal 2009 or beyond. A large portion of our service revenues are deferred and, in most cases, recognized ratably over the service obligation period, which is typically one to three years. Service revenues represented 17.4% and 13.4% of total revenues for fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively. Total International Revenues Total international revenues (including U.S. exports) increased by 23.9% in fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal 2007. Total international revenues were $1,554.3 million, or 47.1% of total revenues for fiscal 2008, compared to $1,254.0 million, or 44.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2007. The year over year increase was driven by the product, software entitlement and maintenance, and service revenue factors outlined above. We cannot assure you that we will be able to maintain or increase international revenues in fiscal 2009 or beyond. 42 Table of Contents Product Gross Margin Product gross margin decreased to 59.4% in fiscal 2008 from 60.9% in fiscal 2007. Product gross margin was negatively impacted by rebates and initiatives taken throughout the year and directed primarily to various indirect channels. We expect future product gross margin may continue to be impacted by a variety of factors including selective price reductions and discounts, increased indirect channel sales, increases in software revenues and new higher margin products. Stock-based compensation expense included in cost of product revenues was $3.4 million in fiscal 2008 compared to $3.7 million in fiscal 2007. Amortization of existing technology included in cost of product revenues was $22.6 million and $17.6 million for fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively. Estimated future amortization of existing technology to cost of product revenues will be $26.3 million for fiscal year 2009, $21.8 million for fiscal year 2010, $12.2 million for fiscal year 2011, $5.9 million for fiscal year 2012, $4.4 million for fiscal year 2013, and none thereafter. Software Entitlements and Maintenance Gross Margin Software entitlements and maintenance gross margin increased to 98.2% for fiscal 2008 from 97.0% for fiscal 2007. The improved software entitlements and maintenance gross margin year over year was due to larger installed base renewals and upgrades. Service Gross Margin Service gross margin increased to 35.6% in fiscal 2008 compared to 27.4% in fiscal 2007. Cost of service revenue increased by 35.1% to $369.8 million in fiscal 2008, from $273.6 million in fiscal 2007. Stock-based compensation expense of $10.4 million and $10.1 million was included in the cost of service revenue for fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively. The improvement in service gross margins year over year was primarily due to an increase in service revenue volume and improved productivity, partially offset by increased service infrastructure spending to support our customers. This spending included additional professional support engineers, increased support center activities and global service partnership programs. Service gross margins will typically be impacted by factors such as timing of technical support service initiations and renewals and additional investments in our customer support infrastructure. For fiscal 2009, we expect service margins to experience some variability as we continue to build out our service capability and capacity to support our growing customer base and new products. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries, commissions, advertising and promotional expenses, stock-based compensation expense, and certain customer service and support costs. Sales and marketing expense increased 20.1% to $1,075.6 million in fiscal 2008, from $895.8 million in fiscal 2007. This expense as a percentage of revenue increased to 32.6% in fiscal 2008, from 32.0% in fiscal 2007. The increase in sales and marketing expense was due to increased commission expense resulting from higher revenues, higher headcount, higher branding campaign costs, and the continued worldwide investment in our sales and global service organizations. Stock compensation expense included in sales and marketing expense for fiscal 2008 was $65.4 million compared to $71.7 million in fiscal 2007. Amortization of trademarks/trade names and customer contracts/relationships included in sales and marketing expense was $4.2 million and $2.9 million in fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2007, respectively. Based on identified intangibles related to our acquisitions recorded at April 25, 2008, estimated future amortization such as trademarks and customer relationships included in sales and marketing expense will be $4.9 million for fiscal 2009, $4.8 million for fiscal 2010, $3.8 million for fiscal 2011, $2.6 million for fiscal 2012, $1.4 million for fiscal 2013 and $1.3 million thereafter. We expect to continue to add sales capacity in an effort to expand our penetration of domestic and international markets, and establish and expand our distribution channels. We expect to increase sales and marketing expense to support our future revenue growth. We believe that our sales and marketing expense will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2009 due to increased headcount, sales and marketing related programs to support future revenue growth, higher branding campaign costs and real estate lease payments, partially offset by reduced discretionary spending. Research and Development Research and development expense consists primarily of salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation, prototype expenses, engineering charges, consulting fees, and amortization of capitalized patents. 43 Table of Contents Research and development expense increased 17.3% to $452.2 million in fiscal 2008 from $385.4 million in fiscal 2007. This expense as a percentage of revenue was 13.7% in both fiscal 2008 and 2007. The increase in research and development expense was primarily a result of increased headcount-related salaries and incentive compensation, and future product development. For both fiscal 2008 and 2007, no software development costs were capitalized. Stock compensation expense included in research and development expense for fiscal 2008 was $46.6 million compared to $51.3 million in fiscal 2007. Also included in research and development expense is capitalized patents amortization of $2.0 million in both fiscal 2008 and 2007. Based on capitalized patents recorded at April 25, 2008, estimated future capitalized patent amortization expenses will be $0.5 million for fiscal year 2009, $0.1 million in fiscal 2010, and none thereafter. We believe that our future performance will depend in large part on our ability to maintain and enhance our current product line, develop new products that achieve market acceptance, maintain technological competitiveness, and meet an expanding range of customer requirements. We expect to continuously support current and future product development, broaden our existing product offerings and introduce new products that expand our solutions portfolio. We believe that our research and development expense will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2009, primarily due to costs associated with the development of new products and technologies, headcount growth, and real estate lease payments. General and Administrative General and administrative expense increased 16.3% to $171.5 million for fiscal 2008 from $147.5 million for fiscal 2007. This expense as a percentage of revenue decreased slightly to 5.2% for fiscal 2008 from 5.3% for fiscal 2007. The increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to increased headcount and associated payroll expenses, higher expenses related to prior acquisitions, and increased professional and legal fees for general corporate matters. We believe that our general and administrative expense will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2009 due to spending required to support and enhance our existing infrastructure as well as real estate lease payments, partially offset by reduced discretionary spending. Stock compensation expense included in general and administrative expense for fiscal 2008 and 2007 was $22.1 million and $26.2 million, respectively. Amortization of covenants not to compete included in general and administrative expense was $0.2 million and $1.0 million for fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively. Restructuring Charges In fiscal 2002, we implemented a restructuring plan related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to our Sunnyvale headquarters. In fiscal 2006, we implemented a restructuring plan related to the move of our global service center operations from Sunnyvale to our new flagship support center at our Research Triangle Park facility in North Carolina. Our restructuring estimates are reviewed and revised periodically and may result in a substantial charge or reduction to restructuring expense should different conditions prevail than were anticipated in previous management estimates. Such estimates included various assumptions such as the time period over which the facilities will be vacant, expected sublease terms, and expected sublease rates. In fiscal 2008, we recorded charges of $0.4 million to the restructuring reserve resulting from a change in the estimated operating expenses and rent escalations related to our 2002 restructuring plan. Of the reserve balance at April 25, 2008, $0.6 million was included in other accrued liabilities, and the remaining $1.3 million was classified as long-term obligations. The balance of the reserve relates to facilities and is expected to be paid by fiscal 2011. 44 Table of Contents The following analysis sets forth the significant components of the restructuring reserve at April 25, 2008 (in thousands): Severance- Related Facility Amounts Total Reserve balance at April 30, 2005 $ 4,503 $ $ 4,503 Restructuring charges 281 859 1,140 Recoveries (1,256 ) (1,256 ) Cash payments and others (862 ) (521 ) (1,383 ) Reserve balance at April 28, 2006 $ 2,666 $ 338 $ 3,004 Recoveries (74 ) (74 ) Cash payments and others (582 ) (264 ) (846 ) Reserve balance at April 27, 2007 $ 2,084 $ $ 2,084 Cash payments (607 ) (607 ) Restructuring charges 447 447 Reserve balance at April 25, 2008 $ 1,924 $ $ 1,924 Gain on Sale of Assets We recorded a gain of $25.3 million in fiscal 2007 as a result of the sale of certain assets to Blue Coat Systems, Inc ( Blue Coat ). Operating Income Operating income as a percentage of revenue decreased to 9.4% for fiscal 2008 from 10.7% for fiscal 2007. Operating income for fiscal 2007 included a gain on sale of assets of $25.3 million. Our operating expense levels are based in part on our expectations as to future revenue growth, and a significant percentage of our operating expenses are fixed and difficult to reduce within a short period of time. As a result, if revenue levels are below expectations, our fixed expenses could adversely affect our operating income and cash flow until revenues increase or until such fixed expenses are reduced to a level commensurate with revenues. We cannot assure you that we will be able to maintain or increase revenues for fiscal 2009 or beyond. Interest Income Interest income was $64.6 million and $68.8 million for fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively. The slight decrease in interest income was primarily driven by lower average interest rates on our investment portfolio and lower cash and investment balances. We expect that period-to-period changes in interest income will continue to be impacted by the volatility of market interest rates, cash and investment balances, cash generated by operations, timing of our stock repurchases, capital expenditures, and payments of our contractual obligations. Interest Expense Interest expense was $8.0 million and $11.6 million in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively. The decrease in interest expense in fiscal 2008 was due to full repayment of the loan agreement entered with JPMorgan ( Loan Agreement ), partially offset by increased interest expense on the $250.0 million outstanding under the revolving secured credit agreement with JPMorgan Securities (see Note 6). We expect period-to-period changes in interest expense to continue to be subject to market interest rate volatility and amounts due under various loan agreements. Net Gain (Loss) on Investments Net gain on sale of investments was $12.6 million for fiscal 2008. Net gain for fiscal 2008 consisted primarily of a gain of $13.6 million related to the sale of shares of Blue Coat common stock offset by a net write-down of $1.0 million for our investments in privately-held companies. For fiscal 2007, net loss on sale of investments was $1.5 million, including a net write-down of $2.1 million related to the impairment of our investment in privately-held companies. Other Income (Expense), Net Other expense was $0.1 million for fiscal 2008 and consisted of net exchange losses from foreign currency of $0.7 million, partially offset by other income of $0.6 million. Other income was $2.8 million for fiscal 2007, and consisted of net exchange gains from foreign currency of $2.4 million and other income of $0.4 million. We believe that period-to-period changes in foreign exchange gains or losses will continue to be impacted by hedging costs associated with our forward and option activities and forecast variance. 45 Table of Contents Provision for Income Taxes For fiscal 2008 and 2007, we applied to pretax income an annual effective tax rate before discrete reporting items of 13.3% and 19.0%, respectively. The decrease to the annual effective tax rate year over year is primarily attributable to a relative increase in the benefits attributable to our foreign operations, as well as to a relative decrease in the tax impact of nondeductible stock compensation under SFAS No. 123R, brought about in part by our decision to cease granting incentive stock options. Since we have replaced the granting of incentive stock options with the granting of nonqualified stock options, this gives rise to the recognition of more deferred tax assets as SFAS No. 123R expense occurs. After taking into account the tax effect of discrete items reported, the effective tax rates applied to the pretax income for fiscal 2008 and 2007 were 19.1% and 17.2%, respectively. Fiscal 2007 Compared to Fiscal 2006 Total Revenues Total revenues increased by 35.7% to $2,804.3 million in fiscal 2007, from $2,066.5 million in fiscal 2006. Our fiscal 2007 revenue growth was attributable to increased product revenues, software entitlements and maintenance revenues, and service revenues, and was partially offset by reduced revenues from older generation products. Sales through our indirect channels which include resellers, distributors, and OEM partners represented 59.6% and 55.5% of total revenues for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Product Revenues Product revenues increased by 32.2% to $2,085.9 million in fiscal 2007, from $1,577.4 million in fiscal 2006. Product revenue increased $686.9 million in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, due to a $669.7 million increase in unit volume and an increase of $17.2 million due to price and configuration on our existing products as well as increased revenues from existing products. Increased revenues from our new products include certain FAS 3000 mid-range products, V-Series systems, NearStore Virtual Tape Library systems and Datafort storage security appliances. Increased revenue from existing products included certain FAS 6000 series high-end enterprise storage systems and certain FAS 3000 products. These increases were partially offset by a $376.3 million decrease in shipments of our older generation products (i.e. older or end-of-life products with declining year over year revenue as well as products we no longer ship), including FAS 900 series systems, NearStore R200 systems and NetCache products we no longer ship. Software Entitlements and Maintenance Revenues Software entitlements and maintenance revenues increased by 42.7% to $341.3 million in fiscal 2007, from $239.1 million in fiscal 2006 due primarily to a larger installed base of customers who have purchased or renewed software entitlements and maintenance contracts. Software entitlements and maintenance revenues represented 12.2% and 11.6% of total revenues for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Service Revenues Service revenues, which include hardware support, professional services, and educational services, increased by 50.9% to $377.1 million in fiscal 2007, from $249.9 million in fiscal 2006. Professional service revenue increased by 56.4% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006. The increase was due to an increasing number of enterprise customers, which typically have extremely complex IT environments and require professional services to integrate our solution into their environments. Service maintenance contracts increased by 48.3% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006, due to an installed base which has grown over time as a result of new customer support contracts, and support contracts and renewals from existing customers. A large portion of our service revenues are deferred and, in most cases, recognized ratably over the service obligation periods, which are typically one to three years. Service revenues represented 13.4% and 12.1% of total revenues for fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively. Total International Revenues Total international revenues (including U.S. exports) increased by 32.9% in fiscal year 2007 compared to fiscal 2006. Total international revenues were $1,254.0 million, or 44.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2007, compared to $943.8 million, or 45.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2006. Product Gross Margin Product gross margin was 60.9% for both fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006. Product gross margin for both fiscal 2007 and 2006 were affected by the following factors: Higher average selling price and gross margins in fiscal 2007 related to new products SFAS 123R stock compensation expenses recorded in fiscal 2007 versus none in fiscal 2006 46 Table of Contents Sales price reductions due to competitive pricing pressure and selective pricing discounts Increased sales through certain indirect channels, which generates lower gross margin than our direct sales in certain geographic regions Higher disk content with an expanded storage capacity for the higher-end storage systems, as resale of disk drives generates lower gross margins Stock-based compensation expense included in cost of product revenues was $3.7 million for fiscal 2007. Amortization of existing technology included in cost of product revenues was $17.6 million and $11.8 million for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Software Entitlements and Maintenance Gross Margin Software entitlements and maintenance gross margin was 97.0% and 96.5% for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively, due primarily to improved productivity and a larger installed base, renewals, upgrades, and an increasing mix of enterprise customers. Service Gross Margin Service gross margin increased to 27.4% in fiscal 2007 compared to 25.9% in fiscal 2006. Cost of service revenue increased by 47.9% to $273.6 million in fiscal 2007, from $185.0 million in fiscal 2006. Stock-based compensation expense of $10.1 million was included in the cost of service revenue for fiscal 2007. The change in service gross margin year over year was primarily impacted by an increase in service revenue, improved productivity, and continued spending in our service infrastructure to support our increasing enterprise customer base. This spending included additional professional support engineers, increased support center activities, and global service partnership programs. Service gross margins will typically be impacted by factors such as timing of technical support service initiations and renewals and additional investments in our customer support infrastructure. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries, commissions, advertising and promotional expenses, stock-based compensation expense, and certain customer service and support costs. Sales and marketing expense increased 49.5% to $895.8 million in fiscal 2007, from $599.1 million in fiscal 2006. These expenses were 32.0% and 28.9% of total revenues in fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was attributed to increased commission expenses resulting from increased revenues, higher payroll expenses due to higher profitability, higher partner program expenses, the continued worldwide investment in our sales and global service organizations associated with selling complete enterprise solutions, and stock-based compensation expenses recognized under adoption of SFAS No. 123R. The stock-based compensation expense included in sales and marketing expense for fiscal 2007 was $71.7 million compared to $4.0 million in fiscal 2006. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Amortization of acquisitions-related trademarks/tradenames and customer contracts and relationships included in sales and marketing expenses was $2.9 million and $2.1 million for fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006, respectively. Research and Development Research and development expense consists primarily of salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation, prototype expenses, nonrecurring engineering charges, fees paid to outside consultants, and amortization of capitalized patents. Research and development expense increased 53.3% to $385.4 million in fiscal 2007 from $251.3 million in fiscal 2006. This expense represented 13.7% and 12.2% of revenue for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in research and development expense was primarily a result of increased headcount, ongoing operating impact of acquisitions, ongoing support of current and future product development and enhancement efforts, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, and stock-based compensation expense recognized under adoption of SFAS No. 123R. For both fiscal 2007 and 2006, no software development costs were capitalized. The stock-based compensation expense included in research and development expense for fiscal 2007 was $51.3 million compared to $8.3 million in fiscal 2006. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Included in research and development expense are capitalized patents amortization of $2.0 million for both fiscal 2007 and 2006. 47 Table of Contents General and Administrative General and administrative expense increased 58.9% to $147.5 million in fiscal 2007, from $92.8 million in fiscal 2006. This expense represented 5.3% and 4.6% of revenues for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to higher payroll expenses due to higher profitability and increased headcount, higher stock-based compensation expense recognized under SFAS No. 123R, and higher legal expenses and professional fees for general corporate matters. The stock-based compensation expense included in general and administrative expense for fiscal 2007 was $26.2 million compared to $1.0 million in fiscal 2006. The increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Amortization of covenants not to compete included in general and administrative expenses was $1.0 million and $2.2 million for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Restructuring Charges In fiscal 2002, we implemented a restructuring plan related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to the Sunnyvale headquarters. In fiscal 2006, we implemented a restructuring plan related to the move of our global services center operations from Sunnyvale to our new flagship support center at our Research Triangle Park facility in North Carolina. In fiscal 2007, we did not record any reduction in restructuring reserve resulting from a change in estimate for our restructuring plans. In fiscal 2006, we recorded a reduction in restructuring reserve of $1.3 million resulting from the execution of a new sublease agreement for our Tewksbury facility. In fiscal 2006, we also recorded a restructuring charge of $1.1 million, primarily attributed to severance-related amounts and relocation expenses related to our 2006 restructuring plan. Of the reserve balance at April 27, 2007, $0.5 million was included in other accrued liabilities, and the remaining $1.6 million was classified as long-term obligations. Gain on Sale of Assets We recorded a gain of $25.3 million in fiscal 2007 as a result of the sale of certain assets of our NetCache product line to Blue Coat. We recorded revenues of $57.4 million, $71.1 million and $75.5 million from NetCache products for fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005 respectively. The contribution to operating income from these products was not significant. Interest Income Interest income was $68.8 million and $41.5 million for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in interest income was primarily driven by higher average interest rates on our investment portfolio. Interest Expense Interest expense was $11.6 million and $1.3 million in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in fiscal 2007 was primarily due to interest incurred in connection with our debt. Net Gain (Loss) on Investments Net gain (loss) on investments included a net write-down of $2.1 million related to the impairment of our investment in privately-held companies in fiscal 2007. Other Income (Expense), Net Other income was $2.8 million for fiscal 2007. Other income for fiscal 2007 included net exchange gains from foreign currency of $2.4 million and other income of $0.4 million. Other income included net exchange gains from foreign currency of $1.7 million for fiscal 2006. Provision for Income Taxes For fiscal 2007, our annual effective tax rate was 17.2% versus 23.9% for fiscal 2006, which included a 6.4% increase to account for the income tax provision of $22.5 million associated with the cash repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings. The decrease to the effective tax rate for fiscal year 2007 is primarily attributable to the absence of this one-time item and the impact of income taxed at lower tax rates in foreign jurisdictions. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2007 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to reductions in the rate derived from a beneficial foreign tax ruling for our principal European subsidiary, the availability of tax credits and the generation of foreign earnings in lower tax jurisdictions, offset partially by an increase in the rate due to the tax effect of stock compensation under SFAS No. 123R. The provision for income taxes for fiscal 2006 included an income tax provision of $22.5 million or $0.06 per share associated with the repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings. This tax raised our 2006 effective tax rate by 6.4% under the one-time incentive created pursuant to Section 965 of the Jobs Act. We will invest these earnings pursuant to an approved Domestic Reinvestment Plan that conforms to the Jobs Act guidelines. The 2006 Tax Relief and Health Care Act was signed into law on December 20, 2006. One of the provisions of this law was the retroactive reinstatement of the research and development credit from January 1, 2006 and its 48 Table of Contents extension through December 31, 2007. The effective tax rates for the fiscal 2007 reflected the benefits attributable to the extension of the research and development tax credit provisions. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following sections discuss the effects of changes in our balance sheet and cash flows, contractual obligations and other commercial commitments, stock repurchase program, capital commitments, and other sources and uses of cash flow on our liquidity and capital resources. Balance Sheet and Other Cash Flows As of April 25, 2008, as compared to April 27, 2007, our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments decreased by $144.4 million to $1,164.4 million. We derive our liquidity and capital resources primarily from our cash flow from operations and from working capital. Working capital (Current Assets minus Current Liabilities) decreased by $399.9 million to $653.3 million as of April 25, 2008, compared to $1,053.3 million as of April 27, 2007 due to higher stock repurchase activities in fiscal 2008. In addition, we have classified all of our auction rate securities that were not liquidated before April 25, 2008 from short-term investments to long-term assets in our consolidated balance sheet as of April 25, 2008 as our ability to liquidate such securities in the next 12 months is uncertain. During fiscal 2008, we generated cash flows from operating activities of $1,008.9 million, as compared with $864.5 million and $554.3 million for fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006, respectively. We reported net income of $309.7 million for fiscal 2008, as compared to $297.7 million and $266.5 million in fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006, respectively. A summary of the significant changes and noncash adjustments affecting net income and changes in assets and liabilities impacting operating cash flows are as follows: Stock-based compensation expense was $148.0 million in fiscal 2008, compared to $163.0 million and $13.3 million in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. The decrease in stock-based compensation in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007 was largely due to our declining stock price year over year. Depreciation expense was $115.3 million, $87.4 million, and $63.7 million in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase was due to continued capital expansion to meet our business growth. Amortization of intangibles and patents was $28.9 million, $23.4 million, and $18.1 million in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase was attributed to intangibles related to the newly acquired companies including Onaro and Topio. Net gain on sale of investments was $12.6 million for fiscal 2008, compared to net loss of $1.5 million for fiscal 2007. The gain in fiscal 2008 was related to sale of Blue Coat common shares which amounted to $13.6 million, offset by a net write-down of $1.0 million for our investments in privately-held companies. An increase in deferred revenues of $401.0 million in fiscal 2008 was primarily due to increased service sales and software entitlements and maintenance revenues. An increase in deferred revenue of $421.3 million in fiscal 2007 compared to $233.2 million in fiscal 2006, was due to larger installed base renewals, upgrades and an increased number of new enterprise customers. Increase in other liabilities of $117.5 million in fiscal 2008 compared to decrease of $0.3 million and $1.6 million in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively, was primarily due to reclassification of our FIN 48 tax liability (see Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). Increase in accounts payable of $20.0 million, $36.6 million and $17.4 million in fiscal 2008, 2007, and 2006, respectively, was primarily attributable to elevated purchasing activity required to support our business growth and facilities expansion projects. Accrued compensation and related benefits increased by $18.8 million, $43.6 million and $28.4 million in fiscal 2008, 2007, and 2006, respectively, reflecting increased headcount and the timing of payroll accruals versus payments. 49 Table of Contents Increase in accounts receivable of $27.7 million in fiscal 2008 was due to increased shipment levels weighted towards the end of the fourth quarter, offset by timing of collections. Increase in accounts receivable of $175.2 million and $116.8 million in fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006, respectively were due to higher revenue volume and shipment levels weighted toward the end of the fourth quarters in both fiscal years. Net inventory increased $15.4 million in fiscal 2008 due to higher inventory to support revenue growth during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008. Net inventory decreased $9.9 million for fiscal 2007, primarily due to higher inventory at fiscal 2006 year end associated with the new FAS 6000 launch. The increase of $46.2 million in fiscal 2006 was due primarily to ramping up of purchased components in anticipation of revenue growth. An increase in deferred income taxes of $53.0 million in fiscal 2008 was primarily due to an increase in deferred tax balances associated with increases in deferred revenue and tax benefits associated with stock compensation. The increase of $146.0 million in fiscal 2007, as compared to a decrease of $1.5 million in fiscal 2006, was primarily due to an increase in deferred tax balances associated with increases in tax benefits associated with stock compensation and deferred revenue. A decrease in income taxes payable of $47.3 million in fiscal 2008 compared to an increase of $1.6 million in fiscal 2007 was primarily attributable to reclassification of FIN 48 liability (see Note 8 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). An increase in income taxes payable in fiscal 2007 compared to an increase of $72.7 million in fiscal 2006 was primarily attributable to income taxes payments related to the one-time repatriation incentive under the Jobs Act. During fiscal 2007, we remitted $19.6 million of income taxes relating to the foreign dividend repatriation in connection with the filing of our fiscal 2006 federal income tax return. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, shipment levels and linearity, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax and other payments. Cash Flows from Investing Activities Capital expenditures for fiscal 2008 were $188.3 million as compared to $165.8 million and $132.9 million in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. We received net proceeds of $376.4 million and $187.9 million in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively, and used net proceeds of $128.5 million in fiscal 2006, for net purchases and redemptions of short-term investments and restricted investments to repay debts with JP Morgan (See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Investing activities in fiscal 2008, 2007, and 2006 also included new investments in privately held companies of $4.2 million, $1.6 million, and $9.3 million, respectively. In fiscal 2008, we acquired Onaro, Inc. and incurred total cash payments including related transaction costs totaling $99.6 million. In fiscal 2007, we acquired Topio, Inc. and incurred total cash payments including related transaction costs totaling $131.2 million. In fiscal 2006, we acquired Alacritus, Inc. ( Alacritus ) and Decru Inc. ( Decru ) and incurred total cash payments including related transaction costs totaling $53.7 million. In fiscal 2008, we received $0.2 million in connection with the escrow from our Topio acquisition. In fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, we received $0.9 million, $2.8 million, and $0.1 million, respectively, from the sale of investments in privately held companies. In fiscal 2008, we received $18.3 million from the sale of shares of Blue Coat common stock. In fiscal 2007, we received $23.9 million in cash in connection with the sale of certain assets to Blue Coat. The credit markets have been volatile and have experienced a shortage in overall liquidity. As of April 25, 2008, auction rate securities with an estimated fair value of $72.7 million were recorded in long-term investments. We concluded that no other-than-temporary impairment losses occurred during fiscal 2008 because we believe that the declines in fair value that occurred during fiscal 2008 were due to general market conditions. These investments continue to be of high credit quality, and we have the intent and ability to hold these investments until the anticipated recovery in market value occurs. We believe we have sufficient liquidity through cash provided by operations and our financing agreements. If the global credit market continues to deteriorate, our investment portfolio may be impacted and we could determine some of our investments are impaired which could adversely impact our financial results. 50 Table of Contents Cash Flows from Financing Activities In fiscal 2008 and 2007, we used $662.4 million and $747.3 million, respectively, compared to fiscal 2006, when cash from financing activities generated $42.8 million. We made repayments of $231.5 million and $214.9 million for our debt and revolving credit facility in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively. We repurchased 32.8 million, 22.6 million and 17.4 million shares of common stock for a total of $903.7 million, $805.7 million, and $488.9 million in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Sales of common stock related to employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases provided $114.7 million, $215.5 million and $232.7 million in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Tax benefits, related to tax deductions in excess of the stock-based compensation expense recognized, of $45.4 million and $63.2 million were presented as financing cash flows for fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively, in accordance with SFAS No. 123R. During fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, we withheld shares with an aggregate value of $6.0 million, $5.3 million and $1.1 million, respectively, in connection with the exercise of certain employees restricted stock for purposes of satisfying those employees federal, state, and local withholding tax obligations. The increase in the amounts withheld year over year was due to the release of restricted stock units assumed in connection with acquisitions and increased grants of restricted stock units. During fiscal 2008, we borrowed $318.8 million through a revolving credit facility for our general corporate purposes, including stock repurchases and working capital needs. During fiscal 2006, we borrowed $300.0 million to fund the repatriation in cash from foreign earnings and investments under the Jobs Act. Net proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to employee participation in employee stock programs have historically been a significant component of our liquidity. The extent to which our employees participate in these programs generally increases or decreases based upon changes in the market price of our common stock. As a result, our cash flow resulting from the issuance of common stock related to employee participation in employee stock programs will vary. Income tax benefits associated with dispositions of employee stock transactions has historically been another significant source of our liquidity. If stock option exercise patterns change, we may receive less cash from stock option exercises and may not receive the same level of tax benefits in the future, which could cause our cash payments for income taxes to increase. In addition, if our stock price declines, we may receive less tax benefits, which could also cause our income tax payments to increase. Other Factors Affecting Liquidity and Capital Resources For fiscal 2008, 2007, and 2006, the income tax benefit associated with dispositions of employee stock transactions was $48.2 million, $175.0 million, and $36.6 million, respectively. If stock option exercise patterns change, we may receive less cash from stock option exercises and may not receive the same level of tax benefits in the future, which could cause our cash payments for income taxes to increase. Stock Repurchase Program At April 25, 2008, $496.2 million remained available for future repurchases under plans approved as of that date. The stock repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. Credit Facilities and Debt In October 2007, we received proceeds from a secured credit agreement totaling $250.0 million with JP Morgan Securities Inc. ( JP Morgan Securities ) as sole bookrunner and sole lead arranger ( Secured Credit Agreement ). The Secured Credit Agreement is used to finance general corporate purposes, including stock repurchases and working capital needs. See Note 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. In fiscal 2008, we repaid $146.4 million and drew $69.0 million against this Secured Credit Agreement. As of April 25, 2008, the outstanding balance on the Secured Credit Agreement was $172.6 million. The obligations under the Secured Credit Agreement are collateralized by certain investments with a value totaling $242.6 million as of April 25, 2008. Interest on the loans under the Secured Credit Agreement accrues at a floating rate based on a base rate in effect from time to time, plus a margin. The interest rate at April 25, 2008 was 2.88%. In accordance with the payment terms of the Secured Credit Agreement, interest payments will be approximately $5.0 million in fiscal 2009 based on amount outstanding at April 25, 2008. As of April 25, 2008, we were in compliance with the liquidity and leverage requirements of the Secured Credit Agreement. 51 Table of Contents In March 2006, we received proceeds from a term loan agreement totaling $300.0 million to finance a dividend under the Jobs Act ( Loan Agreement ). (See Note 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.) As of April 25, 2008, the loan agreement was fully repaid. In November 2007, we entered into a $250.0 million senior unsecured credit agreement (the Unsecured Credit Agreement ) with certain lenders and BNP Paribas, as syndication agent, and JP Morgan Chase Bank National Association, as administrative agent (See Note 6 of the Consolidated Financial Statements,) and as of April 25, 2008, no amount was outstanding under this facility. However, the amounts allocated under the Unsecured Credit Agreement to support certain of our outstanding letters of credit amounted to $0.5 million as of April 25, 2008. In June 2008, we issued $1.265 billion of 1.75% Convertible Senior Notes due 2013 (the Notes ). See Note 17, Subsequent Event of the Consolidated Financial Statements. We have prepared the following unaudited pro forma summary consolidated balance sheet information as of April 25, 2008 which gives effect to the above transactions as if they occurred on April 25, 2008. NetApp, Inc. Pro Forma Summary Consolidated Balance Sheet Information Pro Forma Pro Forma April 25, 2008 Adjustments April 25, 2008 (In thousands) (Unaudited) Cash and cash equivalents $ 936,479 $ 873,017 $ 1,809,496 Total current assets 2,067,433 878,317 2,945,750 Long-term deferred income taxes and other assets 208,529 123,898 332,427 Total assets 4,070,988 1,002,215 5,073,203 Total current liabilities 1,414,102 1,414,102 1.75% convertible senior notes due 2013 1,265,000 1,265,000 Total liabilities 2,370,649 1,265,000 3,635,649 Total stockholders equity 1,700,339 (262,785 ) 1,437,554 Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual cash obligations at April 25, 2008, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Thereafter Total (In millions) Contractual Obligations: Office operating lease payments(1) $ 27.8 $ 24.5 $ 21.2 $ 15.7 $ 12.8 $ 27.2 $ 129.2 Real estate lease payments(2) 6.2 9.2 10.2 10.2 135.5 154.9 326.2 Equipment operating lease payments(3) 17.5 12.9 6.4 1.5 1.3 39.6 Venture capital funding commitments(4) 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.7 Purchase commitments(5) 47.2 47.2 Capital expenditures(6) 29.7 29.7 Communications and maintenance(7) 21.6 12.5 4.8 0.9 0.1 39.9 Restructuring charges(8) 0.6 0.7 0.6 1.9 Debt(9) 4.9 5.0 5.0 5.0 174.4 194.3 Uncertain tax positions(10) 97.8 97.8 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 155.8 $ 65.0 $ 48.4 $ 33.3 $ 324.1 $ 279.9 $ 906.5 52 Table of Contents For purposes of the above table, contractual obligations for the purchase of goods and services are defined as agreements that are enforceable, are legally binding on us, and subject us to penalties if we cancel the agreement. Some of the figures we include in this table are based on management estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, the possibility of renewal or termination, anticipated actions by management and third parties, and other factors. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, our actual future obligations may vary from those reflected in the table. 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Thereafter Total (In millions) Other Commercial Commitments: Letters of credit(11) $ 2.2 $ 0.0 $ 0.1 $ 0.4 $ 0.1 $ 0.4 $ 3.2 (1) We enter into operating leases in the normal course of business. We lease sales offices, research and development facilities, and other property and equipment under operating leases throughout the United States and internationally, which expire on various dates through fiscal year 2017. Substantially all lease agreements have fixed payment terms based on the passage of time and contain payment escalation clauses. Some lease agreements provide us with the option to renew or terminate the lease. Our future operating lease obligations would change if we were to exercise these options and if we were to enter into additional operating lease agreements. Facilities operating lease payments exclude the leases impacted by the restructurings described in Note 13 of the Consolidated Financial Statements. The amounts for the leases impacted by the restructurings are included in subparagraph (8) below. The net increase in office operating lease payments was primarily due to several domestic lease extensions during fiscal 2008. (2) Included in the above contractual cash obligations pursuant to the five financing arrangements with BNP Paribas LLC ( BNP ) are (a) lease commitments of $6.2 million in fiscal 2009; $9.2 million in fiscal 2010; $10.2 million in each of the fiscal years 2011 and 2012; $8.4 million in fiscal 2013, and $6.2 million thereafter, which are based on either the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) rate at April 25, 2008 plus a spread or a fixed rate for terms of five years, and (b) at the expiration or termination of the lease, a supplemental payment obligation equal to our minimum guarantee of $275.8 million in the event that we elect not to purchase or arrange for sale of the buildings. (See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.) (3) Equipment operating leases include servers and IT equipment used in our engineering labs and data centers. (4) Venture capital funding commitments include a quarterly committed management fee based on a percentage of our committed funding to be payable through June 2011. (5) Amounts included in purchase commitments are (a) agreements to purchase components from our suppliers and/or contract manufacturers that are non-cancelable and legally binding; and (b) commitments related to utilities contracts. Purchase commitments and other exclude (a) products and services we expect to consume in the ordinary course of business in the next 12 months; (b) orders that represent an authorization to purchase rather than a binding agreement; (c) orders that are cancelable without penalty and costs that are not reasonably estimable at this time. (6) Capital expenditures include worldwide contractual commitments to purchase equipment and to construct building and leasehold improvements, which will be recorded as property and equipment. (7) Communication and maintenance represent payments we are required to make based on a minimum volume under certain communication contracts with major telecommunication companies as well as maintenance contracts with multiple vendors. Such obligations expire in September 2012. (8) These amounts are included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets under Long-term Obligations and Other Accrued Liabilities, and are comprised of committed lease payments and operating expenses net of committed and estimated sublease income. (9) Included in these amounts is the $172.6 million outstanding under the Secured Credit Agreement (see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Estimated interest payments for the Secured Credit Agreement are $21.7 million for fiscal 2009 through fiscal 2013. (10) As discussed in Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we have adopted the provisions of FIN No. 48. At April 25, 2008, our liability was $97.8 million. 53 Table of Contents (11) The amounts outstanding under these letters of credit relate to workers compensation, a customs guarantee, a corporate credit card program, and foreign rent guarantees. As of April 25, 2008, we have commitments relating to two financing, construction, and leasing arrangements with BNP Paribas LLC ( BNP ) for office space and a parking structure to be located on land in Sunnyvale, California that we currently own. These arrangements require us to lease our land to BNP for a period of 99 years to construct approximately 380,000 square feet of office space costing up to $113.5 million. After completion of construction, we will pay minimum lease payments, which vary based on the LIBOR plus a spread or a fixed rate (3.49% and 3.06% for the first and second lease, respectively, at April 25, 2008) on the cost of the facilities. We began to make lease payments on the first building in January 2008 and expect to begin making lease payments on the second building in December 2008, respectively, for terms of five years. We have the option to renew the leases for two consecutive five-year periods upon approval by BNP. Upon expiration (or upon any earlier termination) of the lease terms, we must elect one of the following options: (i) purchase the buildings from BNP for $48.5 million and $65.0 million, respectively; (ii) if certain conditions are met, arrange for the sale of the buildings by BNP to a third party for an amount equal to at least $41.2 million and $55.3 million, respectively, and be liable for any deficiency between the net proceeds received from the third party and such amounts; or (iii) pay BNP supplemental payments of $41.2 million and $55.3 million, respectively, in which event we may recoup some or all of such payment by arranging for a sale of either or both buildings by BNP during the ensuing two-year period. As of April 25, 2008, we have a commitment relating to a third financing, construction, and leasing arrangement with BNP for facility space to be located on land currently owned by us in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. This arrangement requires us to lease our land to BNP for a period of 99 years to construct approximately 120,000 square feet for a data center costing up to $61.0 million. After completion of construction, we will pay minimum lease payments, which vary based on the LIBOR plus a spread (3.06% at April 25, 2008) on the cost of the facility. We expect to begin making lease payments on the completed buildings in January 2009 for a term of five and a half years. We have the option to renew the lease for two consecutive five-year periods upon approval by BNP. Upon expiration (or upon any earlier termination) of the lease term, we must elect one of the following options: (i) purchase the building from BNP for $61.0 million; (ii) if certain conditions are met, arrange for the sale of the building by BNP to a third party for an amount equal to at least $51.9 million, and be liable for any deficiency between the net proceeds received from the third party and $51.9 million; or (iii) pay BNP a supplemental payment of $51.9 million, in which event we may recoup some or all of such payment by arranging for the sale of the building by BNP during the ensuing two-year period. As of April 25, 2008, we have a commitment relating to a fourth financing and operating leasing arrangement with BNP for approximately 374,274 square feet of buildings located in Sunnyvale, California costing up to $101.1 million. This arrangement requires us to pay minimum lease payments, which may vary based on the LIBOR plus a spread or a fixed rate (3.47% and 3.49% for the first two buildings, and 3.06% for the third building at April 25, 2008). We began to make lease payments on two buildings in December 2007 and the third building in January 2008 for terms of five years. We have the option to renew the leases for two consecutive five-year periods upon approval by BNP. Upon expiration (or upon any earlier termination) of the lease terms, we must elect one of the following options: (i) purchase the buildings from BNP for $101.1 million; (ii) if certain conditions are met, arrange for the sale of the buildings by BNP to a third party for an amount equal to at least $85.9 million, and be liable for any deficiency between the net proceeds received from the third party and $85.9 million; or (iii) pay BNP a supplemental payment of $85.9 million, in which event we may recoup some or all of such payment by arranging for the sale of the buildings by BNP during the ensuing two-year period. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, we entered into a fifth financing, construction, and leasing arrangement with BNP for facility space to be located on land currently owned by us in Sunnyvale, California. This arrangement requires us to lease our land to BNP for a period of 99 years to construct approximately 189,697 square feet for a data center costing up to $49.0 million. After completion of construction, we will pay minimum lease payments, which vary based on the LIBOR plus a spread (3.06% at April 25, 2008) on the cost of the facility. We expect to begin making lease payments on the completed building in January 2010 for a term of five years. We have the option to renew the lease for two consecutive five-year periods upon approval by BNP. Upon expiration (or upon any earlier termination) of the lease term, we must elect one of the following options: (i) purchase the building from BNP for $49.0 million; (ii) if certain conditions are met, arrange for the sale of the 54 Table of Contents building by BNP to a third party for an amount equal to at least $41.6 million, and be liable for any deficiency between the net proceeds received from the third party and $41.6 million; or (iii) pay BNP a supplemental payment of $41.6 million, in which event we may recoup some or all of such payment by arranging for the sale of the building by BNP during the ensuing two-year period. All leases require us to maintain specified financial covenants with which we were in compliance as of April 25, 2008. Such specified financial covenants include a maximum ratio of Total Debt to Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ( EBITDA ) and a minimum amount of Unencumbered Cash and Short Term Investments. Legal Contingencies On September 5, 2007, we filed a patent infringement lawsuit in the Eastern District of Texas seeking compensatory damages and a permanent injunction against Sun Microsystems. On October 25, 2007, Sun Microsystems filed a counter claim against us in the Eastern District of Texas seeking compensatory damages and a permanent injunction. On October 29, 2007, Sun filed a second lawsuit against us in the Northern District of California asserting additional patents against us. The Texas court granted a joint motion to transfer the Texas lawsuit to the Northern District of California on November 26, 2007. On March 26, 2008, Sun filed a third lawsuit in federal court that extends the patent infringement charges to storage management technology we acquired in January 2008. We are unable at this time to determine the likely outcome of these various patent litigations. In addition, as we are unable to reasonably estimate the amount or range of the potential settlement, no accrual has been recorded as of April 25, 2008. We received a subpoena from the Office of Inspector General for the General Services Administration ( GSA ) seeking various records relating to GSA contracting activity by us during the period beginning in 1995 and ending in 2005. The subpoena is part of an investigation being conducted by GSA and the Department of Justice regarding potential violations of the False Claims Act in connection with our GSA contracting activity. The subpoena requested a range of documents including documents relating to our discount practices and compliance with the price reduction clause provisions of its GSA contracts. We are cooperating with the investigation and have produced documents and met with the Department of Justice on several occasions. Violations of the False Claims Act could result in the imposition of a damage remedy which includes treble damages plus civil penalties, and could also result in us being suspended or debarred from future government contracting, any or a combination of which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition. However, as the investigation is still ongoing and we are unable at this time to determine the likely outcome of this matter, no provision has been recorded as of April 25, 2008. In addition, we are subject to various legal proceedings and claims which have arisen or may arise in the normal course of business. While the outcome of these legal matters is currently not determinable, we do not believe that any current litigation or claims will have a material adverse effect on our business, cash flow, operating results, or financial condition. Capital Expenditure Requirements We expect capital expenditures to increase in the future consistent with the growth in our business, as we continue to invest in people, land, buildings, capital equipment, and enhancements to our worldwide infrastructure. We expect that our existing facilities and those being developed in Sunnyvale, California; Research Triangle Park, North Carolina; and worldwide are adequate for our requirements over at least the next two years and that additional space will be available as needed. We expect to finance these construction projects, including our commitments under facilities and equipment operating leases, and any required capital expenditures over the next few years through cash from operations and existing cash, cash equivalents and investments. Credit Environment The credit markets have been volatile and have experienced a shortage in overall liquidity. We believe we have sufficient liquidity through cash provided by operations and our financing agreements. If the global credit market continues to deteriorate, our investment portfolio may be impacted and we could determine some of our investments 55 Table of Contents have experienced other-than-temporary declines in fair value which could adversely impact our financial results. In addition, some of our sales are derived from customers in the financial services industry, which is experiencing a downturn. We believe that our diversified customer base should mitigate our exposure to any one industry; however, we remain exposed to overall reductions in spending by our customer base. See further discussion under Item 1A Risk Factors, We are exposed to fluctuations in the market values of our portfolio investments and in interest rates. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As of April 25, 2008, our financial guarantees of $3.2 million that were not recorded on our balance sheet consisted of standby letters of credit related to workers compensation, a customs guarantee, a corporate credit card program, and foreign rent guarantees. As of April 25, 2008, our notional fair value of foreign exchange forward and foreign currency option contracts totaled $419.3 million. We do not believe that these derivatives present significant credit risks, because the counterparties to the derivatives consist of major financial institutions, and we manage the notional amount of contracts entered into with any one counterparty. We do not enter into derivative financial instruments for speculative or trading purposes. Other than the risk associated with the financial condition of the counterparties, our maximum exposure related to foreign currency forward and option contracts is limited to the premiums paid. We have entered into indemnification agreements with third parties in the ordinary course of business. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by the third party due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with FASB Interpretation 45, of FIN No. 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. We have commitments related to five lease arrangements with BNP for approximately 1,063,971 square feet of office space and a parking structure for our headquarters in Sunnyvale, California and a data center in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina (as further described above under Contractual Obligations ). We have evaluated our accounting for these leases under the provisions of FIN No. 46R and have determined the following: BNP is a leasing company for BNP Paribas in the United States. BNP is not a special purpose entity organized for the sole purpose of facilitating the leases to us. The obligation to absorb expected losses and receive expected residual returns rests with the parent, BNP Paribas. Therefore, we are not the primary beneficiary of BNP as we do not absorb the majority of BNP expected losses or expected residual returns; and BNP has represented in the Closing Agreement (filed as Exhibit 10.40) that the fair value of the property leased to us by BNP is less than half of the total of the fair values of all assets of BNP, excluding any assets of BNP held within a silo. Further, the property leased to NetApp is not held within a silo. The definition of held within a silo means that BNP has obtained funds equal to or in excess of 95% of the fair value of the leased asset to acquire or maintain its investment in such asset through nonrecourse financing or other contractual arrangements, the effect of which is to leave such asset (or proceeds thereof) as the only significant asset of BNP at risk for the repayment of such funds. Accordingly, under the current FIN No. 46R standard, we are not required to consolidate either the leasing entity or the specific assets that we lease under the BNP lease. Our future minimum lease payments and residual guarantees under these real estates leases will amount to a total of $326.2 million reported under our Note 4, Commitments and Contingencies. Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements Key factors affecting our cash flows include our ability to effectively manage our working capital, in particular, accounts receivable and inventories and future demand for our products and related pricing. We expect to incur 56 Table of Contents higher capital expenditures in the future to expand our operations. We will from time to time acquire products and businesses complementary to our business. In the future, we may continue to repurchase our common stock, which would reduce cash, cash equivalents, and/or short-term investments available to fund future operations and meet other liquidity requirements. Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash generated from operations, and credit facilities will satisfy our working capital needs, capital expenditures, stock repurchases, contractual obligations, and other liquidity requirements associated with our operations for at least the next twelve months. However, should we need to investigate other financing alternatives, we cannot be certain that additional financing will be available on satisfactory terms. 
