CIK: 1002047
Company Name: NETWORK APPLIANCE INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-07-08


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the financial statements and the related notes set forth under Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. The following discussion also contains trend information and other forward looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. The Risk Factors set forth in Item 1. Business are hereby incorporated into the discussion by reference. Overview Enterprises are generating vast quantities of data. The rapidly growing amount of data a company generates and the requirements to retain data for longer periods of time, are driving an increasing demand for storage solutions. There is an increase in demand for online access to historical information for business or regulatory requirements. The growth in storage capacity requirements further increases the complexity of data management. Companies are looking for storage solutions to help simplify data storage and reduce total costs of ownership. Companies are migrating toward modular, unified storage systems away from large, fixed, expensive, mainframe-class arrays and inefficient direct-attached storage. There is a growing trend toward consolidating storage and serving a variety of applications from a unified storage pool. We believe that our strategic investments are targeted at some of the strongest growth areas of the storage market, such as modular storage, data protection, iSCSI, and grid computing, however, if any storage market trends and emerging standards on which we are basing our assumptions do not materialize as anticipated, our business could be materially adversely affected. Over the course of the last several years, we believe that the overall global economy has continued to strengthen and IT spending has also improved. Although we expect our revenue to grow in fiscal 2006, we cannot assure you that the storage market will continue to improve or that we will be successful in capitalizing on this improvement. The fiscal 2005 revenue growth and increased gross margin have occurred while the 33 Table of Contents market for our storage products and solutions has grown more competitive with downward pricing pressures that could negatively impact our future revenue growth rate and our future gross margin. At the same time, we anticipate and continue to experience further price decline per petabyte for our products which may have an adverse impact on our future gross margin if not offset by favorable software mix and higher average selling prices associated with new products. We expect our future gross margin to be negatively affected by factors such as global service investment cost; competition, partially offset by new product introductions and enhancements and product and add-on software mix. During fiscal 2005, there were industry-wide constraints affecting the supply of enterprise class hard disk drives ( HDD ). We have secured commitments from our hard disk drive suppliers sufficient to meet our expected requirements, and there has been no material impact on our business in fiscal 2005. However, we remain exposed to risk should there be global, industry-wide shortages affecting all suppliers. We believe that the HDD market supply and demand have regained their balance; however, we cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain our full requirements of all our components in the future or that prices of such components will not increase. Component price increases and supplier capacity constraints over time may negatively affect gross margin in the future. Continued revenue growth is dependent on the introduction and market acceptance of our new products. In fiscal 2006, we expect to refresh our product line, deliver our next-generation operating system with enhanced storage grid functionality and offer a comprehensive suite of data protection solutions. If we fail to timely introduce new products or successfully integrate acquired technology into our existing architecture, or if there is no or reduced demand for these or our current products, we may experience a decline in revenue. Additionally, we plan to invest in the people, processes, and systems necessary to best optimize our revenue growth and long-term profitability. However, we cannot assure you that such investments will achieve our financial objectives. Fiscal 2005 Highlights In fiscal 2005, we continued to enhance our enterprise solutions, broaden our customer portfolio, extend our channel/partner opportunities, and gain market share with our NAS, iSCSI, SAN unified storage, and NearStore solutions. We also continued to win enterprise customers in our target industries with our storage and data management solutions. Our vision is to simplify the data management challenges our customers face through cost-effective innovative storage solutions. Some of the key fiscal 2005 highlights included: Continue to address the major IT challenges that enterprises face by simplifying data management . Our fiscal 2005 results were driven by our solutions based on the unified storage architecture; providing our customers with all three connection types NAS, SAN and iSCSI along with multiple protocols for Windows and UNIX, concurrently from the same system. Our unified storage architecture supporting both SAN and NAS on the same hardware and software platform, provides our customers the ability to support both file- and block-level data, all from a single operating system with common and consistent tools for data management and disaster planning and recovery. With one operating system, Data ONTAP, which runs on all of our systems, we provide customers with the opportunity to choose the cost-effective solutions for their unique environments. All our advance software features are completely interoperable across all of our storage products, with primary and secondary storage and from our largest to smallest systems. Continue to focus our development efforts on the higher growth segments of the storage market, such as modular storage, data protection, iSCSI, and Grid Computing. In fiscal 2005, we maintained our leadership position in both the NAS and iSCSI markets and gained share in the SAN market. Our SAN penetration continued to grow with the majority of fibre channel SAN systems deployed in combination with either NAS or iSCSI protocols. Our leadership in the iSCSI market facilitated SAN. We offered customers the consolidation, scalability, and management advantages of a SAN via low-cost SAN connectivity through iSCSI, without requiring the use of complex, and expensive Fibre Channel network infrastructures. We expect our investment in emerging technologies such as iSCSI, virtualization and the storage grid to increasingly contribute to our growth over the long term. We experienced growth in our Windows business and more storage-grid-style Linux deployments. The majority of our iSCSI deployments are for Microsoft Exchange and SQL Server projects and therefore we expect our Windows 34 Table of Contents business to be a strong driver of the growth of our block storage solutions. We recently announced the rollout of the new midrange FAS3000 series, which will offer high performance data protection with the lowest storage costs through Serial ATA ( SATA ), drives with RAID-DP for use in primary storage. Customers can mix and match Fibre Channel and SATA disks within one system, offering flexibility and high availability to customers. Continue to extend our channel/partner opportunities. Our fiscal 2005 channel mix demonstrated increased expansion through our partner programs, with approximately 51.2% of our business coming through indirect channels and the remaining 48.8% coming through direct sales. The majority of our block-based storage business and the U.S. Federal business came from indirect channels. Higher growth rates in our indirect channels demonstrated our increasing leverage, giving us broader market reach and increasing enterprise penetration. The combination of our two-tier distribution partners, Arrow and Avnet, contributed to 8.6% of total revenue for fiscal 2005. The latest addition to our data management and virtualization portfolio is the NetApp V-Series, which unifies SAN, IP SAN, and NAS under a common architecture. V-Series systems enable customers to extend the complete suite of virtualization capabilities in Data ONTAP 7G software to third-party storage products from HDS, HP, IBM, and SUN. Continue to expand our global services and support. It is an element of our strategy to expand and offer a global, comprehensive, end-to-end suite of world-class service and support solutions designed to help our customers meet their goals of simplifying their storage solutions. We increased our business with our top enterprise customers who typically purchased more complete and longer-term service packages. The growth in service revenue in fiscal 2005 was also driven by increases in professional services. We expect to continue to expand our global services and support and believe that such investments will help accelerate the adoption rate of our technology. We cannot assure you that service revenue will continue to grow at previous rates. We expect to invest in our services infrastructure commensurate with our revenue growth. Fiscal 2005 Financial Performance Our revenues for the fiscal 2005 were $1.6 billion, a 36.6% increase over the same period a year ago. Our revenues for the fiscal 2004 were $1.2 billion, a 31.2% increase compared to revenues of $892.1 million in fiscal 2003. Our revenue growth was driven by the adoption of our new products targeted at the areas of fastest growth in storage, secondary storage for compliance applications and our broadened NetApp storage solutions that simplify data management. Our overall gross margins were 61.0%, 60.2% and 61.3%, in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The improvement in our overall gross margin for fiscal 2005 compared to 2004 was primarily attributable to a favorable change in product and add-on software mix and improved services margin. The deterioration in overall gross margin for fiscal 2004 compared to 2003 was primarily due to continued investment in our service infrastructure to support our increasing enterprise customer base. Net income for fiscal 2005 increased 48.4% to $225.8 million compared to net income of $152.1 million for the same period a year ago. Net income for fiscal 2004 increased 98.9% to $152.1 million compared to net income of $76.5 million for the same period a year ago. Net income for fiscal 2004 included a nonrecurring income tax benefit of $16.8 million or approximately $0.05 per share associated with a favorable foreign tax ruling. Except for the long-term restructuring and deferred rent liabilities totaling $4.5 million, our balance sheet as of April 30, 2005 remains debt-free, with cash, cash equivalents and investments of $1,170.0 million due primarily to our net income and the related cash generated from operations. During fiscal 2005, we repurchased $192.9 million of our common stock. Days Sales Outstanding were 60 days, and 52 days, respectively, as of April 30, 2005, and 2004, reflecting increased sales and less linear shipments. Inventory turns were 17.9 times and 15.9 times, respectively, as of April 30, 2005 and 2004. Deferred revenue increased to $449.2 million in fiscal 2005 from $278.9 million reported in fiscal 2004 due to higher software subscription and service arrangements attributable to our continuing shift 35 Table of Contents toward larger enterprise customers. Capital purchases of plant, property, and equipment for fiscal 2005 were $93.6 million, which included the $24.1 million site purchase in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of such statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements. Our estimates are based on historical experience and other assumptions that we consider to be appropriate in the circumstances. However, actual future results may vary from our estimates. We believe that the following accounting policies are critical as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission, in that they are both highly important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and require difficult management judgments and assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain. We also have other important policies, including those related to derivative instruments and concentration of credit risk. However, these policies do not meet the definition of critical accounting policies because they do not generally require us to make estimates or judgments that are difficult or subjective. These policies are discussed in the Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements accompanying this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the accounting policies described below are the ones that most frequently require us to make estimates and judgments, and therefore are critical to the understanding of our results of operations: Revenue recognition and allowances Valuation of goodwill and intangibles Accounting for income taxes Inventory write-downs Restructuring accruals Impairment losses on investments Accounting for stock-based compensation Loss contingencies. Revenue Recognition and Allowances We apply the provisions of Statement of Position ( SOP ) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition and related interpretations, to all transactions that generate revenue. We recognize revenue when: Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists. It is our customary practice to have a purchase order and/or contract prior to recognizing revenue on an arrangement from our end user customers, value-added resellers, or distributors. Delivery has occurred. Our product is physically delivered to our customers, generally with standard transfer terms such as FOB origin or EXWorks point of origin. We typically do not allow for restocking rights with any of our value-added resellers or distributors. Products shipped with acceptance criteria or return rights are not recognized as revenue until all criteria are achieved. If undelivered products or services exist that are essential to the functionality of the delivered product in an arrangement, delivery is not considered to have occurred. The fee is fixed or determinable. Arrangements with payment terms extending beyond our standard terms and conditions practices are not considered to be fixed or determinable. Revenue from such 36 Table of Contents arrangements is recognized as the fees become due and payable. We typically do not allow for price-protection rights with any of our value-added resellers or distributors. Collection is probable. Probability of collection is assessed on a customer-by-customer basis. Customers are subject to a credit review process that evaluates the customer financial position and ultimately their ability to pay. If it is determined from the outset of an arrangement that collection is not probable based upon our review process, revenue is deferred and recognized when collection becomes probable. For arrangements with multiple elements, we allocate revenue to each element using the residual method based on vendor specific objective evidence of fair value of the undelivered items. We defer the portion of the arrangement fee equal to the vendor specific objective evidence of fair value of the undelivered elements until they are delivered. Vendor specific objective evidence of fair value is based on the price charged when the element is sold separately. A typical arrangement includes product, software subscription, and maintenance. Some arrangements include training and consulting. Software subscriptions include unspecified product upgrades and enhancements on a when-and-if-available basis, bug fixes, and patch releases and are included in product revenues. Service maintenance includes contracts for technical support and hardware maintenance. Revenue from software subscriptions and service maintenance is recognized ratably over the contractual term, generally one to three years. Revenue from training and consulting is recognized as the services are performed. We record reductions to revenue for estimated sales returns at the time of shipment. These estimates are based on historical sales returns, changes in customer demand, and other factors. If actual future returns and allowances differ from past experience, additional allowances may be required. We also maintain a separate allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses based on our assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and the aging of the accounts receivable. We analyze accounts receivable and historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer solvency, current economic and geographic trends, and changes in customer payment terms and practices when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts. If the financial condition of our customers deteriorates, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles We record goodwill and intangible assets when we acquire companies. The cost of the acquisition is allocated to the assets and liabilities acquired, including identifiable intangible assets, with the remaining amount being classified as goodwill. Goodwill and purchased intangible assets include existing technology, patents, trademarks, customer contracts and covenants not to compete. Identifiable intangible assets are amortized over time, while in-process research and development is recorded as a charge on the date of acquisition and goodwill is capitalized, subject to periodic review for impairment. Accordingly, the allocation of the acquisition cost to identifiable intangible assets has a significant impact on our future operating results. The allocation process requires extensive use of estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets. Should conditions be different than management current assessment, material write-downs of the fair value of intangible assets may be required. We periodically review the estimated remaining useful lives of our other intangible assets. A reduction in the estimate of remaining useful life could result in accelerated amortization expense or a write-down in future periods. As such, any future write-downs of these assets would adversely affect our gross and operating margins. We evaluate the impairment of goodwill and purchased indefinite life intangible assets on an annual basis, or sooner if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Triggering events for impairment reviews may be indicators such as adverse industry or economic trends, restructuring actions, lower projections of profitability, or a sustained decline in our market capitalization. Evaluations of possible impairment and, if applicable, adjustments to carrying values, require us 37 Table of Contents to estimate, among other factors, future cash flows, useful lives, and fair market values of our reporting units and assets. Actual results may vary from our expectations. Under our accounting policy we perform an annual review in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, or more often if indicators of impairment exist. Accordingly, goodwill recorded in business combinations may significantly affect our future operating results to the extent impaired, but the magnitude and timing of any such impairment is uncertain. When we conduct our evaluation of goodwill, the fair value of goodwill is assessed using valuation techniques that require significant management judgment. Should conditions be different from management last assessment, significant write-downs of goodwill may be required. In fiscal 2005 and 2004, we performed such evaluation and found no impairment. However, any future write-downs of goodwill would adversely affect our operating margin. As of April 30, 2005, our assets included $291.8 million in goodwill related to the acquisitions of Orca, WebManage, and Spinnaker. See Note 13, Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets to our consolidated financial statements. Accounting for Income Taxes The determination of our tax provision is subject to judgments and estimates due to operations in several tax jurisdictions outside the U.S. Earnings derived from our international business are generally taxed at rates that are lower than U.S. rates, resulting in a reduction of our effective tax rate. The ability to maintain our current effective tax rate is contingent upon existing tax laws in both the U.S. and the respective countries in which our international subsidiaries are located. Future changes in domestic or international tax laws could affect the continued realization of the tax benefits we are currently receiving and expect to receive from international business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our international business or in the mix of international business among particular tax jurisdictions could increase our overall effective tax rate. Also, our current effective tax rate assumes that U.S. income taxes are not provided for undistributed earnings of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or federal and state income taxes should they be either deemed or actually remitted to the U.S. In fiscal 2004, we recorded a nonrecurring income tax benefit of $16.8 million associated with a favorable foreign tax ruling. This favorable ruling from the Netherlands provided for retroactive benefits dating back to fiscal year 2001 and continuing until December 31, 2005. Subsequent to our fiscal 2005 year end, we obtained a new tax ruling from the Netherlands, which terminated the first ruling and provides for continuing favorable tax rate benefits until April 30, 2010. The carrying value of our net deferred tax assets, which consists primarily of the reversal of net deductible temporary differences including credits and net operating loss carryforwards, assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable income to fully utilize these tax attributes. If we do not generate sufficient future income, the realization of these deferred tax assets may be impaired resulting in additional income tax expense. We have provided a valuation allowance on the deferred tax attributes associated with the exercise of employee stock options (primarily credits and net operating loss carryforwards) because of uncertainty regarding their realizability due to the expectation of future employee stock option exercises. If these attributes are realized, the associated tax benefit will be credited to stockholders equity, rather than as a reduction in the income tax provision. The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 ( the Jobs Act ) creates a temporary incentive for U.S. corporations to repatriate accumulated income earned abroad by providing an 85% dividend-received deduction for certain dividends from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries. The deduction is subject to a number of limitations and we are currently considering recently issued Treasury and IRS guidance on the application of the deduction. We are not yet in a position to decide whether, and to what extent, foreign earnings that have not yet been remitted to the US might be repatriated. Based on the analysis to date, however, it is reasonably possible that as much as $355.0 million might be repatriated, with a respective tax liability of up to $15.0 million. We expect to be in a position to finalize our analysis during the third quarter of fiscal 2006. 38 Table of Contents Inventory Write-downs We write down inventory and record purchase commitment liabilities for estimated excess and obsolete inventory equal to the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated fair value based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. Although we strive for accuracy in our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and commitments, and our reported results. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected, additional write-downs and other charges against earnings may be required. If actual market conditions are more favorable, we may realize higher gross margin in the period when the written-down inventory is sold. We engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers. We also provide for the estimated cost of known product failures based on known quality issues when they arise. Should actual cost of product failure differ from our estimates, revisions to the estimated liability would be required. Restructuring Accruals In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in IT spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and a consolidation of our facilities. These restructuring accruals were accounted for in accordance with Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) Issue No. 94-3, Liability Recognition for Certain Employee Termination Benefits and Other Costs to Exit an Activity (including Certain Costs Incurred in a Restructuring) , and included various assumptions such as the time period over which the facilities will be vacant, expected sublease terms, and expected sublease rates. These estimates are reviewed and revised periodically and may result in a substantial change to restructuring expense should different conditions prevail than were anticipated in original management estimates. Future restructurings will be accounted for under SFAS No. 146 Accounting for Costs associated with Exit or Disposal Activities, which superceded EITF No. 94-3. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Impairment Losses on Investments We perform periodic reviews of our investments for impairment. As of April 30, 2005, our short-term investments have been classified as available-for-sale and are carried at fair value. There have been no significant declines in fair value of investments that are considered to be other-than-temporary under the EITF No. 03-01, for any of the three years in the period ended April 30, 2005. Our investments in publicly held companies are generally considered impaired when the fair value of an investment as measured by quoted market prices is less than its carrying value and the decline is not considered temporary. Our investments in privately held companies are considered impaired when a review of the investees operations and other indicators of impairment indicate that the carrying value of the investment is not likely to be recoverable. Such indicators include, but are not limited to, limited capital resources, limited prospects of receiving additional financing, and limited prospects for liquidity of the related securities. Accounting for Stock-based Compensation We adopted the disclosure-only provisions of SFAS No. 123 as amended by SFAS No. 148 and provide pro forma disclosure using the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our employee stock options. The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and is not remeasured as a result of subsequent stock price fluctuations. The Black-Scholes option pricing model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of traded options that have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. In addition, option pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility. We use projected volatility rates, which are based upon historical volatility rates since our initial public offering, trended into future years. In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment ( FAS 123R ), see discussion under New Accounting Standards 39 Table of Contents below. In March 2005, the SEC issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 ( SAB 107 ). SAB 107 includes interpretive guidance for the initial implementation of FAS 123R. We will apply the principles of SAB 107 in conjunction with our adoption of FAS 123R in our first quarter of fiscal 2007 which begins on May 1, 2006. Loss Contingencies We are subject to the possibility of various loss contingencies arising in the course of business. We consider the likelihood of the loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset has been impaired and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted. New Accounting Standards In November 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued SFAS No. 151 Inventory Costs ( SFAS No. 151 ). This statement amends the guidance in Accounting Research Bulletin No. 43, Chapter 4, Inventory Pricing, to clarify the accounting for abnormal amounts of idle facility expense, freight, handling costs, and wasted material (spoilage). SFAS No. 151 requires that those items be recognized as current-period charges. In addition, this statement requires that allocation of fixed production overhead to costs of conversion be based upon the normal capacity of the production facilities. The provisions of SFAS No. 151 are effective for inventory costs incurred in fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005. As such, we are required to adopt these provisions at the beginning of fiscal 2007. We do not expect the adoption of SFAS No. 151 to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements. In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment ( FAS 123R ) that addresses the accounting for share-based payment transactions in which an enterprise receives employee services in exchange for either equity instruments of the enterprise or liabilities that are based on the fair value of the enterprise equity instruments or that may be settled by the issuance of such equity instruments. The statement eliminates the ability to account for share-based compensation transactions using the intrinsic value method as prescribed by Accounting Principles Board, or APB, Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees, and generally requires that such transactions be accounted for using a fair-value-based method and recognized as expenses in our consolidated statement of income. The statement requires companies to assess the most appropriate model to calculate the value of the options. We currently use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value options and are currently assessing which model we may use in the future under the statement and may deem an alternative model to be the most appropriate. The use of a different model to value options may result in a different fair value than results from the use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model. In addition, there are a number of other requirements under the new standard that will result in differing accounting treatments than currently required. These differences include, but are not limited to, the accounting for the tax benefits on employee stock options and for stock issued under our employee stock purchase plan. In addition to the appropriate fair value model to be used for valuing share-based payments, we will also be required to determine the transition method to be used at date of adoption. The allowed transition methods include prospective and retroactive adoption methods. Under the retroactive method, prior periods may be restated either as of the beginning of the year of adoption or for all periods presented. The prospective method requires that compensation expense be recorded for all unvested stock options and restricted stock at the beginning of the first quarter of adoption of FAS 123R, while the retroactive methods would record compensation expense for all unvested stock options and restricted stock beginning with the first period restated. The effective date of the new standard for our consolidated financial statements is the first fiscal quarter of fiscal 2007, which begins on May 1, 2006. Upon adoption, this statement will have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements because we will be required to expense the fair value of our stock option grants and stock purchases under our employee stock purchase plan rather than disclose the impact on our consolidated net income within our footnotes as is our current practice (see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained 40 Table of Contents herein). The amounts disclosed within our footnotes are not necessarily indicative of the amounts that will be expensed upon the adoption of FAS 123R. Compensation expense calculated under FAS 123R may differ from amounts currently disclosed within our footnotes based on changes in the fair value of our common stock, changes in the number of options granted or the terms of such options, the treatment of tax benefits and changes in interest rates or other factors. In addition, upon adoption of FAS 123R we may choose to use a different valuation model to value the compensation expense associated with employee stock options. In March 2005, the SEC issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 ( SAB 107 ). SAB 107 includes interpretive guidance for the initial implementation of FAS 123R. We will apply the principles of SAB 107 in conjunction with our adoption of FAS 123R. In January 2005, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position ( FSP ) No. FAS 109-1, Application of SFAS No. 109 to the Tax Deduction on Qualified Production Activities Provided by the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004. This FSP provides guidance for the accounting of a deduction provided to U.S. manufacturing companies and is effective immediately. We believe the adoption of this position currently will not have a material effect of its financial position or results of operations. However, there is no assurance that there will not be a material impact in the future. In December 2004, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position ( FSP ) No. 109-2, Accounting and Disclosure Guidance for the Foreign Earnings Repatriation Provision within the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004. The American Jobs Creation Act introduces a special one-time dividends received deduction on the repatriation of certain foreign earnings to U.S. companies, provided certain criteria are met. FSP No. 109-2 provides accounting and disclosure guidance on the impact of the repatriation provision on a company income tax expense and deferred tax liability. We are currently studying the impact of the one-time favorable foreign dividend provision and intend to complete the analysis during the third quarter of fiscal 2006. Accordingly, we have not adjusted income tax expense or deferred tax liability to reflect the tax impact of any repatriation of non-U.S. earnings. Results of Operations The following table sets forth certain consolidated statements of income data as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated: Years Ended April 30, 2005 2004 2003 Revenues: 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Product revenue 89.5 90.4 89.9 Service revenue 10.5 9.6 10.1 Cost of Revenues: Cost of product revenue 30.5 31.7 31.3 Cost of service revenue 8.5 8.1 7.4 Gross Profit 61.0 60.2 61.3 Operating Expenses: Sales and marketing 29.1 29.9 34.2 Research and development 10.7 11.3 12.7 General and administrative 4.8 4.7 4.1 Acquired in process research and development 0.4 Stock compensation 0.5 0.3 0.4 Restructuring charges 0.1 0.1 Total Operating Expenses 45.1 46.7 51.5 Income From Operations 15.9 13.5 9.8 41 Table of Contents Years Ended April 30, 2005 2004 2003 Other Income (Expenses), Net: Interest income 1.5 1.2 1.4 Other expenses, net (0.1 ) (0.2 ) (0.2 ) Net gain (loss) on investments 0.1 (0.1 ) Gain on sale of intangible asset 0.1 Total Other Income, Net 1.4 1.1 1.2 Income Before Income Taxes 17.3 14.6 11.0 Provision for Income Taxes 3.2 1.6 2.4 Net Income 14.1 % 13.0 % 8.6 % The following table presents the components of revenues, stated as a percentage of total revenues: Years Ended April 30, 2005 2004 2003 Revenues: Products 78.9 % 80.7 % 81.5 % Software subscriptions 10.6 % 9.7 % 8.4 % Product revenue 89.5 % 90.4 % 89.9 % Service revenue 10.5 % 9.6 % 10.1 % Total Revenues 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Fiscal 2005 Compared to Fiscal 2004 Product Revenues Product revenues increased by 35.2% to $1,430.3 million in fiscal 2005, from $1,058.2 million in fiscal 2004. Product revenues growth was across all geographies. This increase in product revenues was specifically attributable to increased software licenses and software subscriptions and an increase in units shipped, compared to the same period in the previous year. Product revenues were favorably affected by the following factors: Increased revenues from our current product portfolio, such as FAS980, FAS960, FAS940, FAS920, FAS270 and FAS250 storage systems; NearStore R200 nearline storage systems; and NetCache C6200, C2100 appliances and add-on software; Increased sales of software subscriptions representing 10.6% and 9.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively Growth in secondary storage system and related software products as enterprises continue to implement disk-to-disk backup/archival, business continuance, and regulated compliance initiatives Increased demand for NetApp data protection, mission-critical tier-one storage environments, iSCSI SAN deployments in the Windows environment and distributed enterprise Increased sales through indirect channels in absolute dollars, including sales through our resellers, distributors, and OEM partners, representing 51.2% and 47.9% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively Product revenues were negatively affected by the following factors: Lower-cost-per-megabyte disks Declining average selling prices and unit sales of our older products Incremental revenue due to an extra week of business in fiscal 2004 compared to fiscal 2005 42 Table of Contents The Spinnaker acquisition, which closed in February 2004, did not have a significant impact on our fiscal 2005 revenue. We expect to release Spinnaker integrated capabilities at the end of calendar year 2005. We cannot assure you that we will be able to maintain or increase market demand for our products. Service Revenues Service revenues, which include hardware support, professional services, and educational services, increased by 49.7% to $167.8 million in fiscal 2005, from $112.1 million in fiscal 2004. The increase in absolute dollars was due to the following factors: An increasing number of enterprise customers, which typically purchase more complete and generally longer-term service packages than our nonenterprise customers A growing installed base resulting in new customer support contracts in addition to support contract renewals by existing customers Growth in professional services revenue While it is an element of our strategy to expand and offer a more comprehensive, global enterprise support and service solution, we cannot assure you that service revenue will grow at the current rate in fiscal 2006. Service revenues are generally deferred and, in most cases, recognized ratably over the service obligation periods, which are typically one to three years. Service revenues represented 10.5% and 9.6% of total revenues for fiscal year 2005 and 2004, respectively. International total revenues International total revenues (including U.S. exports) increased by 39.0% in fiscal year 2005 compared with fiscal 2004. International total revenues were $765.8 million, or 47.9% of total revenues for fiscal year 2005 compared with $551.0 million or 47.1% of total revenues for fiscal 2004. The increase in international sales was primarily a result of revenue growth from our European and Asia Pacific geography, driven by larger storage implementations, increased demand for our solutions portfolio, new customers, and higher storage spending in certain geographic regions, as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year. We cannot assure you that we will be able to maintain or increase international revenues in fiscal 2006. Product Gross Margin Product gross margin increased to 65.9% for fiscal 2005, from 64.9% for fiscal 2004. Product gross margin was favorably affected by the following factors: Favorable product and add-on software mix Competitive pricing solutions with our bundled software and solutions set Higher average selling prices for our newer products Growth in software subscription upgrades and software licenses due primarily to a larger installed base and an increasing number of new enterprise customers Transitional expenses incurred in fiscal 2004 associated with the initial implementation of a new Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system, which we did not incur in fiscal 2005 Product gross margin was negatively affected by the following factors: Higher disk content with an expanded storage capacity for the higher-end storage systems and NearStore systems, as resale of disk drives generates lower gross margin Increased sales through certain indirect channels, which typically carry a lower gross margin than our direct sales Sales price reductions due to competitive pricing pressure and selective pricing discounts Lower average selling price of certain add-on software options 43 Table of Contents We expect higher disk content associated with high-end storage systems will negatively affect our gross margin in the future, if not offset by software revenue and new products. Amortization of existing technology included in cost of product revenues was $3.4 million and $3.7 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. Estimated future amortization of existing technology to cost of product revenues relating to the Spinnaker acquisition will be $3.4 million for each of fiscal years 2006, 2007, and 2008; $2.8 million for fiscal year 2009; and none thereafter. Service Gross Margin Service gross margin increased to 19.4% in fiscal 2005 compared to 15.9% in fiscal 2004. Cost of service revenue increased by 43.4% to $135.2 million in fiscal 2005, from $94.3 million in fiscal 2004. The improvement in service gross margin for fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004 was primarily due to an increase in services revenue and improved headcount utilization offset by the continued spending in our service infrastructure to support our increasing enterprise customer base. This spending included additional professional support engineers, increased support center activities, and global service partnership programs. Service gross margin will typically experience some variability over time due to the timing of technical support service initiations and renewals and additional investments in our customer support infrastructure. In fiscal 2006, we expect service margin to be in the low 20% range, as we continue to build out our service capability and capacity to support our growing enterprise customers and new products. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, advertising and promotional expenses, and certain customer service and support costs. Sales and marketing expenses increased 33.3% to $466.0 million for fiscal 2005, from $349.5 million for fiscal 2004. These expenses were 29.1% and 29.9% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was attributed to increased commission expenses resulting from increased revenues, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, higher sales kickoff expenses, higher partner program expenses, and the continued worldwide spending in our sales and global service organizations associated with selling complete enterprise solutions, partially offset by an extra week of business in fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal 2005. Amortization of Spinnaker trademarks/tradenames and customer contracts, and relationships included in sales and marketing expenses was $0.8 million and $0.2 million for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. Estimated future amortization of trademarks, tradenames, customer contracts, and relationships relating to the Spinnaker acquisition and included in sales and marketing expenses will be $0.3 million for fiscal 2006, and $0.1 million for fiscal 2007, respectively. Sales and marketing headcount increased to 1,918 at April 30, 2005, from 1,421 at April 30, 2004. We expect to continue to selectively add sales capacity in an effort to expand domestic and international markets, introduce new products, establish and expand new distribution channels, and increase product and company awareness. We expect to increase our sales and marketing expenses commensurate with future revenue growth. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, prototype expenses, nonrecurring engineering charges, fees paid to outside consultants and amortization of capitalized patents. Research and development expenses increased 29.7% to $171.0 million for fiscal 2005 from $131.9 million for fiscal 2004. These expenses represented 10.7% and 11.3% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily a result of increased headcount, ongoing impact of the Spinnaker acquisition, ongoing support of current and future product development and enhancement efforts, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, partially offset by an extra week of expenses in fiscal 2004 compared to the fiscal 2005, cost control, and reduction in discretionary spending efforts. Research and development headcount increased to 827 as of April 30, 2005, compared to 650 as of April 30, 2004. For both fiscal 2005 and 2004, no software development costs were capitalized. 44 Table of Contents Included in research and development expenses is capitalized patents amortization of $1.8 million and $1.5 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. Based on capitalized patents recorded at April 30, 2005, estimated future capitalized patents amortization expenses will be $2.0 million for each of the fiscal years 2006, 2007, and 2008, respectively, and $0.5 and $0.2 million for fiscal 2009 and 2010. We believe that our future performance will depend in large part on our ability to maintain and enhance our current product line, develop new products that achieve market acceptance, maintain technological competitiveness, and meet an expanding range of customer requirements. We expect to continuously support current and future product development and enhancement efforts, and incur prototyping expenses and nonrecurring engineering charges associated with the development of new products and technologies. We intend to continuously broaden our existing product offerings and introduce new products that expand our solutions portfolio. We believe that our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2006, primarily due to ongoing costs associated with the development of new products and technologies, projected headcount growth and the operating impact of potential future acquisitions as compared to fiscal 2005. General and Administrative General and administrative expenses increased 41.0% to $76.9 million for fiscal 2005, from $54.6 million for fiscal 2004. These expenses represented 4.8% and 4.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. This increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to expenses associated with expanded regulatory requirements, higher legal expenses and professional fees for general corporate matters including patents, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, partially offset by reduced expenses as a result of one less week of expenses in the fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004 and higher expenses associated with investments in our enterprise-wide ERP system and back-office infrastructure in fiscal 2004, which we did not incur in fiscal 2005. General and administrative headcount increased to 432 at April 30, 2005, from 331 at April 30, 2004. We believe that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2006 due to projected G&A headcount growth. Amortization of Spinnaker covenants not to compete included in general and administrative expenses was $5.1 million and $1.1 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. Estimated future amortization of covenants not to compete relating to the Spinnaker acquisition will be $1.5 million for fiscal year 2006 and none thereafter. Stock Compensation Stock compensation expenses were $8.1 million and $3.9 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. This net increase year-over-year in stock compensation expenses reflected primarily higher stock compensation relating to the Spinnaker acquisition and restricted stock awards partially offset by forfeitures of unvested options and forfeited restricted stock assumed in the Spinnaker acquisition. Based on deferred stock compensation recorded at April 30, 2005, estimated future deferred stock compensation amortization expenses are $6.8 million in fiscal 2006, $5.3 million in fiscal 2007, $3.7 million in fiscal 2008, and none thereafter. Restructuring Charges In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in IT spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and consolidations of our facilities. Fiscal 2002 Second Quarter Restructuring Plan In August 2001, we implemented the first restructuring plan, which included a reduction in workforce by approximately 200 employees and a consolidation of facilities. The action was required to properly align and manage the business commensurate with our revenue at that time. All functional areas of the Company were affected by the reduction. We completed our actions during the second quarter of fiscal 2002. As a result of this restructuring, we recorded a charge of $8.0 million. The restructuring charge included $4.8 million of severance-related amounts, $2.7 million of committed excess facilities and facility closure expenses, including certain facilities in foreign countries, and $0.5 million in fixed assets write-offs. 45 Table of Contents During fiscal 2005, we paid $0.6 million pursuant to final resolution of certain severance-related restructuring accruals. As of April 30, 2005, we have no outstanding balance in our restructuring liability for the second quarter fiscal 2002 restructuring. The following analysis sets forth the significant components of the second quarter fiscal 2002 restructuring at April 30, 2005 (in thousands): Severance- Fixed Assets Related Amounts Write-Off Facility Total Restructuring charge $ 4,796 $ 528 $ 2,656 $ 7,980 Cash payments and others (4,394 ) (894 ) (5,288 ) Noncash portion (528 ) (46 ) (574 ) Adjustments 315 (1,585 ) (1,270 ) Reserve balance at April 30, 2004 717 131 848 Cash payments and others (531 ) (46 ) (577 ) Adjustments (186 ) (85 ) (271 ) Reserve balance at April 30, 2005 $ $ $ $ Fiscal 2002 Fourth Quarter Restructuring Plan In April 2002, we completed a restructuring related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to the Sunnyvale headquarters. As a result of this restructuring, we recorded a charge of $5.9 million. The restructuring charge included $0.8 million of severance-related amounts, $4.6 million of committed excess facilities and facility closure expenses, and $0.5 million in fixed assets write-offs. Of the reserve balance at April 30, 2005, $0.8 million was included in other accrued liabilities and the remaining $3.7 million was classified as long-term obligations. In fiscal 2003 and 2004, we updated our assumptions and estimates based on certain triggering events, which resulted in additional net charges of $0.9 million and $1.3 million, respectively, primarily relating to sublease assumptions for our engineering facility. The restructuring liability will be fully paid through November 2010. In the event that the engineering facility is not subleased as anticipated, we will be obligated for an additional total lease payments of $1.8 million as of April 30, 2005 to be payable through November 2010. The following analysis sets forth the significant components of the fourth quarter fiscal 2002 restructuring at April 30, 2005 (in thousands): Severance- Fixed Assets Related Amounts Write-Off Facility Total Restructuring charge $ 813 $ 473 $ 4,564 $ 5,850 Cash payments and others (706 ) (1,713 ) (2,419 ) Noncash portion (473 ) (473 ) Adjustments (107 ) 2,357 2,250 Reserve balance at April 30, 2004 5,208 5,208 Cash payments and others (705 ) (705 ) Reserve balance at April 30, 2005 $ $ $ 4,503 $ 4,503 Interest Income Interest income was $24.2 million and $13.7 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. Included in interest income for fiscal 2005 was a $1.3 million interest received on a tax refund. In addition, the increase in interest income was primarily driven by higher cash and investment balances provided by operating activities and higher average interest rates on our investment portfolio. We expect interest income to increase for fiscal 2006 as a result of rising average interest rates and higher cash and invested balances in a higher interest-rate portfolio environment. 46 Table of Contents Other Income (Expense), Net Other Income (Expense), Net, included net exchange losses from foreign currency transactions of $1.6 million and $2.9 million in fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. The net exchange loss was a result of the volatility of the currency exchange market and increased hedging costs associated with our forward and option activities. Provision for Income Taxes For fiscal 2005, we had an effective tax rate of 18.3% to pretax income. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2005 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to a foreign tax ruling for our principal European subsidiary, the availability of tax credits, and the generation of foreign earnings in lower tax jurisdictions. For fiscal 2004, our effective tax rate was 10.8% which included 9.9% reduction to account for the $16.8 million nonrecurring benefit from the retroactive portion of foreign tax ruling. Fiscal 2004 Compared to Fiscal 2003 Business Combinations During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004, we acquired Spinnaker for approximately $305.6 million (including transaction costs) in an all-stock transaction. Spinnaker provides scalable system architectures, distributed file systems, next-generation clustering technologies, and virtualization. The acquisition was accounted for as a purchase transaction. The unaudited pro forma information giving pro forma effect to the merger is presented under Note 11, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Product Revenues Product revenues increased by 31.9% to $1,058.2 million in fiscal 2004, from $802.3 million in fiscal 2003. Product revenues growth was across all geographies. This increase in product revenues was specifically attributable to increased software licenses and software subscriptions and an increase in units shipped, compared to the prior year. Product revenues were favorably affected by the following factors: Increased revenues from our current products such as: FAS960, FAS940, FAS270, and FAS250 storage systems; NearStore R200 and R150 nearline storage systems; NetCache C2100 and C6200 appliances, as well as our gateway storage systems (gFiler), GF960, GF940 and GF825 Increased revenues from data management software products that are focused on solving enterprise customer storage challenges, including regulatory and compliance data needs, storage consolidation, Internet access and security, technical applications, and data protection Higher sales of software subscription upgrades representing 9.7% and 8.4% of total revenues for fiscal year 2004 and 2003, respectively Increased demand for regulatory compliance WORM solutions and back-up-to-disk solutions Increased sales through indirect channels, including sales through our resellers, distributors, and OEM partners, representing 47.9% and 46.5% of total revenues for fiscal 2004 and 2003, respectively Incremental revenue due to an extra week of business in fiscal 2004 compared to fiscal 2003 Product revenues were negatively affected by the following factors: Lower-cost-per-megabyte disks Declining average selling price and unit sales of our older storage systems The acquisition of Spinnaker in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004 did not have a significant impact on fiscal 2004 revenues. Service Revenues Service revenues, which include hardware support, professional services, and educational services, increased by 24.9% to $112.1 million in fiscal 2004, from $89.8 million in fiscal 2003. Service revenues are generally deferred and, in most cases, recognized ratably over the service obligation periods, which are typically one to three years. Service revenues represented 9.6%, and 10.1% of total revenues for fiscal year 2004 and 2003, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was due to an increasing number of enterprise customers, which typically purchase more complete and generally longer-term service packages. 47 Table of Contents Higher service revenues were also related to a growing installed base resulting in new customer support contracts in addition to support contract renewals by existing customers. International Total Revenues International total revenues (including U.S. exports) increased by 46.9% in fiscal year 2004 compared with fiscal 2003. International total revenues were $551.0 million, or 47.1% of total revenues for fiscal year 2004 compared with $375.2 million or 42.1% of total revenues for fiscal 2003. The increase in international sales for fiscal year 2004 was primarily a result of European and Asia/ Pacific net revenues growth, driven by larger storage implementations, new products, and higher storage spending in certain geographic regions, compared to the previous fiscal year. Product Gross Margin Product gross margin decreased to 64.9% for fiscal 2004, from 65.1% for fiscal 2003. Amortization of existing technology included in cost of product revenues was $3.7 million and $5.5 million for fiscal year 2004 and 2003, respectively. Product gross margin was negatively affected by the following factors: Increased sales through certain indirect channels, which have a lower gross margin than our direct sales Transitional costs associated with implementation of a new Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system Higher disk content with an expanded storage capacity for the higher-end storage systems and NearStore systems Sales price reductions due to competitive pricing pressure and selective pricing discounts Lower average selling price of certain add-on software options Product gross margin was favorably affected by the following factors: Favorable product and add-on software mix Competitive pricing solutions with our bundled software and solutions set Higher average selling prices for our new products Growth in software subscription upgrades and software licenses due primarily to a larger installed base and an increasing number of new enterprise customers Lower cost of components Service Gross Margin Service gross margin decreased to 15.9% in fiscal 2004 as compared to 26.5% in fiscal 2003. Investments in global service increased by 43.0% to $94.3 million in fiscal 2004, from $66.0 million in fiscal 2003. The decrease in service gross margin was primarily due to the continued investment in our service infrastructure to support our increasing enterprise customer base, partially offset by improved headcount utilization. These investments included additional professional support engineers, increased support center activities, and global service partnership programs. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, advertising and promotional expenses, and certain global service and support costs. Sales and marketing expenses increased 14.9% to $349.5 million for fiscal 2004, from $304.2 million for fiscal 2003. These expenses were 29.9% and 34.2% of total revenues for fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was attributed to sales kickoff and club meetings, increased commission expenses resulting from increased revenues, an extra week of expenses in fiscal 2004 compared to fiscal 2003, the continued worldwide investment in our sales and global service organizations associated with selling complete enterprise solutions and scaling our sales infrastructure, offset by cost controls and reduction in discretionary spending efforts. Sales and marketing headcount increased to 1,421 at April 30, 2004, from 1,199 at April 30, 2003. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, prototype expenses, nonrecurring engineering charges, fees paid to outside consultants, and amortiza- 48 Table of Contents tion of capitalized patents. Included in research and development expenses are capitalized patents amortization of $1.5 million for April 30, 2004, compared to none for the same periods in the prior year. Research and development expenses increased 16.8% to $131.9 million for fiscal 2004 from $112.9 million for fiscal 2003. These expenses represented 11.3% and 12.7% of total revenues for fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily a result of an extra week of expenses in fiscal 2004 compared to fiscal 2003, increased ongoing operating impact of the Spinnaker acquisition, increased headcount, ongoing support of current and future product development and enhancement efforts, prototyping expenses, and nonrecurring engineering charges, offset by cost controls and reduction in discretionary spending efforts. Research and development headcount increased to 650 as of April 30, 2004, compared to 526 as of April 30, 2003. For both fiscal 2004 and 2003, no software development costs were capitalized. General and Administrative General and administrative expenses increased 48.1% to $54.6 million in fiscal 2004, from $36.8 million in fiscal 2003. These expenses represented 4.7% and 4.1% of total revenues for fiscal 2004 and 2003, respectively. Increases in absolute dollars were primarily due to expenses associated with initiatives to enhance and implement our enterprise-wide ERP system, back office infrastructure and expanded regulatory requirements, partially offset by cost control and reduction in discretionary spending efforts. General and administrative headcount increased to 331 in fiscal 2004 from 283 in fiscal 2003. Stock Compensation Stock compensation expenses were $3.9 million and $3.6 million for fiscal 2004 and 2003, respectively. This net increase in stock compensation expenses reflected primarily higher stock compensation relating to the Spinnaker acquisition and restricted stock awards offset by forfeitures of unvested options assumed in the Spinnaker and WebManage acquisitions. Restructuring Charges In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in IT spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and consolidations of our facilities. Fiscal 2002 Second Quarter Restructuring Plan. In August 2001, we implemented the first restructuring plan, which included a reduction in workforce by approximately 200 employees and a consolidation of facilities. As a result of this restructuring, we incurred a charge of $8.0 million. During fiscal 2002, we purchased our Sunnyvale headquarters site and terminated the operating leases. As a result, an adjustment was made to reduce the previously recorded estimated facilities lease losses by $1.5 million. As of April 30, 2004, we have $0.7 million outstanding in our accrued and unpaid severance-related restructuring costs due to changes in estimated costs of certain severance-related matters. The reserve balance of $0.8 million at April 30, 2004, was included in other accrued liabilities. The following analysis sets forth the significant components of the second quarter fiscal 2002 restructuring at April 30, 2004 (in thousands): Severance- Fixed Assets Related Amounts Write-Off Facility Total Restructuring charge $ 4,796 $ 528 $ 2,656 $ 7,980 Cash payments and others (4,444 ) (885 ) (5,329 ) Noncash portion (528 ) (46 ) (574 ) Adjustments 315 (1,585 ) (1,270 ) Reserve balance at April 30, 2003 667 140 807 Cash payments and others 50 (9 ) 41 Reserve balance at April 30, 2004 $ 717 $ $ 131 $ 848 Fiscal 2002 Fourth Quarter Restructuring Plan. In April 2002, we completed a restructuring related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to the Sunnyvale headquarters. As a result 49 Table of Contents of this restructuring, we recorded a charge of $5.9 million. Of the reserve balance at April 30, 2004, $0.7 million was included in other accrued liabilities and the remaining $4.5 million was classified as long-term obligations. In fiscal 2003 and 2004, we updated our assumptions and estimates based on certain triggering events, which resulted in additional net charges of $0.9 million and $1.3 million, respectively, primarily relating to sublease assumptions for our engineering facility. The following analysis sets forth the significant components of the fourth quarter fiscal 2002 restructuring at April 30, 2004 (in thousands): Severance- Fixed Assets Related Amounts Write-Off Facility Total Restructuring charge $ 813 $ 473 $ 4,564 $ 5,850 Cash payments and others (706 ) (1,023 ) (1,729 ) Non-cash portion (473 ) (473 ) Adjustments (107 ) 1,030 923 Reserve balance at April 30, 2003 4,571 4,571 Cash payments and others (690 ) (690 ) Adjustments 1,327 1,327 Reserve balance at April 30, 2004 $ $ $ 5,208 $ 5,208 Interest Income During fiscal 2004, interest income was $13.7 million, compared to $12.2 million in fiscal 2003. The increase in interest income was primarily driven by higher cash and investment balances provided by operating activities partially offset by lower average interest rates on our investment portfolio. Other Expenses, Net Other expenses, net, included a net exchange loss from foreign currency transactions of $2.9 million and $1.0 million, respectively, for fiscal 2004 and 2003. The increase in net exchange loss was attributed to the impact of currency balance sheet hedging activities resulting from forecast variances. Net Gain (Loss) on Investments Our investments in publicly held companies are generally considered impaired when a decline makes the fair value of an investment as measured by quoted market prices less than its carrying value and the decline is not considered temporary. In fiscal 2004, we realized a net gain of $0.7 million on the sale of previously impaired investments. In fiscal 2003, we recorded a noncash write down of $2.0 million related to the impairment of our investments, partially offset by a gain of $0.8 million on previously impaired investments. Gain on Sale of Intangible Assets We recorded a gain on sale of intangible assets of $0.6 million in fiscal 2003 related to the sale of our ContentReporter software. We intend to resell this software through a licensing arrangement. Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes Provision for income taxes for fiscal 2004 included a nonrecurring income tax benefit of $16.8 million or approximately $0.05 per share associated with a favorable foreign tax ruling, which occurred during the second quarter of fiscal 2004. This favorable ruling from the Netherlands provides for retroactive benefits dating back to fiscal year 2001 as well as current and future tax rate benefits. For fiscal 2004, we had an effective tax rate of 10.8% which included 9.9% reduction to account for the $16.8 million nonrecurring benefit from the foreign tax ruling. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2004 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the retroactive and current benefits of the foreign tax ruling, the availability of tax credits, and the generation of foreign earnings in lower tax jurisdictions. For fiscal 2003, our effective tax rate was 21.8%, which included certain benefits from tax credits and foreign earnings in a lower tax jurisdiction. 50 Table of Contents Liquidity and Capital Resources The following sections discuss the effects of changes in our balance sheet and cash flow, contractual obligations and other commercial commitments, stock repurchase program, capital commitments, other sources and uses of cash flow and potential tax opportunities on our liquidity and capital resources. Balance Sheet and Other Cash Flows As of April 30, 2005, compared to April 30, 2004, our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased by $362.0 million to $1,170.0 million. We derive our liquidity and capital resources primarily from our cash flow from operations and from working capital. Working capital increased by $310.7 million to $1,055.7 million as of April 30, 2005, compared to $745.0 million as of April 30, 2004. During fiscal 2005, we recorded cash flows from operating activities of $462.1 million as compared with $313.0 million and $192.4 million for fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003, respectively. The largest driver of this increase was fiscal 2005 net income of $225.8 million as compared to $152.1 million and $76.5 million in fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003, respectively. Noncash adjustments were higher in fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004, including amortization of intangible assets, which was higher by $4.4 million and stock compensation which was higher by $4.3 million, all relating to the Spinnaker acquisition. In addition to higher net income and noncash adjustments in fiscal 2005, the primary factors that impacted the period-to-period change in cash flows relating to operating activities included the following: An increase in deferred revenues from higher software subscription and service billings attributable to our continuing shift toward larger enterprise customers, as well as renewals of existing maintenance agreements An increase in accounts payable in fiscal 2005 as a result of growth in business volumes and facilities expansion projects Increased income taxes payable, primarily reflecting higher profitability in fiscal 2005 compared to the fiscal 2004 Decreased prepaid expenses and other assets in fiscal 2005 due to a tax refund of $9.0 million in connection with a carryback of net operating losses generated in fiscal 2000 Increased accrued compensation and related benefits due to higher commission and higher performance-based payroll expenses reflecting higher revenue and profitability in fiscal 2005 compared to the fiscal 2004 The above factors were partially offset by the effects of the following: Increased accounts receivable balances due to increased sales in fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004 An increase in inventories due primarily to end-of-life buys for certain products We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, shipment linearity, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax and other payments. Capital expenditures for fiscal 2005 were $93.6 million, which included the $24.1 million site purchase in Research Triangle Park (RTP), North Carolina, compared to $48.7 million and $60.2 million in fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003, respectively. We used net proceeds of $266.8 million, $191.7 million, and $200.0 million in fiscal 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively, for net purchases/redemptions of short-term investments. In fiscal 2005 and 2004, we acquired additional patents for a purchase price of approximately $0.9 million and $9.0 million, respectively. Investing activities in fiscal 2005, 2004, and 2003 also included new investments in privately held companies of $0.4 million and $0.9 million and $0.7 million, respectively. We received $0.3 million, $1.1 million, and $0.8 million in proceeds from sales of investments in fiscal 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. Under a split dollar insurance arrangement with our CEO entered in May 2000, we paid total premiums of $10.2 million, including $0.2 million, $3.9 million, and $2.0 million for fiscal years 2005, 51 Table of Contents 2004, and 2003, respectively. In April 2005, our CEO reimbursed us $10.2 million for these premiums. In fiscal 2004, we incurred $8.0 million on a bridge loan and related transactions costs and assumed $1.2 million relating to the Spinnaker acquisition. We used $12.1 million and $54.6 million in fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively, and received $29.3 million in fiscal 2003 in net financing activities, which included sales of common stock related to employee stock transactions net of common stock repurchases. During fiscal 2005 and 2004, we repurchased 7.7 million and 6.9 million shares of common stock at a total of $192.9 million and $136.2 million, respectively. Other financing activities provided $181.9 million, $81.5 million, and $29.3 million in the fiscal 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively, which related to sales of common stock related to employee stock transactions. During fiscal 2005, pursuant to the provisions of our Stock Option plans, we allowed optionees to satisfy withholding tax obligations by electing to have us withhold from the shares to be issued upon exercise of a restricted stock the equivalent shares having a fair market value equal to $1.1 million withholding taxes to cover for federal, state, and local withholding taxes. The change in cash flow from financing was primarily due to the effects of higher common stock repurchases partially offset by proceeds from issuance of common stock under employee programs compared to the same period in the prior year. Net proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to employee participation in employee stock programs have historically been a significant component of our liquidity. The extent to which our employees participate in these programs generally increases or decreases based upon changes in the market price of our common stock. As a result, our cash flow resulting from the issuance of common stock related to employee participation in employee stock programs will vary. Stock Repurchase Program In fiscal 2005, our Board of Directors approved an increase in shares authorized to be repurchased from $150.0 million to $350.0 million in common shares. On May 24, 2005, the Board authorized an expansion of the program to purchase an additional $300.0 million of outstanding common stock. The duration of the repurchase program is open-ended, and the program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. Share repurchase activities for fiscal 2005 and 2004, were as follows (in thousands): Fiscal Year 2005 2004 Shares repurchased 7,713 6,853 Cost of shares repurchased $ 192,903 $ 136,171 Average price per share $ 25.01 $ 19.87 Since the inception of the stock repurchase program through April 30, 2005, we have purchased a total of 14.6 million shares of our common stock at an average price of $22.59 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $329.1 million. At April 30, 2005, $20.9 million in shares remained authorized for repurchases under the plan. Other Sources and Uses of Cash and Tax Opportunities The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 ( the Jobs Act ) creates a temporary incentive for U.S. corporations to repatriate accumulated income earned abroad by providing an 85% dividend-received deduction for certain dividends from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries. The deduction is subject to a number of limitations, and we are currently considering recently issued Treasury and IRS guidance on the application of the deduction. We are not yet in a position to decide whether, and to what extent, foreign earnings that have not yet been remitted to the U.S. might be repatriated. Based on the analysis to date, however, it is reasonably possible that as much as $355.0 million might be repatriated, with a respective tax liability of up to $15.0 million. We expect to be in a position to finalize our analysis during our third quarter of fiscal 2006. For fiscal 2005, 2004, and 2003, we recorded tax benefits, in the form of reduced payments, of $27.8 million, $49.5 million, and $18.5 million, respectively, associated with disqualifying dispositions of employee stock options. If stock option exercise patterns change, we may receive less cash from stock option 52 Table of Contents exercises and may not receive the same level of tax benefits in the future, which could cause our cash payments for income taxes to increase. Contractual Cash Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments The following summarizes our contractual cash obligations and commercial commitments at April 30, 2005, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods, (in thousands): 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Thereafter Total Contractual Obligations: Rent operating lease payments(1) $ 13,057 $ 8,798 $ 8,382 $ 8,644 $ 6,616 $ 22,634 $ 68,131 Equipment operating lease payments 3,766 2,835 1,362 241 1 8,205 Venture capital funding commitments(2) 548 548 536 523 511 534 3,200 Purchase commitments and other(3) 758 606 6 1,370 Capital expenditures(4) 19,564 19,564 Communications & maintenance(5) 4,608 910 347 67 5,932 Restructuring charges(6) 756 832 836 818 792 469 4,503 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 43,057 $ 14,529 $ 11,469 $ 10,293 $ 7,920 $ 23,637 $ 110,905 For purposes of the above table, contractual obligations for the purchase of goods and services are defined as agreements that are enforceable, legally binding on us, and subject us to penalties if we cancel the agreement. Some of the figures we include in this table are based on management estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, the possibility of renewal or termination, anticipated actions by third parties, and other factors. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, the enforceable and legally binding obligations we will actually pay in future periods may vary from those reflected in the table. 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Thereafter Total (In thousands) Other Commercial Commitments: Letters of credit(7) $ 1,483 $ $ $ $ $ 337 $ 1,820 Restricted cash(8) 1,699 1,693 483 105 79 4,059 Total Commercial Commitments $ 3,182 $ 1,693 $ 483 $ 105 $ $ 416 $ 5,879 (1) We enter into operating leases in the normal course of business. We lease sales offices, research and development facilities, and other property and equipment under operating leases throughout the U.S. and internationally, which expire through fiscal 2015. Substantially all lease agreements have fixed payment terms based on the passage of time and contain escalation clauses. Some lease agreements provide us with the option to renew the lease or to terminate the lease. Our future operating lease obligations would change if we were to exercise these options and if we were to enter into additional operating lease agreements. Sublease income of $0.2 million has been included as a reduction of the payment amounts shown in the table. Facilities operating lease payments exclude the leases impacted by the restructurings. The amounts for the leases impacted by the restructurings are included in subparagraph (6) below. (2) Venture capital funding commitments includes a quarterly committed management fee based on a percentage of our committed funding to be payable through June 2011. (3) Purchase commitments and other represent agreements to purchase component inventory from our suppliers and/or contract manufacturers that are enforceable and legally binding against us. Other examples include minimum cash commitments related to facilities and utilities. Purchase commitments and other excludes (a) purchases of good and services we expect to consume in the ordinary course of business in the next 12 months; (b) open purchase orders which represent an authorization to purchase 53 Table of Contents rather than binding agreements; (c) agreements that are cancelable without penalty and costs that are not reasonably estimable at this time. (4) Capital expenditures include worldwide contractual commitments to purchase equipment and to construct building and leasehold improvements, which will be recorded as Property and Equipment. (5) Under certain communication contracts with major telecommunication companies as well as maintenance contracts with multiple vendors, we are required to pay based on a minimum volume. Such obligations expire through January 2009. (6) These amounts are included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets under Long-term Obligations and Other Accrued Liabilities, which is comprised of committed lease payments and operating expenses net of committed and estimated sublease income. The restructuring estimated sublease income included various assumptions such as the time period over which the facilities will be vacant, expected sublease terms, and expected sublease rates. The actual amount paid, if the facility is not subleased, would be increased by $1.8 million to be payable through November 2010. (7) The amounts outstanding under these letters of credit relate to workers compensation, a customs guarantee, a corporate credit card program, and a foreign lease. (8) Restricted cash arrangements relate to facility lease requirements, service performance guarantees, customs and duties guarantees, and VAT requirements, and are included under Prepaid Expenses and Other and Other Assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Capital Expenditure Requirements We expect capital expenditures to increase in the future consistent with the growth in our business, as we continue to invest in people, land, buildings, capital equipment and enhancements to our worldwide infrastructure. We expect that our existing facilities and those being developed in Sunnyvale, California; RTP, North Carolina; and worldwide are adequate for our requirements over at least the next two years and that additional space will be available as needed. During the first quarter of fiscal 2005, we purchased three buildings in RTP, North Carolina, for $24.1 million. We expect to finance these construction projects, including our commitments under facilities and equipment operating leases, and any required capital expenditures over the next few years through cash from operations and existing cash, cash equivalents and investments. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As of April 30, 2005, our financial guarantees of $1.8 million that were not recorded on our balance sheet consisted of standby letters of credit related to workers compensation, a customs guarantee, a corporate credit card program, and a foreign lease. As of April 30, 2005, our notional fair values of foreign exchange forward and foreign currency option contracts totaled $211.1 million. We do not believe that these derivatives present significant credit risks because the counterparties to the derivatives consist of major financial institutions, and we manage the notional amount of contracts entered into with any one counterparty. We do not enter into derivative financial instruments for speculative or trading purposes. Other than the risk associated with the financial condition of the counterparties, our maximum exposure related to foreign currency forward and option contracts is limited to the premiums paid. We offer both recourse and nonrecourse lease financing arrangements to our customers. Under the terms of recourse leases, which are generally three years or less, we remain liable for the aggregate unpaid remaining lease payments to the third-party leasing company in the event that any customers were to default. We initially defer 100% of the recourse lease receivable and recognize revenue over the term of the lease as the lease payments become due. As of April 30, 2005, and 2004, the maximum recourse exposure under such leases totaled approximately $7,047 and $6,755, respectively. Under the terms of the nonrecourse leases we do not have any continuing obligations or liabilities. To date, we have not experienced significant losses under this lease financing program. 54 Table of Contents We have entered into indemnification agreements with third parties in the ordinary course of business. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by the third party due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with FASB, Interpretation 45, of FIN 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. See Guarantees in footnote 14 for further discussion of these indemnification agreements. As of April 30, 2005, except for operating leases and other contractual obligations outlined under the Contractual Cash Obligations table, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets, or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. We also do not have any majority-owned subsidiaries that are not included in the consolidated financial statements. Additionally, we do not have any interest in or relationship with, any special purpose entities. Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements Key factors affecting our cash flows include our ability to effectively manage our working capital, in particular, accounts receivable and inventories and future demand for our products and related pricing. We expect to incur higher capital expenditures in the near future to expand our operations. We will from time to time acquire products and businesses complementary to our business. In the future, we may continue to repurchase our common stock, which would reduce cash, cash equivalents, and/or short-term investments available to fund future operations and meet other liquidity requirements. Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash generated from operations will satisfy our working capital needs, capital expenditures, stock repurchases, contractual obligations, and other liquidity requirements associated with our operations through at least the next 12 months. 
