CIK: 1002047
Company Name: NETWORK APPLIANCE INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-06-26


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the financial statements and the related notes set forth under Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. The following discussion also contains trend information and other forward looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. The Risk Factors set forth in Item 1. Business are hereby incorporated into the discussion by reference. Overview Enterprises are generating vast quantities of data. We are experiencing a worldwide data explosion, driven by rapid growth of broadband Internet access, the proliferation of data devices, and the need to protect critical data through replication, the digital footprints of everyday life are growing exponentially. As the volume of data grows, so does the complexity of data storage and management. Data ownership and the burdens of managing data continue to challenge our enterprise customers. Data growth, greater global demands on data access, more complex legal requirements, increasing consequences for data outages, and greater data longevity all contribute to the growing burden of responsibility on IT professionals. In response, CIOs and IT professionals are looking for solutions to help simplify data storage, IT administration, improve the capabilities of storage systems and reduce total costs of ownership. Companies are migrating toward modular, unified storage systems away from large, fixed, expensive, frame-class arrays and inefficient direct-attached storage. There is a growing trend toward consolidating storage and serving a variety of applications from a unified storage pool. We believe that our strategic investments are targeted at some of the strongest growth areas of the storage market, such as modular storage, archive and compliance, data protection, data classification, data discovery, data migration, data permanence, data security and privacy, iSCSI, and grid computing. However, if any storage market 35 Table of Contents trends and emerging standards on which we are basing our assumptions do not materialize as anticipated, our business could be materially adversely affected. In fiscal 2007, despite continuous downward pricing pressures and competitive environments, our revenue continued to grow faster than that of our competitors. We expect to continue to experience price declines per petabyte for our hardware products, which may have an adverse impact on our future gross margins if not offset by a product mix with higher software content and higher average selling prices associated with new products. At the same time, we also expect our future gross margins may be negatively affected by factors such as global service investment cost, competition, indirect sales including OEM, and high disk content, partially offset by new product introductions and add-on software mix. While we reported solid fiscal 2007 results with a 36% annual revenue growth, we were not immune to the macroeconomic spending slowdown in the U.S. Our fourth quarter fiscal 2007 bookings were back-end loaded and finished lower than our forecast. In addition, in the last two weeks of the fourth quarter in fiscal 2007, we experienced a shift in the mix of our bookings toward more deferred elements. As a result, we did not build our normal levels of non-deferred backlog at the end of the fourth quarter, which will impact the first quarter of fiscal 2008. Without the benefit of normal backlog, we do not expect our usual level of growth in first quarter revenue, and as a result, our expense levels as a percentage of our revenue will be above our targeted business model. We will slow our rate of hiring and investment spending in order to return to our targeted business model. Given the lack of growth in our non-deferred backlog, we lowered our forecasts for the first quarter of fiscal 2008 in revenues, operating margins and earnings. Although we are faced with a first quarter that does not have the benefit of typical backlog levels, we believe our business fundamentals remain intact. We remain confident in the competitiveness of our products and in our ability to grow our business over the long term. We continue to make progress across many areas of the organization, including broadening and enhancing our enterprise solutions, supporting our channel/partners, and deepening our professional services coverage. We believe our products continue to offer the best price-performance value in the industry, and we further extended our ability to help customers do more with less with new product introductions. Fiscal 2007 Highlights Our fiscal 2007 revenue grew year over year, and the increase was across all major products categories and geographies. The net increase in revenues was attributable to increased software licenses, software upgrade and maintenance arrangements, increased service revenue, an expanded portfolio with new products and solutions for the enterprise customers, and was partially offset by lower cost-per-megabyte disks, and a decline in shipments and lower average selling prices of our older generation products. Some of the key fiscal 2007 highlights included: Increased our penetration into enterprise data centers and enhanced data management and data protection solutions. From a product perspective, we continued to enhance our data management and data protection portfolios with a key acquisition and several product introductions. We extended our data center portfolio with several additions including new midrange and high-end platforms, broader Fibre Channel storage area network capabilities, significant enhancements in the NetApp Manageability Software Family, and new professional services, all aimed at making enterprise data center management easier for customers who demand high-performance SAN solutions and increased application uptime to meet their business needs. We anticipate the SAN competitiveness of our new midrange, along with the strength of our high-end SAN-configured systems, to continue to contribute to an increase in the block-based protocols component of our business. We also continued to gain momentum in the SAN market while maintaining market leadership in both network-attached storage and iSCSI. Extended our channel/partner opportunities. We continued to make progress in penetrating and expanding our business in enterprise data centers with mission-critical partners. Our fiscal 2007 channel mix demonstrated increased expansion through our partner programs, with approximately 59.6% of our business coming through indirect channels and the remaining 40.4% coming through direct sales. Higher growth rates in our indirect channels demonstrated our increasing leverage, giving us broader market reach and increasing enterprise penetration. 36 Table of Contents Expanded our global services and support. It is an element of our strategy to expand and offer a global, comprehensive, end-to-end suite of world-class service and support solutions designed to help our customers meet their goals of simplifying their storage solutions. We increased our business with our top enterprise customers, who typically purchase more complete and longer-term service packages. The growth in service revenue in fiscal 2007 was also driven by increases in professional services. We plan to continue to invest in our global services and support and believe that such investments will help accelerate the adoption rate of our technology. We cannot assure you that service revenue will continue to grow at previous rates. Broadened our total addressable market and extended our product lines into adjacent spaces. We have brought a more comprehensive set of products to the market place with the new high-end offering our next-generation scale-out operating system with enhanced storage grid functionality, the disk-to-disk backup solution in the VTL space, and our entry into the small to medium-sized business market. We also continued to broaden our addressable market by increasing our focus on the V-Series product line, which uses virtualization to let customers take advantage of the management simplicity of NetApp Data ONTAP in front of their storage from other vendors. Our acquisition of Topio in December 2006 will also help us expand our heterogeneous data protection portfolio as part of our plan to broaden our total addressable market. Fiscal 2007 Financial Performance Our revenues for fiscal 2007 were $2.8 billion, a 35.7% increase over the same period a year ago. Our revenues for fiscal 2006 were $2.1 billion, a 29.3% increase compared to revenues of $1.6 billion in fiscal 2005. Our revenue growth was driven by the adoption of our products and solutions targeted at the areas of fastest growth in storage, secondary storage for compliance applications, and our broadened NetApp storage solutions that simplify data management. Our overall gross margins were 60.8%, 60.8%, and 61.0% in fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The gross margins remained relatively flat for both fiscal 2007 and 2006, reflecting increased software upgrade and maintenance arrangements and improved service margins, offset by lower margins from our OEM business. The slight decline in our overall gross margins for fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 was primarily due to a shift in revenue mix toward services, with an increase in our OEM business partially offset by improved service gross margins. In fiscal 2007, we generated $864.5 million of cash from operating activities as compared to $554.3 million in fiscal 2006. As of April 27, 2007, our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments decreased slightly to $1,308.8 million, compared to $1,322.9 million as of April 28, 2006. This decrease was due primarily to $805.7 million used to repurchase our common stock and net cash paid of $131.2 million in connection with the Topio acquisition, partially offset by $864.5 million generated from operations and $23.9 million received from the sale of certain NetCache assets. Our deferred revenue balance increased to $1,103.0 million in fiscal 2007 from $681.5 million reported in fiscal 2006, due to higher software upgrade and maintenance arrangements and service arrangements attributable to our continuing shift toward larger enterprise customers who tend to purchase more comprehensive and longer term arrangements. Capital purchases of plant, property, and equipment for fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005 were $165.8 million, $132.9 million, and $93.6 million, respectively, reflecting continued worldwide capital investment to meet our business growth. Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of such statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements. Our estimates are based on historical experience and other assumptions that we consider to be appropriate in the circumstances. However, actual future results may vary from our estimates. 37 Table of Contents We believe that the following accounting policies are critical as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission, in that they are both highly important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require difficult management judgments and assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain. We also have other important policies, including those related to derivative instruments and concentration of credit risk. However, these policies do not meet the definition of critical accounting policies because they do not generally require us to make estimates or judgments that are difficult or subjective. These policies are discussed in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements accompanying this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the accounting policies described below are the ones that most frequently require us to make estimates and judgments and therefore are critical to the understanding of our results of operations: Revenue recognition and allowances Valuation of goodwill and intangibles Accounting for income taxes Inventory write-downs Restructuring accruals Impairment losses on investments Accounting for stock-based compensation Loss contingencies Revenue Recognition and Allowances We apply the provisions of Statement of Position ( SOP ) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition (SOP No. 97-2), and related interpretations to our product sales, both hardware and software, because our software is essential to the performance of our hardware. We recognize revenue when: Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists: It is our customary practice to have a purchase order and/or contract prior to recognizing revenue on an arrangement from our end users, customers, value-added resellers, or distributors. Delivery has occurred: Our product is physically delivered to our customers, generally with standard transfer terms such as FOB origin. We typically do not allow for restocking rights with any of our value-added resellers or distributors. Products shipped with acceptance criteria or return rights are not recognized as revenue until all criteria are achieved. If undelivered products or services exist that are essential to the functionality of the delivered product in an arrangement, delivery is not considered to have occurred. The fee is fixed or determinable: Arrangements with payment terms extending beyond our standard terms, conditions and practices are not considered to be fixed or determinable. Revenue from such arrangements is recognized as the fees become due and payable. We typically do not allow for price-protection rights with any of our value-added resellers or distributors. Collection is probable: Probability of collection is assessed on a customer-by-customer basis. Customers are subjected to a credit review process that evaluates the customers financial position and ultimately their ability to pay. If it is determined at the outset of an arrangement that collection is not probable based upon our review process, revenue is recognized upon cash receipt. Our multiple element arrangements include our systems and generally may also include one or more of the following undelivered software-related elements: software upgrade and maintenance arrangements, premium hardware maintenance, and storage review services. Our software upgrade and maintenance arrangements entitle our customers to receive unspecified product upgrades and enhancements on a when-and-if-available basis, bug fixes, and patch releases. Premium hardware maintenance services include contracts for technical support and minimum response times. Revenues from software upgrade and maintenance arrangements, premium hardware maintenance services and storage review services are recognized ratably over the contractual term, generally from 38 Table of Contents one to three years. Standard hardware warranty costs are considered an obligation under SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies and expensed as a cost of service when revenue is recognized. We also offer extended service contracts (which extend our standard parts warranty and may include premium hardware maintenance) at the end of the warranty term; revenues from these contracts are recognized ratably over the contract term. We typically sell technical consulting services separately from any of our other revenue elements, either on a time and materials basis or for fixed price standard projects; we recognize revenue for these services as they are performed. Revenue from hardware installation services is recognized at the time of delivery and any remaining costs are accrued, as the remaining undelivered services are considered to be inconsequential and perfunctory. For arrangements with multiple elements, we recognize as revenue the difference between the total arrangement price and the greater of fair value or stated price for any undelivered elements ( the residual method ). For our undelivered software-related elements, we apply the provisions of SOP No. 97-2 and determine fair value of these undelivered elements based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ), which for us consists of the prices charged when these services are sold separately either alone, in the case of software upgrade and maintenance arrangements, or as a bundled element which always includes software upgrade and maintenance arrangements and premium hardware maintenance, and may also include storage review services. To determine the fair value of these elements, we analyze both the selling prices when elements are sold separately as well as the concentrations of those prices. We believe those concentrations have been sufficient to enable us to establish VSOE of fair value for the undelivered elements. If VSOE cannot be obtained to establish fair value of the undelivered elements, paragraph 12 of SOP 97-2 would require that revenue from the entire arrangement be initially deferred and recognized ratably over the period these elements are delivered. For income statement presentation purposes, once fair value has been determined for our undelivered bundled elements, we allocate revenue first to software upgrade and maintenance arrangements based on VSOE of its separate fair value, and then the residual is allocated to other service revenues. We record reductions to revenue for estimated sales returns at the time of shipment. Sales returns are estimated based on historical sales returns, current trends, and our expectations regarding future experience. We monitor and analyze the accuracy of sales returns estimates by reviewing actual returns and adjust them for future expectations to determine the adequacy of our current and future reserve needs. Our reserve levels have been sufficient to cover actual returns and have not required material changes in subsequent periods. While we currently have no expectations for significant changes to these reserves, if actual future returns and allowances differ from past experience, additional allowances may be required. We also maintain a separate allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses based on our assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and the aging of the accounts receivable. We analyze accounts receivable and historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer solvency, current economic and geographic trends, and changes in customer payment terms and practices when evaluating the adequacy of current and future allowance. In circumstances where we are aware of a specific customer inability to meet its financial obligations to us, a specific allowance for bad debt is estimated and recorded, which reduces the recognized receivable to the estimated amount we believe will ultimately be collected. We monitor and analyze the accuracy of allowance for doubtful accounts estimate by reviewing past collectibility and adjust it for future expectations to determine the adequacy of our current and future allowance. Our reserve levels have generally been sufficient to cover credit losses. Our allowance for doubtful accounts as of April 27, 2007 was $2.6 million, compared to $2.4 million as of April 28, 2006. During the year ended April 28, 2006, we reduced our reserve by $1.5 million due to overall improvement in our collections history. However, if the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles Identifiable intangible assets are amortized over time, while in-process research and development is recorded as a charge on the date of acquisition and goodwill is capitalized, subject to periodic review for impairment. Accordingly, the allocation of the acquisition cost to identifiable intangible assets has a significant impact on our future operating results. The allocation process requires extensive use of estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets. Should conditions be different than 39 Table of Contents management current assessment, material write-downs of the fair value of intangible assets may be required. We periodically review the estimated remaining useful lives of our other intangible assets. In addition, a reduction in the estimate of remaining useful life could result in accelerated amortization expense or a write-down in future periods. As such, any future write-downs of these assets would adversely affect our gross and operating margins. We currently do not foresee changes to useful lives or write-downs to these assets. Under our accounting policy we perform an annual review in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, or more often if indicators of impairment exist. Triggering events for impairment reviews may be indicators such as adverse industry or economic trends, restructuring actions, lower projections of profitability, or a sustained decline in our market capitalization. Evaluations of possible impairment and, if applicable, adjustments to carrying values require us to estimate, among other factors, future cash flows, useful lives, and fair market values of our reporting units and assets. When we conduct our evaluation of goodwill, the fair value of goodwill is assessed using valuation techniques that require significant management judgment. Should conditions be different from management last assessment, significant write-downs of goodwill may be required. In fiscal 2007 we performed such evaluation and found no impairment. However, any future write-downs of goodwill would adversely affect our operating margins. As of April 27, 2007, our assets included $601.1 million in goodwill. See Note 14, Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets, to our Consolidated Financial Statements. During fiscal 2007, we recorded goodwill of $114.7 million in connection with our Topio acquisition and a reduction of goodwill for $1.2 million in connection with the divestiture of certain NetCache assets. Accounting for Income Taxes The determination of our tax provision is subject to judgments and estimates due to the complexity of the tax law that we are subject to in several tax jurisdictions. Earnings derived from our international business are generally taxed at rates that are lower than U.S. rates, resulting in a lower effective tax rate than the U.S. statutory tax rate of 35.0%. The ability to maintain our current effective tax rate is contingent upon existing tax laws in both the U.S. and the respective countries in which our international subsidiaries are located. Future changes in domestic or international tax laws could affect the continued realization of the tax benefits we are currently receiving. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our international business or a change in the mix of international business among particular tax jurisdictions could increase our overall effective tax rate. We account for income taxes in accordance with SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. SFAS No. 109 requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities be recognized for the effect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. SFAS No. 109 also requires that deferred tax assets be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have provided a valuation allowance of $21.0 million as of April 27, 2007, compared to $431.2 million as of April 28, 2006 on certain of our deferred tax assets. We adopted SFAS No. 123R effective the beginning of our fiscal year ended April 27, 2007. Under SFAS No. 123R, tax attributes related to the exercise of employee stock options should not be realized until they result in a reduction of taxes payable. Pursuant to Footnote 82 of SFAS No. 123R, on a prospective basis we no longer include unrealized stock option attributes as components of our gross deferred tax assets and corresponding valuation allowance disclosures. The tax effected amounts of gross unrealized net operating loss and business tax credit carryforwards, and their corresponding valuation allowance excluded under Footnote 82 for the year ended April 27, 2007 are $363.3 million. The valuation allowance at April 28, 2006 related to net operating loss carryforwards, conditional royalty carryforwards, and tax credit carryforwards attributable to the exercise of employee stock options. We are currently undergoing federal income tax audits in the U.S. and several foreign tax jurisdictions. The rights to some of our intellectual property ( IP ) are owned by certain of our foreign subsidiaries, and payments are made between foreign and U.S. tax jurisdictions relating to the use of this IP. Recently, some other companies have had their foreign IP arrangements challenged as part of an examination. Our management does not believe, based upon information currently known to us that the final resolution of any of our audits will have a material adverse effect upon our consolidated financial position and the results of operations and cash flows. However, if upon the conclusion of these audits the ultimate determination of our taxes owed in any of these tax jurisdictions is for an 40 Table of Contents amount in excess of the tax provision we have recorded or reserved for, our overall effective tax rate may be adversely impacted in the period of adjustment. In July 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued FASB Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 (FIN No. 48). FIN No. 48 prescribes a comprehensive model for how a company should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in its financial statements uncertain tax positions that the Company has taken or expects to take on a tax return (including a decision whether to file or not to file a return in a particular jurisdiction). FIN No. 48 is applicable to all uncertain tax positions for taxes accounted for under FASB Statement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes (SFAS No. 109), and substantially changes the applicable accounting model. We are required to adopt FIN No. 48 for our fiscal year beginning April 28, 2007. We are currently evaluating the effect that the adoption of FIN No. 48 will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. Inventory Write-Downs Our net inventory balance was $54.9 million as of April 27, 2007, compared to $64.5 million as of April 28, 2006. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out basis) or market. We perform an in-depth excess and obsolete analysis of our inventory based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. We adjust the inventory value based on estimated excess and obsolete inventories determined primarily by future demand forecasts. Although we strive for accuracy in our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and commitments and on our reported results. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected, additional write-downs and other charges against earnings may be required. If actual market conditions are more favorable, we may realize higher gross margins in the period when the written-down inventory is sold. During the past few years, our inventory reserves have generally been sufficient to cover excess and obsolete exposure and have not required material changes in subsequent periods. We record purchase commitment liabilities with our contract manufacturers and suppliers as a result of changes in demand forecasts or as we transition our products. As of April 27, 2007 and April 28, 2006, we did not have purchase commitment liabilities under such arrangements. We engage in extensive, ongoing product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers. We also provide for the estimated cost of known product failures based on known quality issues when they arise. Should actual cost of product failure differ from our estimates, revisions to the estimated liability would be required. We are subject to a variety of federal, state, local, and foreign environmental regulations relating to the use, storage, discharge, and disposal of hazardous chemicals used during our manufacturing process or requiring design changes or recycling of products we manufacture. We will continue to monitor our environmental compliance and could incur higher costs, including additional reserves for excess component inventory. Restructuring Accruals In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in IT spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and a consolidation of our facilities. In fiscal 2006, we implemented the third restructuring plan related to the move of our global service center operations. In determining restructuring charges, we analyze our future business requirements in order to properly align and manage our business commensurate with our future revenue levels. Our restructuring costs, and any resulting accruals, involve significant estimates made by management using the best information available at the time the estimates are made, some of which may be provided by third parties. In recording severance reserves, we accrue a liability when the following conditions have been met: employees rights to receive compensation are attributable to employees services already rendered, the obligation relates to rights that vest or accumulate, payment of the compensation is probable, and the amount can be reasonably estimated. In recording the facilities lease restructuring reserve, we make various assumptions, including the time period over 41 Table of Contents which the facilities are expected to be vacant, expected sublease terms, expected sublease rates, anticipated future operating expenses, and expected future use of the facilities. Our estimates involve a number of risks and uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control, including future real estate market conditions and our ability to successfully enter into subleases or lease termination agreements with terms as favorable as those assumed when arriving at our estimates. We regularly evaluate a number of factors to determine the appropriateness and reasonableness of our restructuring and lease loss accruals, including the various assumptions noted above. If actual results differ significantly from our estimates, we may be required to adjust our restructuring and lease loss accruals in the future. We estimated our facility and severance restructuring reserve to be $2.1 million as of April 27, 2007. Our fiscal 2006 facility restructuring reserve included a $1.0 million reduction related to the execution of a new sublease agreement for our Tewksbury facility net of related costs. Impairment Losses on Investments As of April 27, 2007, our short-term investments have been classified as available-for-sale and are carried at fair value. There have been no significant declines in fair value of investments that are considered to be other-than-temporary for any of the three years in the period ended April 27, 2007. The fair value of our available-for-sale investments reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets were $935.7 million and $1,102.8 million as of April 27, 2007 and April 28, 2006, respectively. Included in these balances were short-term restricted investments of $116.0 million, as of April 27, 2007, and short-term and long-term restricted investments of $136.7 million and $104.4 million, respectively, as of April 28, 2006. In addition, our available-for-sale investments also included an investment in a publicly held company of $12.9 million, which was based on quoted market prices on April 27, 2007. We had no investments in publicly held companies as of April 28, 2006. We have not identified any of these declines to be other-than-temporary, as market declines of our investments have been caused by interest rate changes and were not due to credit-worthiness. Because we have the ability and intent to hold these investments until maturity, we would not expect any significant decline in value of our investments caused by market interest rate changes. All of our available-for-sale investments and nonmarketable securities are subject to a periodic impairment review. Investments are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value is judged to be other-than-temporary. This determination requires significant judgment. For publicly traded investments, impairment is determined based upon the specific facts and circumstances present at the time, including factors such as current economic and market conditions, the credit rating of the security issuer, the length of time an investment fair value has been below our carrying value, and our ability and intent to hold investments to maturity. If an investment decline in fair value, caused by factors other than changes in interest rates, is deemed to be other-than-temporary, we would reduce its carrying value to its estimated fair value, as determined based on quoted market prices or liquidation values. For investments in publicly held companies, we recognize an impairment charge when the declines in the fair values of our investments in these companies are below their cost basis are judged to be other-than-temporary. The ultimate value realized on these investments in publicly held companies is subject to market price volatility until they are sold. We have no impairment losses on our available-for-sale investments for fiscal 2007 and 2006. For nonmarketable securities, the impairment analysis requires the identification of events or circumstances that would likely have a significant adverse effect on the fair value of the investment, including, revenue and earnings trends, overall business prospects, limited capital resources, limited prospects of receiving additional financing, limited prospects for liquidity of the related securities, and general market conditions in the investees industry. Our investments in privately-held companies were $8.9 million and $11.0 million as of April 27, 2007 and April 28, 2006, respectively. During fiscal 2007, we recorded impairment of $2.1 million for investments in privately-held companies. We had no impairment losses on our investments in privately-held companies in fiscal 2006. Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation We adopted SFAS No. 123R, Share-Based Payment , using the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our employee stock options. The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes 42 Table of Contents option pricing model and is not remeasured as a result of subsequent stock price fluctuations. Option pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility, expected life, and forfeiture rate. We have chosen to base our estimate of future volatility using the implied volatility of traded options to purchase the Company common stock as permitted by Staff Accounting Bulletin ( SAB ) No. 107. As of April 29, 2006, the contractual life of our stock options was shortened to seven years from ten years for options issued on or after this date, and to the extent that the shorter life changes employees exercise behavior, it may change the expected term of an option going forward. SFAS No. 123R requires us to use estimated forfeitures, and therefore the adoption of SFAS No. 123R could have a material impact on the timing of and, based on the accuracy of estimates of future actual forfeitures, the amount of stock-based compensation expense. Any changes in these highly subjective assumptions may significantly impact the stock-based compensation expense for the future. Likewise, the shortening of the contractual life of our options could change the estimated exercise behavior in a manner other than currently expected. Loss Contingencies We are subject to the possibility of various loss contingencies arising in the course of business. We consider the likelihood of the loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset has been impaired and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. In fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005, we did not identify or accrue for any loss contingencies. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted. New Accounting Standards In February 2007, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Including an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 115. SFAS No. 159 allows measurement at fair value of eligible financial assets and liabilities that are not otherwise measured at fair value. If the fair value option for an eligible item is elected, unrealized gains and losses for that item shall be reported in current earnings at each subsequent reporting date. SFAS No. 159 also establishes presentation and disclosure requirements designed to draw comparison between the different measurement attributes the company elects for similar types of assets and liabilities. This statement is effective for our fiscal year beginning April 27, 2008. We are currently evaluating the effect, if any, that the adoption of SFAS No. 159 will have on our consolidated financial statements In September, 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 157, Fair Value Measurements. SFAS No. 157 provides a framework for measuring fair value, clarifies the definition of fair value, and expands disclosures regarding fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 does not require any new fair value measurements and eliminates inconsistencies in guidance found in various prior accounting pronouncements. We are required to adopt SFAS No. 157 for our fiscal year beginning April 27, 2008. We are currently evaluating the effect that the adoption of SFAS No. 157 will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition, but do not expect it to have a material impact. In September 2006, the SEC issued Staff Accounting Bulletin ( SAB ) No. 108, Considering the Effects of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Misstatements in Current Year Financial Statements. SAB No. 108 provides guidance on how prior year misstatements should be taken into consideration when quantifying misstatements in current year financial statements for purposes of determining whether the current year financial statements are materially misstated. SAB No. 108 is effective for fiscal years ending on or after November 15, 2006. We adopted SAB 108 in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007 and its adoption did not have a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition. In July 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued FASB Interpretation ( FIN ) No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 . FIN No. 48 prescribes a comprehensive model for how a company should recognize, measure, present, and disclose in its financial statements uncertain tax positions that the Company has taken or expects to take on a tax return (including a decision whether to file or not to file a return in a particular jurisdiction). FIN No. 48 is applicable to all uncertain tax 43 Table of Contents positions for taxes accounted for under FASB Statement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes (SFAS No. 109), and substantially changes the applicable accounting model. We are required to adopt FIN No. 48 for our fiscal year beginning April 28, 2007. We are currently evaluating the effect that the adoption of FIN No. 48 will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. Results of Operations The following table sets forth certain consolidated statements of income data as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated: Years Ended April 27, April 28, April 29, 2007 2006 2005 Revenues: Product 74.4 % 76.3 % 78.9 % Software upgrade and maintenance arrangements 12.2 11.6 10.6 Service 13.4 12.1 10.5 100.0 100.0 100.0 Cost of Revenues: Cost of product 29.0 29.8 30.2 Cost of software upgrade and maintenance arrangements 0.4 0.4 0.3 Cost of service 9.8 9.0 8.5 Gross Profit 60.8 60.8 61.0 Operating Expenses: Sales and marketing 32.0 28.9 29.2 Research and development 13.7 12.2 11.0 General and administrative 5.3 4.6 4.9 Acquired in process research and development 0.2 Restructuring charges (recoveries) Gain on sale of assets (0.9 ) Total Operating Expenses 50.1 45.9 45.1 Income From Operations 10.7 14.9 15.9 Other Income (Expenses), Net: Interest income 2.5 2.1 1.5 Interest expense (0.4 ) (0.1 ) Net loss on investments (0.1 ) Other income (expenses), net 0.1 0.1 (0.1 ) Total Other Income, Net 2.1 2.1 1.4 Income Before Income Taxes 12.8 17.0 17.3 Provision for Income Taxes 2.2 4.1 3.2 Net Income 10.6 % 12.9 % 14.1 % Fiscal 2007 Compared to Fiscal 2006 Product Revenues Product revenues increased by 32.2% to $2,085.9 million in fiscal 2007, from $1,577.4 million in fiscal 2006. Product revenues growth was across all geographies. 44 Table of Contents Product revenues were favorably affected by the following factors: Increased revenues from our current product portfolio. Product revenue grew $686.9 million in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, with a $669.7 million increase due to unit volume and an increase of $17.2 million due to price and configuration on existing products. Price changes, volumes, and product model mix can have an effect on changes in product revenues; the impact on these forces is significantly affected by the configuration of systems shipped. Units shipped of the FAS3000 enterprise storage systems increased 85.5% for fiscal 2007, compared to the prior fiscal year. The average capacity on revenue units of the FAS3000 series increased 180.5% for fiscal 2007, compared to the prior fiscal year. Increased sales through indirect channels in absolute dollars, including sales through our resellers, distributors, and OEM partners, represented 59.6% and 55.5% of total revenues for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Our petabytes shipped increased 107.7% year over year to a record 536 petabytes due to increased enterprise penetration in primary and secondary storage, i.e., enterprise data centers, data protection, disaster recovery, archival, and compliance requirements. This increase in petabytes shipped was attributable to an increase in petabytes from 500 gigabyte ATA drives. ATA drives accounted for 55.7% of our total petabytes shipped in fiscal 2007 compared to 47.1% in fiscal 2006. Fibre Channel petabytes were up 148.3% year over year, to 44.3% of our total shipped. Product revenues were negatively affected by the following factors: Price declines per petabyte for our hardware products as disks are a significant component of our storage systems. As performance has improved on our devices, the related price we can charge per petabyte of storage has decreased as well. Revenues for our older products declined by $376.3 million in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to a 72.0% and a 63.3% decrease in revenue generated by FAS900 series systems and NearStore R200 systems, respectively. In addition, revenue also declined by $2.2 million in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006 due to products that we no longer ship, including our NetCache products. Our systems are highly configurable to respond to customer requirements in the open systems storage markets that we serve. As a result, the wide variation in customized configuration can significantly impact revenue, cost of revenues, and gross margin performance. Price changes, volumes, and product model mix can have an effect on changes in product revenues; the impact on these forces is significantly affected by the configuration of systems shipped. Software Upgrade and Maintenance Arrangements Revenues Software upgrade and maintenance arrangements revenues increased by 42.7% to $341.3 million in fiscal 2007, from $239.1 million in fiscal 2006 due primarily to a larger installed base of customers who have purchased or renewed software upgrade and maintenance arrangements, and an increased number of new enterprise customers. Software upgrade and maintenance arrangements revenues represented 12.2% and 11.6% of total revenues for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Service Revenues Service revenues, which include hardware support, professional services, and educational services, increased by 50.9% to $377.1 million in fiscal 2007, from $249.9 million in fiscal 2006. The increase in absolute dollars was due to the following factors: Professional service revenue increased by 56.4% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006, due to an increasing number of enterprise customers, which typically have extremely complex IT environments and require professional services to integrate our solution into their environments. Service maintenance contracts increased by 48.3% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006, due to a growing installed base, resulting in new customer support contracts in addition to support contract renewals by existing customers. 45 Table of Contents While it is an element of our strategy to expand and offer more comprehensive global enterprise support and service solutions, we cannot assure you that service revenue will grow at the current rate in fiscal 2008 or beyond. A large portion of our service revenues is deferred and, in most cases, recognized ratably over the service obligation periods, which are typically one to three years. Service revenues represented 13.4% and 12.1% of total revenues for fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively. International total revenues International total revenues (including U.S. exports) increased by 32.9% in fiscal year 2007 compared to fiscal 2006. International total revenues were $1,254.0 million, or 44.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2007, compared to $943.8 million, or 45.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2006. The increase in international sales was primarily driven by the same factors outlined under the Total Revenue discussion, as compared to the same periods in the prior fiscal year. We cannot assure you that we will be able to maintain or increase international revenues in fiscal 2008. Product Gross Margins Product gross margins were 60.9% for both fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006. Product gross margins for both fiscal 2007 and 2006 were affected by the following factors: SFAS 123R stock compensation expenses recorded in fiscal 2007 and none in fiscal 2006 Sales price reductions due to competitive pricing pressure and selective pricing discounts Increased sales through certain indirect channels, which generate lower gross margins than our direct sales in certain geographic regions Higher disk content with an expanded storage capacity for the higher-end storage systems, as resale of disk drives generates lower gross margins We expect higher disk content associated with high-end storage systems will negatively affect our gross margins in the future if not offset by increases in software revenue and new higher-margin products. Stock-based compensation expense included in cost of product revenues was $3.7 million for fiscal 2007. Amortization of existing technology included in cost of product revenues was $17.6 million and $11.8 million for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Estimated future amortization of existing technology to cost of product revenues will be $21.1 million for fiscal year 2008, $20.4 million for fiscal year 2009, $15.9 million for fiscal year 2010, $6.3 million for fiscal year 2011, and none thereafter. Software Upgrade and Maintenance Arrangements Gross Margins Software upgrade and maintenance arrangements gross margins was 97.0% and 96.5% for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively, due primarily to improved productivity and a larger installed base renewals, upgrades, and an increasing number of new enterprise customers. Service Gross Margins Service gross margins increased to 27.4% in fiscal 2007 compared to 25.9% in fiscal 2006. Cost of service revenue increased by 47.9% to $273.6 million in fiscal 2007, from $185.0 million in fiscal 2006. Stock-based compensation expense of $10.1 million was included in the cost of service revenue for fiscal 2007. The change in service gross margins year over year was primarily impacted by an increase in services revenue, improved productivity, and continued spending in our service infrastructure to support our increasing enterprise customer base. This spending included additional professional support engineers, increased support center activities, and global service partnership programs. Service gross margins will typically be impacted by factors such as timing of technical support service initiations and renewals and additional investments in our customer support infrastructure. In fiscal 2008, we expect service margins to experience some variability over time as we continue to build out our service capability and capacity to support our growing enterprise customers and new products. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, advertising and promotional expenses, stock-based compensation expense, and certain customer service and support costs. Sales and marketing expenses increased 49.5% to $895.8 million for fiscal 2007, from $599.1 million for fiscal 2006. These expenses were 32.0% and 28.9% of total revenues for fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006, respectively. The 46 Table of Contents increase in absolute dollars was attributed to increased commission expenses resulting from increased revenues, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, higher partner program expenses, the continued worldwide investment in our sales and global service organizations associated with selling complete enterprise solutions, and stock-based compensation expenses recognized under adoption of SFAS No. 123R. The stock-based compensation expenses included in sales and marketing expenses for fiscal 2007 was $71.7 million compared to $4.0 million in fiscal 2006. The increase in stock-based compensation was due to adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Amortization of acquisitions-related trademarks/tradenames and customer contracts and relationships included in sales and marketing expenses was $2.9 million and $2.1 million for fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006, respectively. Based on identified intangibles related to our acquisitions recorded at April 27, 2007, estimated future amortization such as trademarks and customer relationships included in sales and marketing expenses will be $3.9 million for fiscal 2008, $3.8 million for fiscal 2009, $3.7 million for fiscal 2010, $2.7 million for fiscal 2011, $1.6 million for fiscal 2012, and $0.9 million thereafter. We expect to continue to selectively add sales capacity in an effort to expand domestic and international markets, introduce new products, and establish and expand new distribution channels. We expect to increase our sales and marketing expenses commensurate with future revenue growth. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation, prototype expenses, nonrecurring engineering charges, fees paid to outside consultants, and amortization of capitalized patents. Research and development expenses increased 53.3% to $385.4 million for fiscal 2007 from $251.3 million for fiscal 2006. These expenses represented 13.7% and 12.2% of total revenues for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily a result of increased headcount, ongoing operating impact of the acquisitions, ongoing support of current and future product development and enhancement efforts, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, and stock-based compensation expense recognized under adoption of SFAS No. 123R. For both fiscal 2007 and 2006, no software development costs were capitalized. The stock-based compensation expenses included in research and development expenses for fiscal 2007 was $51.3 million compared to $8.3 million in fiscal 2006. The increase in stock-based compensation was due to adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Included in research and development expenses are capitalized patents amortization of $2.0 million and $2.0 million for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Based on capitalized patents recorded at April 27, 2007, estimated future capitalized patents amortization expenses will be $2.0 million for fiscal year 2008, $0.5 million in fiscal 2009, $0.2 million in fiscal 2010, and none thereafter. We believe that our future performance will depend in large part on our ability to maintain and enhance our current product line, develop new products that achieve market acceptance, maintain technological competitiveness, and meet an expanding range of customer requirements. We expect to continuously support current and future product development and enhancement efforts and to incur prototyping expenses and nonrecurring engineering charges associated with the development of new products and technologies. We intend to continuously broaden our existing product offerings and to introduce new products that expand our solutions portfolio. We believe that our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2008, primarily due to ongoing costs associated with the development of new products and technologies, increased headcount, and the operating impact of potential future acquisitions. General and Administrative General and administrative expenses increased 58.9% to $147.5 million for fiscal 2007, from $92.8 million for fiscal 2006. These expenses represented 5.3% and 4.6% of total revenues for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. This increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability and increased headcount, higher stock-based compensation expense recognized under SFAS No. 123R, and higher legal expenses and professional fees for general corporate matters. We believe that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2008 due to increased general and administrative headcount. The stock-based compensation expenses included in general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2007 was $26.2 million compared to $1.0 million in fiscal 2006. The increase in 47 Table of Contents stock-based compensation was due to adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Amortization of covenants not to compete included in general and administrative expenses was $1.0 million and $2.2 million for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. Based on identified intangibles related to our acquisitions recorded at January 26, 2007, estimated future amortization of covenants not to compete relating to our acquisitions will be $0.2 million for fiscal year 2008, and none thereafter. Restructuring Charges In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in information technology ( IT ) spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and consolidations of our facilities. As of April 27, 2007, we have no outstanding balance in our restructuring liability for the first restructuring. The second restructuring related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to the Sunnyvale headquarters. In fiscal 2006, we implemented a third restructuring plan related to the move of our global services center operations from Sunnyvale to our new flagship support center at our Research Triangle Park facility in North Carolina. Our restructuring estimates are reviewed and revised periodically and may result in a substantial charge or reduction to restructuring expense should different conditions prevail than were anticipated in previous management estimates. Such estimates included various assumptions such as the time period over which the facilities will be vacant, expected sublease terms, and expected sublease rates. In fiscal 2007, we did not record any reduction in restructuring reserve resulting from a change in estimate for our third restructuring plan. In fiscal 2006, we recorded a reduction in restructuring reserve of $1.3 million resulting from the execution of a new sublease agreement for our Tewksbury facility. In fiscal 2006, we also recorded a restructuring charge of $1.1 million, primarily attributed to severance-related amounts and relocation expenses related to the third restructuring plan. Of the reserve balance at April 27, 2007, $0.5 million was included in other accrued liabilities, and the remaining $1.6 million was classified as long-term obligations. The balance of the reserve is expected to be paid by fiscal 2011. The following analysis sets forth the significant components of the restructuring reserve at April 27, 2007 (in thousands): Severance- Related Facility Amounts Total Reserve balance at April 30, 2004 $ 5,208 $ $ 5,208 Cash payments and other (705 ) (705 ) Reserve balance at April 29, 2005 $ 4,503 $ $ 4,503 Restructuring charges 281 859 1,140 Recoveries (1,256 ) (1,256 ) Cash payments and other (862 ) (521 ) (1,383 ) Reserve balance at April 28, 2006 $ 2,666 $ 338 $ 3,004 Recoveries (74 ) (74 ) Cash payments and other (582 ) (264 ) (846 ) Reserve balance at April 27, 2007 $ 2,084 $ $ 2,084 Gain on Sale of Assets We recorded a gain of $25.3 million in fiscal 2007 as a result of the sale of certain assets to Blue Coat Systems, Inc ( Blue Coat ). (see Note 16 of the Consolidated Financial Statements). We recorded revenues of $57.4 million, $71.1 million and $75.5 million from NetCache products for fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005 respectively. The contribution to operating income from these products was not significant. Interest Income Interest income was $68.8 million and $41.5 million for fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in interest income was primarily driven by higher average interest rates on our investment portfolio. We expect interest income to increase compared to fiscal 2008 as a result of our cash and invested balances being reinvested in a higher interest rate portfolio environment. 48 Table of Contents Interest Expense Interest expense was $11.6 million and $1.3 million in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in fiscal 2007 was primarily due to interest incurred in connection with our debt. Net Gain (Loss) on Investments Net gain (loss) on investments included a net write-down of $2.1 million related to the impairment of our investment in privately-held companies in fiscal 2007. Other Income (Expense), Net Other income was $2.8 million for fiscal 2007. Other income for fiscal 2007 included net exchange gains from foreign currency of $2.4 million and other income of $0.4 million. Other income included net exchange gains from foreign currency of $1.7 million for fiscal 2006. We believe that period-to-period changes in foreign exchange gains or losses will continue to be impacted by hedging costs associated with our forward and option activities and forecast variance. Provision for Income Taxes For fiscal 2007, our annual effective tax rate was 17.2% versus 23.9% for fiscal 2006, which included a 6.4% increase to account for the income tax provision of $22.5 million associated with the cash repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings. The decrease to the effective tax rate for fiscal year 2007 is primarily attributable to the absence of this one-time item and the impact of income taxed at lower tax rates in foreign jurisdiction. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2007 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to reductions in the rate derived from a beneficial foreign tax ruling for our principal European subsidiary, the availability of tax credits and the generation of foreign earnings in lower tax jurisdictions, offset partially by an increase in the rate due to the tax effect of stock compensation under SFAS No. 123R. The provision for income taxes for fiscal 2006 included an income tax provision of $22.5 million or $0.06 per share associated with the repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings. This tax raised our 2006 effective tax rate by 6.4% under the one-time incentive created pursuant to Section 965 of the Jobs Act. We will invest these earnings pursuant to an approved Domestic Reinvestment Plan that conforms to the Jobs Act guidelines. The 2006 Tax Relief and Health Care Act was signed into law on December 20, 2006. One of the provisions of this law was the retroactive reinstatement of the research and development credit from January 1, 2006 and its extension through December 31, 2007. The effective tax rates for the fiscal 2007 reflected the benefits attributable to the extension of the research and development tax credit provisions. Fiscal 2006 Compared to Fiscal 2005 Product Revenues Product revenues increased by 25.1% to $1,577.4 million in fiscal 2006, from $1,260.6 million in fiscal 2005. Product revenues growth was across all geographies. This net increase year over year was specifically attributable to increased software licenses, an increase in units shipped, and an increase in demand for data protection and mission-critical storage environments, partially offset by a decline in shipments and lower average selling prices of older generation products, lower cost-per-megabyte disks. Product revenues were favorably affected by the following factors: Increased revenues from our current product portfolio, such as FAS980 and FAS270 storage systems; and introduction of new products, such as FAS3020, FAS3050, and FAS6070 storage systems; V3020 and V3050 storage virtualization systems; NetCache C2300, and C3300 appliances and add-on software Revenue generated from disk-to-disk backup/archival, and security solutions increased by 28.1% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 Increased sales through indirect channels in absolute dollars, including sales through our resellers, distributors, and OEM partners, representing 55.5% and 51.2% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively Product revenues were negatively affected by the following factors: Lower-cost-per-megabyte disks, which are a significant component of our hardware costs. As performance has improved on these devices, the related sales price we can charge per megabyte of storage has decreased as well. Declining average selling prices and unit sales of our older products. 49 Table of Contents The Decru acquisition and the IBM OEM relationship did not have a significant impact on the revenue for fiscal 2006. Software Upgrade and Maintenance Arrangements Revenues Software upgrade and maintenance arrangements revenues increased by 40.9% to $239.1 million in fiscal 2006, from $169.7 million in fiscal 2005 due primarily to a larger installed base renewals, upgrades, and an increasing number of new enterprise customers. Software upgrade and maintenance arrangements revenues represent 11.6% and 10.6% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Service Revenues Service revenues, which include hardware support, professional services, and educational services, increased by 48.9% to $249.9 million in fiscal 2006, from $167.8 million in fiscal 2005. The increase in absolute dollars was due to the following factors: Professional service revenue increased by 49.0% to $89.4 million in fiscal 2006 from $60.0 million in fiscal 2005 due to an increasing number of enterprise customers, which typically have extremely complex IT environments and require professional services to integrate our solution into their environments. A growing installed base resulting in new customer support contracts in addition to support contract renewals by existing customers A large portion of our service revenues is deferred and, in most cases, recognized ratably over the service obligation periods, which are typically one to three years, and are classified as short-term and long-term deferred revenue on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Service revenues represented 12.1% and 10.5% of total revenues for fiscal year 2006 and 2005, respectively. International total revenues International total revenues (including U.S. exports) increased by 23.2% in fiscal year 2006 compared with fiscal 2005. International total revenues were $943.8 million, or 45.7% of total revenues for fiscal year 2006 compared with $765.8 million or 47.9% of total revenues for fiscal 2005. The increase in international sales was primarily a result of revenue growth from our European and Asia Pacific geographies, driven by increased demand for our solutions portfolio, new customers, and higher storage spending in certain geographic regions as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year. Product Gross Margins Product gross margins decreased to 60.9% for fiscal 2006, from 61.7% for fiscal 2005. Amortization of existing technology from acquisitions included in cost of product revenues was $11.8 million and $3.4 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Product gross margins were negatively affected by the following factors: Sales price reductions due to competitive pricing pressure and selective pricing discounts Increased sales through certain indirect channels, which may have lower gross margins than our direct sales in certain geographic regions Sales of relatively lower margin add-on storage shelves and hardware increased by 57.1% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 Product gross margins were favorably affected by the following factors: Favorable product and add-on software mix with software licenses increasing by 32.8% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 Higher average selling prices for our newer products Software Upgrade and Maintenance Arrangements Gross Margins Software upgrade and maintenance arrangements gross margins increased slightly to 96.5% for fiscal 2006, from 97.0% for fiscal 2005 due primarily to improved productivity and a larger installed base renewals, upgrades, and an increasing number of new enterprise customers. 50 Table of Contents Service Gross Margins Service gross margins increased to 25.9% in fiscal 2006 compared to 19.4% in fiscal 2005. Cost of service revenue increased by 36.9% to $185.0 million in fiscal 2006, from $135.2 million in fiscal 2005. The improvement in service gross margins for fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 was primarily due to an increase in services revenue and improved productivity offset by the continued spending in our service infrastructure to support our increasing enterprise customer base. This spending included additional professional support engineers, increased support center activities, and global service partnership programs. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, advertising and promotional expenses, and certain customer service and support costs. Sales and marketing expenses increased 28.0% to $599.1 million for fiscal 2006, from $468.2 million for fiscal 2005. These expenses were 28.9% and 29.2% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was attributed to increased commission expenses resulting from increased revenues, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, higher partner program expenses, and the continued worldwide investment in our sales and global service organizations associated with selling complete enterprise solutions. Compensation expenses related to stock options and restricted stock assumed in acquisitions were $4.0 million and $2.2 million for fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. Amortization of acquisitions-related trademarks/tradenames and customer contracts and relationships included in sales and marketing expenses was $2.1 million and $0.8 million for fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, prototype expenses, nonrecurring engineering charges, fees paid to outside consultants and amortization of capitalized patents. Research and development expenses increased 42.6% to $251.3 million for fiscal 2006 from $176.3 million for fiscal 2005. These expenses represented 12.2% and 11.0% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily a result of increased headcount, ongoing operating impact of the acquisitions, ongoing support of current and future product development and enhancement efforts, and higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability. For both fiscal 2006 and 2005, no software development costs were capitalized. Included in research and development expenses is amortization of acquired patents of $2.0 million and $1.8 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Compensation expenses related to stock options and restricted stock assumed in acquisitions was $8.3 million and $5.2 million for fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. General and Administrative General and administrative expenses increased 19.6% to $92.8 million for fiscal 2006, from $77.6 million for fiscal 2005. These expenses represented 4.6% and 4.9% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. This increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to expenses associated with expanded regulatory requirements, higher legal expenses and professional fees for general corporate matters including patents and higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability. Compensation expenses related to stock options and restricted stock assumed in acquisitions were $1.0 million and $0.7 million for fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. Amortization of acquisitions-related covenants not to compete included in general and administrative expenses was $2.2 million and $5.1 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. In-Process Research and Development We recorded in-process research and development charges of $5.0 million in fiscal 2006 related to the acquisition of Decru. The purchase price of the transaction was allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities based on their estimated fair values as of the date of the acquisition. Approximately $5.0 million was allocated to in-process research and development and charged to operations because the acquired technology had not reached technological feasibility and had no alternative uses. The value was determined by estimating the costs to develop the acquired in-process technology into commercially viable products, estimating the resulting future net cash flows from such projects, and discounting the net cash flows back to their present value. The discount rate included a factor that took into account the uncertainty surrounding the 51 Table of Contents successful development of the acquired in-process technology. These estimates are subject to change, given the uncertainties of the development process, and no assurance can be given that deviations from these estimates will not occur. Research and development costs to bring the products from Decru to technological feasibility are not expected to have a material impact on our future results of operations or financial conditions. Restructuring Charges In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in IT spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and consolidations of our facilities. As of April 28, 2006, we have no outstanding balance in our restructuring liability for the first restructuring. The second restructuring related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to the Sunnyvale headquarters. In the second quarter of fiscal 2006, we implemented a third restructuring plan related to the move of our global services center operations from Sunnyvale to our new flagship support center at our Research Triangle Park facility in North Carolina. In fiscal 2006, we recorded a reduction in restructuring reserve of $1.3 million resulting from the execution of a new sublease agreement for our Tewksbury facility. In fiscal 2006, we recorded a restructuring charge of $1.1 million, primarily attributed to severance-related amounts and relocation expenses related to the third restructuring plan. Of the reserve balance at April 28, 2006, $0.9 million was included in other accrued liabilities, and the remaining $2.1 million was classified as long-term obligations. Interest Income Interest income was $41.5 million and $24.2 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Included in interest income for fiscal 2005 was $1.3 million interest received on a tax refund. The increase in interest income was primarily driven by higher average interest rates on our investment portfolio. Interest Expense Interest expense was $1.3 million and $0.1 million in fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase in fiscal 2006 was primarily due to interest incurred in connection with our debt. Other Income (Expense), Net Other Income (Expense), Net, included net exchange gains from foreign currency transactions of $1.7 million in fiscal 2006, due primarily to forecast variances offset by hedging costs as a result of higher U.S. interest rates compared to other countries. Net exchange losses from foreign currency transactions were $1.6 million in fiscal 2005 as a result of exchange rate volatility, forecast variances and higher hedging costs. Provision for Income Taxes The provision for income taxes for fiscal 2006 included an income tax provision of $22.5 million or $0.06 per share associated with the repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings which occurred during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006 under the one-time incentive created pursuant to Section 965 of the Jobs Act. We will invest these earnings pursuant to an approved Domestic Reinvestment Plan that conforms to the Jobs Act guidelines. For fiscal 2006, we had an effective tax rate of 23.9% to pretax income, which included a 6.4% increase to account for the income tax provision of $22.5 million associated with the cash repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2006 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to a beneficial foreign tax ruling for our principal European subsidiary, the availability of tax credits, and the generation of foreign earnings in lower tax jurisdictions. For fiscal 2005, our effective tax rate was 18.3%. Liquidity and Capital Resources The following sections discuss the effects of changes in our balance sheet and cash flows, contractual obligations and other commercial commitments, stock repurchase program, capital commitments, other sources, and uses of cash flows and tax opportunities on our liquidity and capital resources. Balance Sheet and Other Cash Flows As of April 27, 2007, as compared to April 28, 2006, our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments decreased by $14.1 million to $1,308.8 million. We derive our liquidity and capital resources primarily from our cash flows from operations and from working capital. Working capital decreased by $62.8 million to $1,053.3 million as of April 27, 2007, compared to $1,116.0 million as of April 28, 2006. 52 Table of Contents During fiscal 2007, we generated cash flows from operating activities of $864.5 million, as compared with $554.3 million and $462.1 million for fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. We reported net income of $297.7 million for fiscal 2007, as compared to $266.5 million and $225.8 million in fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. A summary of the significant changes in noncash adjustments affecting net income is as follows: Stock-based compensation expense was $163.0 million in fiscal 2007, compared to $13.3 million and $8.1 million in fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase was the result of adopting SFAS No. 123R. Depreciation expense was $87.4 million, $63.7 million, and $54.5 million in fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase was due to continued capital expansion to meet our business growth. Gain on sale of NetCache to Blue Coat was $25.3 million in fiscal 2007. Amortization of intangibles was $21.4 million, $16.1 million, and $9.3 million in fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase was attributed to the Topio and Decru acquisitions. An increase in net deferred tax assets of $19.5 million in fiscal 2007 compared to a decrease of $1.5 million in fiscal 2006 and decrease of $6.3 million in fiscal 2005, primarily attributable to an increase in deferred revenue relating to higher software upgrade and maintenance arrangements and service revenues. In addition to net income and noncash adjustments in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, the primary factors that impacted the period-to-period change in cash flows relating to operating activities included the following: An increase in deferred revenues of $421.3 million in fiscal 2007, compared to increase in deferred revenue of $233.2 million and $169.4 million in fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively, was due to higher software upgrade and maintenance arrangements and service billings attributable to the increase in larger enterprise customers, as well as renewals of existing maintenance agreements in fiscal 2007. A decrease in income taxes payable in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006 primarily attributable to income taxes payment of the one-time repatriation incentive under the Jobs Act. During fiscal 2007, we remitted $19.6 million of income taxes relating to the foreign dividend repatriation in connection with the filing of our fiscal 2006 federal income tax return. Increased income taxes payable in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005, primarily reflecting the $22.5 million of federal and state tax liability relating to repatriation of accumulated foreign earnings under the Jobs Act and higher profitability in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005. Increase in accounts payable of $36.6 million, $17.4 million and $30.5 million in fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005, respectively, was primarily attributable to elevated purchasing activity required to support our business growth and facilities expansion projects. Accrued compensation and related benefits increased by $43.6 million, $28.4 million and $33.8 million in fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively, reflecting the timing of payroll accruals and payment. Net inventory decreased $9.9 million for fiscal 2007, primarily due to higher inventory at fiscal 2006 year end associated with the new FAS 6000 launch. The increase of $46.2 million in fiscal 2006 was due primarily to ramping up of purchased components in anticipation of revenue growth. The increase of $15.0 million in fiscal 2005 was primarily due to end-of-life buys for certain products. The above factors were partially offset by the effects of: Increase in accounts receivable of $175.2 million in fiscal 2007 was due to higher revenue volume. Increase in accounts receivable of $116.8 million in fiscal 2006 was due primarily to a shipping profile weighted toward the second half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006. Increase of $103.4 million in fiscal 2005 was due to increased sales in fiscal 2005. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, shipment linearity, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax and other payments. 53 Table of Contents Cash Flows from Investing Activities Capital expenditures for fiscal 2007 were $165.8 million as compared to $132.9 million and $93.6 million in fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. We received net proceeds of $60.0 million in fiscal 2007, and used net proceeds of $128.5 million and $266.8 million in fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively, for net purchases/redemptions of short-term investments. We redeemed $127.9 million of restricted investments and its interest income pledged with JP Morgan Chase in fiscal 2007 to repay the Tranche A term loan with JP Morgan Chase (See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements) Investing activities in fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005 also included new investments in privately-held companies of $1.6 million, $9.3 million, and $0.4 million, respectively. In fiscal 2007, we acquired Topio, Inc. for a purchase price of approximately $146.1 million, which consisted of the value of the assumed options, cash payments of $131.2 million, and related transaction costs. In fiscal 2006, we acquired Alacritus and Decru and incurred total cash payments including related transactions costs totaling $53.7 million. In fiscal 2005, we acquired additional patents for a purchase price of approximately $0.9 million. In fiscal 2007, we received $23.9 million in cash in connection with the sale of certain assets to Blue Coat. We received $2.8 million, $0.1 million, and $0.3 million in proceeds from the sale of investments in privately-held companies in fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005, respectively. Under a split dollar insurance arrangement with our CEO entered in May 2000, we paid total premiums of $10.2 million, including $0.2 million for fiscal year 2005. In April 2005, our CEO reimbursed us $10.2 million for these premiums. Cash Flows from Financing Activities We used $747.3 million and $12.1 million in fiscal 2007 and 2005, respectively, as compared to cash provided by financing activities of $42.8 million in fiscal 2006. During fiscal 2006, we borrowed $300.0 million to fund the repatriation in cash from foreign earnings and investments under the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 ( the Jobs Act ). We made a repayment of $214.9 million for our debt in fiscal 2007. During fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005, we repurchased 22.6 million, 17.4 million, and 7.7 million shares of common stock at a total of $805.7 million, $488.9 million, and $192.9 million, respectively. Other financing activities provided $215.5 million, $232.7 million, and $181.9 million in fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005, respectively, from sales of common stock related to employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. Tax benefits, related to tax deductions in excess of the stock-based compensation expense recognized, of $63.2 million were presented as financing cash flows for fiscal 2007 in accordance with SFAS No. 123R. During fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, we withheld $5.3 million, $1.1 million, and $1.1 million in shares, respectively, from certain employees exercised shares of their restricted stock to reimburse for federal, state, and local withholding taxes obligations. The increase in the amounts withheld year over year was due to the release of the Decru assumed restricted stock units. The change in cash flow from financing was primarily due to the effects of higher common stock repurchases partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock under employee equity programs compared to the same period in the prior year. Net proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to employee participation in employee stock programs have historically been a significant component of our liquidity. The extent to which our employees participate in these programs generally increases or decreases based upon changes in the market price of our common stock. As a result, our cash flow resulting from the issuance of common stock related to employee participation in employee stock programs will vary. Other Factors Affecting Liquidity and Capital Resources The Jobs Act created a one-time incentive for U.S. corporations to repatriate accumulated income earned abroad by providing an 85% dividend-received deduction for certain dividends from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries. Primarily as a result of this one-time repatriation incentive, we remitted $19.6 million of income taxes with the filing of our fiscal year 2006 federal income tax return. For fiscal 2007, 2006, and 2005, the income tax benefit associated with dispositions of employee stock transactions was $175.0 million, $36.6 million, and $27.8 million, respectively. If stock option exercise patterns change, we may receive less cash from stock option exercises and may not receive the same level of tax benefits in the future, which could cause our cash payments for income taxes to increase. 54 Table of Contents Stock Repurchase Program On November 15, 2006, the Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program in which up to $800.0 million of additional shares may be purchased. At April 27, 2007, $399.9 million remained available for future repurchase. The stock repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. Debt In March 2006, we received proceeds from the term loans totaling $300.0 million to finance a dividend under the Jobs Act. (See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Loan payments of $85.1 million are due in fiscal 2008. This debt was collateralized by restricted investments totaling $116.0 million as of April 27, 2007. In accordance with the payment terms of the loan agreement, interest payments will be approximately $2.7 million in fiscal 2008. As of April 27, 2007, we are in compliance with the liquidity and leverage ratio as required by the Loan Agreement with the lenders. Contractual Cash Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments The following summarizes our contractual cash obligations and commercial commitments at April 27, 2007, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Thereafter Total (In thousands) Contractual Obligations: Office operating lease payments(1) $ 21,771 $ 20,855 $ 17,557 $ 14,561 $ 10,501 $ 28,809 $ 114,054 Real estate lease payments(2) 1,296 4,722 5,972 5,972 5,972 93,901 117,835 Equipment operating lease payments(3) 10,358 8,102 2,207 9 20,676 Venture capital funding commitments(4) 290 278 265 253 21 1,107 Capital expenditures(5) 5,027 5,027 Communications and maintenance(6) 17,688 12,242 5,315 595 17 35,857 Restructuring charges(7) 579 603 594 308 2,084 Debt(8) 87,835 87,835 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 144,844 $ 46,802 $ 31,910 $ 21,698 $ 16,511 $ 122,710 $ 384,475 For purposes of the above table, contractual obligations for the purchase of goods and services are defined as agreements that are enforceable, legally binding on us, and subject us to penalties if we cancel the agreement. Some of the figures we include in this table are based on management estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, the possibility of renewal or termination, anticipated actions by third parties, and other factors. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, the enforceable and legally binding obligations we will actually pay in future periods may vary from those reflected in the table. 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Thereafter Total (In thousands) Other Commercial Commitments: Letters of credit(9) $ 2,685 $ 310 $ $ $ $ 369 $ 3,364 (1) We lease sales offices, research and development facilities, and other property under operating leases throughout the U.S. and internationally, which expire through fiscal 2016. Substantially all lease agreements have fixed payment terms based on the passage of time and contain escalation clauses. Some lease agreements provide us with the option to renew the lease or to terminate the lease. Our future operating lease obligations 55 Table of Contents would change if we were to exercise these options or if we were to enter into additional operating lease agreements. Facilities operating leases impacted by the 2002 restructurings are included in subparagraph (7) below. The net increase in the office operating lease payments was primarily due to a domestic lease extension and two new European leases during fiscal 2007. (2) Included in the above contractual cash obligations pursuant to the two financing arrangements with BNP Paribas LLC ( BNP ) are (a) lease commitments of $1.3 million in fiscal 2008; $4.7 million in fiscal 2009, $6.0 million in each of the fiscal years 2010, 2011, and 2012, $4.7 million in fiscal 2013; and $1.3 million in fiscal 2014, which are based on the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) rate at April 27, 2007 for a term of five years, and (b) at the expiration or termination of the lease, a supplemental payment obligation equal to our minimum guarantee of $88.0 million in the event that we elect not to purchase or arrange for sale of the buildings, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (3) Equipment operating leases include servers and IT equipment used in our engineering labs and data centers. (4) Venture capital funding commitments include a quarterly committed management fee based on a percentage of our committed funding to be payable through June 2011. (5) Capital expenditures include worldwide contractual commitments to purchase equipment and to construct building and leasehold improvements, which will be recorded as Property and Equipment. (6) We are required to pay based on a minimum volume under certain communication contracts with major telecommunication companies as well as maintenance contracts with multiple vendors. Such obligations expire in April 2010. (7) These amounts are included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets under Long-term Obligations and Other Accrued Liabilities, which is comprised of committed lease payments and operating expenses net of committed and estimated sublease income. (8) Included in these amounts are the JP Morgan Chase loan (see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements) on our Consolidated Balance Sheets under Current Portion of Long-Term Debt and Long-Term Debt. This amount also includes estimated interest payments of $2.7 million for fiscal 2008. The decrease from April 28, 2006 represented a loan repayment of $214.9 million, plus interest of $10.6 million for fiscal 2007. (9) The amounts outstanding under these letters of credit relate to workers compensation, a customs guarantee, a corporate credit card program, and a foreign rent guarantee. Capital Expenditure Requirements We expect capital expenditures to increase in the future consistent with the growth in our business, as we continue to invest in people, land, buildings, capital equipment, and enhancements to our worldwide infrastructure. We expect that our existing facilities and those being developed in Sunnyvale, California; RTP, North Carolina; and worldwide are adequate for our requirements over at least the next two years and that additional space will be available as needed. We expect to finance these construction projects, including our commitments under facilities and equipment operating leases, and any required capital expenditures over the next few years through cash from operations and existing cash, cash equivalents and investments. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As of April 27, 2007, our financial guarantees of $3.4 million that were not recorded on our balance sheet consisted of standby letters of credit related to workers compensation, a customs guarantee, a corporate credit card program, and a foreign rent guarantee. As of April 27, 2007, our notional fair values of foreign exchange forward and foreign currency option contracts totaled $368.8 million. We do not believe that these derivatives present significant credit risks because the counterparties to the derivatives consist of major financial institutions, and we manage the notional amount of contracts entered into with any one counterparty. We do not enter into derivative financial instruments for speculative or trading purposes. Other than the risk associated with the financial condition of the counterparties, our maximum exposure related to foreign currency forward and option contracts is limited to the premiums paid. 56 Table of Contents We have entered into indemnification agreements with third parties in the ordinary course of business. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by the third party due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with FASB, Interpretation 45, of FIN 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. See Guarantees in footnote 15 for further discussion of these indemnification agreements. We have commitments related to two lease arrangements with BNP for approximately 380,000 square feet of office space to be located on land currently owned by us in Sunnyvale, California (as further described above under Contractual Cash Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments ). We have evaluated our accounting for this lease under the provisions of FIN 46R, and have determined the following: BNP is a leasing company for BNP Paribas in the U.S. BNP is not a special purpose entity organized for the sole purpose of facilitating the lease to us. The obligation to absorb expected losses and receive expected residual returns rests with the parent BNP Paribas. Therefore, we are not the primary beneficiary of BNP as we do not absorb the majority of BNP expected losses or expected residual returns; and BNP has represented in the Closing Agreement (filed as Exhibit 10.40) that the fair value of the property leased to us by BNP is less than half of the total of the fair values of all assets of BNP, excluding any assets of BNP held within a silo. Further, the property leased to Network Appliance is not held within a silo. The definition of held within a silo means that BNP has obtained funds equal to or in excess of 95% of the fair value of the leased asset to acquire or maintain its investment in such asset through nonrecourse financing or other contractual arrangements, the effect of which is to leave such asset (or proceeds thereof) as the only significant asset of BNP at risk for the repayment of such funds. Accordingly, we are not required to consolidate either the leasing entity or the specific assets that we lease under the BNP lease. Assuming this transaction will continue to meet the provisions of FIN 46R as new standards evolve over time, our future minimum lease payments under this real estates lease will amount to a total of $117.8 million reported under our Note 4, Commitments and Contingencies . As of April 27, 2007, except for operating leases and other contractual obligations outlined under the Contractual Cash Obligations table, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets, or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. We also do not have any majority-owned subsidiaries that are not included in the consolidated financial statements. Additionally, we do not have any interest in or relationship with any special purpose entities. Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements Key factors affecting our cash flows include our ability to effectively manage our working capital, in particular, accounts receivable and inventories and future demand for our products and related pricing. We expect to incur higher capital expenditures in the near future to expand our operations. We will from time to time acquire products and businesses complementary to our business. In the future, we may continue to repurchase our common stock, which would reduce cash, cash equivalents, and/or short-term investments available to fund future operations and meet other liquidity requirements. Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash generated from operations will satisfy our working capital needs, capital expenditures, stock repurchases, contractual obligations, and other liquidity requirements associated with our operations for at least the next twelve months. 
