CIK: 1002047
Company Name: NETWORK APPLIANCE INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-07-12


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the financial statements and the related notes set forth under Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. The following discussion also contains trend information and other forward looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. The Risk Factors set forth in Item 1. Business are hereby incorporated into the discussion by reference. Overview Enterprises are generating vast quantities of data. The rapidly growing amount of data a company generates and the requirements to retain data for longer periods of time are driving an increasing demand for storage and data management solutions. There is an increase in demand for online access to historical information for business or regulatory requirements. The growth in storage capacity requirements further increases the complexity of data management. Managing the continued growth in the volume of data and the on-demand information access continue to challenge our enterprise customers. Companies are looking for solutions to help simplify data storage, IT administration and reduce total costs of ownership. Companies are migrating toward modular, unified storage systems away from large, fixed, expensive, frame-class arrays and inefficient direct-attached storage. There is a growing trend toward consolidating storage and serving a variety of applications from a unified storage pool. In recent years, enterprises have centralized terabytes of data into networked storage environments to achieve lower costs, higher utilization, and simplified management. On the other hand, geopolitical events such as September 11, 2001; natural disasters such as the Katrina Hurricane disaster; government regulations such as Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) Rule 17a-4; banking regulations such as Basel II; increased privacy concerns such as laptop thefts with sensitive data; and industry guidelines such as PCI (Payment Card Industry standard put forth by Visa and MasterCard), have all put a spotlight on the need to protect and retain data for both the public and private sector. Consolidation, coupled with a higher probability of disasters, has created a heightened sensitivity to the impact of data loss and its disruptive impact on the business. At the same time, compliance and privacy concerns are requiring enterprises to retain data for long periods of time, as well as secure data at rest. Data protection and retention have become a critical IT priorities, requiring cost-effective storage solutions that can help the enterprise protect itself from catastrophic business disruption at an affordable cost. We believe that our strategic investments are targeted at some of the strongest growth areas of the storage market, such as modular storage, data protection, data retention, data security, iSCSI, and grid computing. However, if any storage market trends and emerging standards on which we are basing our assumptions do not materialize as anticipated, our business could be materially adversely affected. The fiscal 2006 revenue growth and increased gross margins have occurred while the market for our storage products and solutions has grown more competitive with downward pricing pressures that could negatively impact our future revenue growth rate and our future gross margins. At the same time, we anticipate and continue to experience further price decline per petabyte for our products which may have an adverse impact on our future gross margins if not offset by favorable software mix and higher average selling prices associated with new products. We expect our future gross margins to be negatively affected by factors such as global service investment cost; competition, indirect sales including OEM, high disk content partially offset by new product introductions and enhancements and product and add-on software mix. Continued revenue growth is dependent on the introduction and market acceptance of our new products. In fiscal 2007, we expect to ship our new high-end products, launch our next-generation operating system with enhanced storage grid functionality and offer a comprehensive suite of data protection solutions. If we fail to timely deliver new products or successfully integrate acquired technology into our existing architecture, or if our new products do not achieve market acceptance or if there is no or reduced demand for these or our current products, we may experience a decline in revenue. Additionally, we plan to invest in the people, processes, and systems necessary to best optimize our revenue growth and long-term profitability. However, we cannot assure you that such investments will achieve our financial objectives. 34 Table of Contents Fiscal 2006 Highlights In fiscal 2006, we continued to enhance our enterprise solutions, broaden our customer portfolio, extend our channel/partner opportunities, build additional infrastructure to manage our growth and broaden our total addressable market. During the second quarter of fiscal 2006, we acquired Decru, Inc. that develops and sells encryption software and appliances which offers data protection solutions for enterprises and governments, including regulatory compliance, privacy, secure consolidation, and outsourcing. We believe that the current and future potential for this technology will enable us to help our customers manage their risk of data theft and corruption with data encryption and authentication products. Some of the key fiscal 2006 highlights included: Penetrated in enterprise data centers and expanded our breadth of disk-to-disk backup and security solutions. We achieved revenue growth and profitability in fiscal 2006 driven primarily by our new FAS3000 midrange product line. For the first time, customers can choose to purchase Fibre Channel and/or lower-cost ATA drives, on the same system. Combined with our patented RAID-DP protection and our FlexVol and FlexClone technologies, the FAS3000 allows more cost-effective ATA drives to be used safely in primary storage applications, which offers the best price-performance value to our customers. We expect our data center penetration will win more NearStore deployments as customers choose NetApp data production solutions to back up their mission critical systems. During fiscal 2006, we introduced an array of products, technologies, and services that highlight the broad range of NetApp disk-to-disk backup and security solutions which simplify data backup procedures, improve recoverability, and lower backup infrastructure expenses. We believe that our new NearStore Virtual Tape Library solution will further expand our market opportunity as we can now provide disk-to-disk backup solutions for all open systems enterprise primary storage. Extended our channel/partner opportunities. We continued to make progress in penetrating and expanding our business in enterprise data centers with mission critical partners. Our fiscal 2006 channel mix demonstrated increased expansion through our partner programs, with approximately 55.5% of our business coming through indirect channels and the remaining 44.5% coming through direct sales. The majority of our block-based storage business and the U.S. Federal business came from indirect channels. Higher growth rates in our indirect channels demonstrated our increasing leverage, giving us broader market reach and increasing enterprise penetration. Expanded our global services and support. It is an element of our strategy to expand and offer a global, comprehensive, end-to-end suite of world-class service and support solutions designed to help our customers meet their goals of simplifying their storage solutions. We increased our business with our top enterprise customers who typically purchase more complete and longer-term service packages. The growth in service revenue in fiscal 2006 was also driven by increases in professional services. We expect to continue to expand our global services and support and believe that such investments will help accelerate the adoption rate of our technology. We cannot assure you that service revenue will continue to grow at previous rates. We expect to invest in our services infrastructure commensurate with our revenue growth. Broadened our total addressable market and extended our product lines into adjacent spaces. We have brought a more comprehensive set of products to the market place, with the new high end offering next generation operating system with enhanced storage grid functionality, the disk-to-disk backup solution on the VTL space, the Decru security and encryption solutions and in early fiscal 2007 our entry into the small-to-medium businesses. We also continued to broaden our addressable market by increasing our focus on the V-Series product line, which uses virtualization to let customers take advantage of the management simplicity of NetApp Data ONTAP with their storage from other vendors. Fiscal 2006 Financial Performance Our revenues for fiscal 2006 were $2.1 billion, a 29.3% increase over the same period a year ago. Our revenues for fiscal 2005 were $1.6 billion, a 36.6% increase compared to revenues of $1.2 billion in fiscal 2004. Our revenue growth was driven by the adoption of our new products targeted at the areas of fastest growth in storage, secondary storage for compliance applications and our broadened NetApp storage solutions that simplify data management. 35 Table of Contents Our overall gross margins were 60.8%, 61.0% and 60.2% in fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The slight decline in our overall gross margins for fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 was primarily due to a shift in revenue mix with an increase in disk sales and IBM OEM business partially offset by improved service gross margins. The improvement in our overall gross margins for fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004 was primarily attributable to a favorable change in product and add-on software mix and improved services margins. Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments increased to $1,322.9 million, compared to $1,170.0 million as of April 30, 2005, due primarily to cash generated from operations partially offset by cash repurchases of our common stock of $488.9 million and net cash paid of $53.7 million in connection with the Alacritus and Decru acquisitions. Days Sales Outstanding in receivable were 63 days, and 60 days, respectively, as of April 30, 2006 and 2005, reflecting increased sales and less linear shipments. Inventory turns were 14.7 times and 17.9 times, respectively, as of April 30, 2006 and 2005 due to higher consigned inventory for IBM sales and new products at customer sites. Deferred revenue increased to $681.5 million in fiscal 2006 from $449.2 million reported in fiscal 2005 due to higher software subscription and service arrangements attributable to our continuing shift toward larger enterprise customers. Capital purchases of plant, property, and equipment for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004 were $132.9 million, $93.6 million and $48.7 million, respectively, reflecting continued worldwide capital investment to meet our business growth. Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of such statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements. Our estimates are based on historical experience and other assumptions that we consider to be appropriate in the circumstances. However, actual future results may vary from our estimates. We believe that the following accounting policies are critical as defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission, in that they are both highly important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results, and require difficult management judgments and assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain. We also have other important policies, including those related to derivative instruments and concentration of credit risk. However, these policies do not meet the definition of critical accounting policies because they do not generally require us to make estimates or judgments that are difficult or subjective. These policies are discussed in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements accompanying this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the accounting policies described below are the ones that most frequently require us to make estimates and judgments, and therefore are critical to the understanding of our results of operations: Revenue recognition and allowances Valuation of goodwill and intangibles Accounting for income taxes Inventory write-downs Restructuring accruals Impairment losses on investments Accounting for stock-based compensation Loss contingencies 36 Table of Contents Revenue Recognition and Allowances We apply the provisions of Statement of Position ( SOP ) No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, and related interpretations to our product sales because we believe our firmware and operating software are essential to the functionality of our hardware products. We recognize revenue when: Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists. It is our customary practice to have a purchase order and/or contract prior to recognizing revenue on an arrangement from our end user customers, value-added resellers, or distributors. Delivery has occurred. Our product is physically delivered to our customers, generally with standard transfer terms such as FOB origin. We typically do not allow for restocking rights with any of our value-added resellers or distributors. Products shipped with acceptance criteria or return rights are not recognized as revenue until all criteria are achieved. If undelivered products or services exist that are essential to the functionality of the delivered product in an arrangement, delivery is not considered to have occurred. The fee is fixed or determinable. Arrangements with payment terms extending beyond our standard terms, conditions and practices are not considered to be fixed or determinable. Revenue from such arrangements is recognized as the fees become due and payable. We typically do not allow for price-protection rights with any of our value-added resellers or distributors. Collection is probable. Probability of collection is assessed on a customer-by-customer basis. Customers are subject to a credit review process that evaluates the customer financial position and ultimately their ability to pay. If it is determined at the outset of an arrangement that collection is not probable based upon our review process, revenue is deferred and recognized when collection becomes probable. For arrangements with multiple elements, we allocate revenue to each element using the residual method. When all of the undelivered elements are software-related, this allocation is based on vendor specific objective evidence of fair value of the undelivered items. When the undelivered elements include non-software related items that are only sold as a bundle with software related items, this allocation is based on objective and reliable evidence of fair value, in accordance with Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 00-21, Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables ( EITF 00-21 ). We defer the portion of the arrangement fee equal to the fair value of the undelivered elements until they are delivered. Vendor specific objective evidence of fair value is based on the price charged when the element is sold separately. If vendor specific evidence cannot be obtained to determine fair value of the undelivered elements, revenue from the entire arrangement would be deferred and recognized as these elements are delivered. This would have a material effect on the timing of product revenues. A typical arrangement includes product, software subscription, and maintenance. Some arrangements include technical consulting and training. Software subscriptions represent the right to unspecified product upgrades and enhancements on a when-and-if-available basis, bug fixes, and patch releases. Service maintenance includes contracts for technical support and hardware maintenance. Revenue from software subscriptions and service maintenance is recognized ratably over the contractual term, generally one to three years. We typically sell technical consulting services and training separately from any of our other revenue elements, either on a time and materials basis or for fixed price standard projects. The type of work that is performed is not essential to the functionality of the software or hardware. Accordingly, we recognize revenue as the services are performed and in accordance with EITF 03-05 Applicability of AICPA Statement of Position 97-2 to Non-Software Deliverables in an Arrangement Containing More-Than-Incidental Software . Revenue from hardware installation services is a non-software deliverable because the software is not essential to the functionality of the installation service and is therefore outside of the scope of SOP 97-2. Revenue from shipping and handling is included in product revenue and its related cost included in cost of product revenue. We record reductions to revenue for estimated sales returns at the time of shipment. Sales returns are estimated based on historical sales returns, changes in customer demand, current trends, and our expectations regarding future experience. Reductions to revenue associated with sales returns include consideration of historical sales levels, the timing and magnitude of historical sales returns and a projection of this experience into the future. We monitor and analyze the accuracy of sales returns estimate by reviewing actual returns and adjust it for future expectations to 37 Table of Contents determine the adequacy of our current and future reserve needs. If actual future returns and allowances differ from past experience and expectation, additional allowances may be required. We also maintain a separate allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses based on our assessment of the collectibility of specific customer accounts and the aging of the accounts receivable. We analyze accounts receivable and historical bad debts, customer concentrations, customer solvency, current economic and geographic trends, and changes in customer payment terms and practices when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts. In circumstances where we are aware of a specific customer inability to meet its financial obligations to us, a specific allowance for bad debt is estimated and recorded which reduces the recognized receivable to the estimated amount we believe will ultimately be collected. We monitor and analyze the accuracy of allowance for doubtful accounts estimate by reviewing past collectibility and adjust it for future expectations to determine the adequacy of our current and future allowance. Our allowance for doubtful accounts as of April 30, 2006 was $2.4 million, compared to $5.4 million as of April 30, 2005. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles Identifiable intangible assets are amortized over time, while in-process research and development is recorded as a charge on the date of acquisition and goodwill is capitalized, subject to periodic review for impairment. Accordingly, the allocation of the acquisition cost to identifiable intangible assets has a significant impact on our future operating results. The allocation process requires extensive use of estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets. Should conditions be different than management current assessment, material write-downs of the fair value of intangible assets may be required. We periodically review the estimated remaining useful lives of our other intangible assets. A reduction in the estimate of remaining useful life could result in accelerated amortization expense or a write-down in future periods. As such, any future write-downs of these assets would adversely affect our gross and operating margins. Under our accounting policy we perform an annual review in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year, or more often if indicators of impairment exist. Triggering events for impairment reviews may be indicators such as adverse industry or economic trends, restructuring actions, lower projections of profitability, or a sustained decline in our market capitalization. Evaluations of possible impairment and, if applicable, adjustments to carrying values, require us to estimate, among other factors, future cash flows, useful lives, and fair market values of our reporting units and assets. When we conduct our evaluation of goodwill, the fair value of goodwill is assessed using valuation techniques that require significant management judgment. Should conditions be different from management last assessment, significant write-downs of goodwill may be required. In fiscal 2006 and 2005, we performed such evaluation and found no impairment. However, any future write-downs of goodwill would adversely affect our operating margins. As of April 30, 2006, our assets included $487.5 million in goodwill. See Note 14, Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets to our consolidated financial statements. During fiscal 2006, we adjusted goodwill by $3.5 million and $2.1 million relating to the tax benefits associated with the subsequent exercise of previously vested assumed Spinnaker and Decru options, respectively. Estimated future adjustments to goodwill related to the tax benefits associated with subsequent exercise of previously vested assumed options by previous acquisitions are approximately $8.4 million, subject to future cancellations relating to employee terminations. Accounting for Income Taxes The determination of our tax provision is subject to judgments and estimates due to operations in several tax jurisdictions outside the U.S. Earnings derived from our international business are generally taxed at rates that are lower than U.S. rates, resulting in a reduction of our effective tax rate. The ability to maintain our current effective tax rate is contingent upon existing tax laws in both the U.S. and the respective countries in which our international subsidiaries are located. Future changes in domestic or international tax laws could affect the continued realization of the tax benefits we are currently receiving and expect to receive from international business. In addition, a 38 Table of Contents decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our international business or in the mix of international business among particular tax jurisdictions could increase our overall effective tax rate. While most of our profits are earned in foreign jurisdictions with income tax rates generally lower than the combined U.S. federal and state income tax rates, judgment must be made with respect to other estimates of income tax provision, such as R&D tax credits and valuation allowances against deferred tax assets, primarily those set up for net operating losses and income tax credits. The carrying value of our net deferred tax assets, which consists primarily of the reversal of net deductible temporary differences including credits and net operating loss carryforwards, assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable income to fully utilize these tax attributes. If we do not generate sufficient future income, the realization of these deferred tax assets may be impaired, resulting in additional income tax expense. We have provided a valuation allowance of $431.2 million as of April 30, 2006 on the deferred tax attributes associated with the exercise of employee stock options (primarily credits and net operating loss carryforwards) because of uncertainty regarding their realization due to the expectation that future employee stock option exercises will reduce our ability to generate sufficient taxable income in the future. In the event these attributes are realized, the associated tax benefit will be credited to stockholders equity, rather than as a reduction in the income tax provision. Prior to fiscal year 2006, our current effective tax rate assumed that U.S. income taxes were not provided for undistributed earnings of certain non-U.S. subsidiaries. However, pursuant to the one-time incentive created under Section 965 of The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (the Jobs Act ), our foreign subsidiaries remitted approximately $405.5 million in accumulated earned income on which we incurred approximately $22.5 million in federal and state income taxes in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006. In fiscal 2004, we recorded an income tax benefit of $16.8 million associated with a favorable foreign tax ruling. This favorable ruling from the Netherlands provided for retroactive benefits dating back to fiscal year 2001 and continuing until December 31, 2005. Subsequent to our fiscal 2005 year end, we obtained a new tax ruling from the Netherlands, which terminated the first ruling and provides for continuing favorable tax rate benefits until April 30, 2010. As of April 30, 2006, our Netherlands subsidiary had a conditional royalty expense carryforward of $51.7 million that may become available for offset against future Dutch income. The carryforward may not, however, be used to offset income under the new Dutch tax ruling expiring April 30, 2010. We have established a valuation allowance against the deferred tax asset for this carryforward based upon our belief that we will not be able to utilize this attribute. We have been notified of examinations in the U.S. and several foreign tax jurisdictions. Our management does not believe, based upon information currently known to it that the final resolution of any of these audits will have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. However, if upon the conclusion of these audits the ultimate determination of our taxes owed in any of these tax jurisdictions is for an amount in excess of the tax provision we have recorded or reserved for, our overall effective tax rate may be adversely impacted. Beginning with the fiscal year 2007 implementation of SFAS No. 123R, we may experience adverse impacts to future years effective tax rates in the event that we determine that our APIC pool as of the beginning of fiscal year 2007 is not sufficient enough to cover the impacts of future stock compensation shortfalls. Inventory Write-Downs Our inventories net balance was $64.5 million as of April 30, 2006, compared with $39.0 million as of April 30, 2005. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out basis) or market. We perform an in depth excess and obsolete analysis of our inventory based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. We adjust the inventory value based on estimated excess and obsolete inventories determined primarily by future demand forecasts. Although we strive for accuracy in our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and commitments, and our reported results. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected, additional write-downs and other charges against earnings may be required. If actual market conditions are more favorable, we may realize higher gross margins in the period when the written-down inventory is sold. 39 Table of Contents We record purchase commitment liabilities with our contract manufacturers and suppliers as a result of changes in demand forecasts or as we transition our products. As of April 30, 2006, we do not have purchase commitment under such arrangements. We engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers. We also provide for the estimated cost of known product failures based on known quality issues when they arise. Should actual cost of product failure differ from our estimates, revisions to the estimated liability would be required. We are subject to a variety of federal, state, local and foreign environmental regulations relating to the use, storage, discharge and disposal of hazardous chemicals used during our manufacturing process or requiring design changes or recycling of products we manufacture. We will continue to monitor our environmental compliance and could incur higher costs including additional reserves for excess component inventory. Restructuring Accruals In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in IT spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and a consolidation of our facilities. In fiscal 2006, we implemented the third restructuring plan related to the move of our global service center operations. In determining restructuring charges, we analyze our future business requirements in order to properly align and manage our business commensurate with our future revenue levels. Our restructuring costs, and any resulting accruals, involve significant estimates made by management using the best information available at the time the estimates are made, some of which may be provided by third parties. In recording severance reserves, we accrue a liability when the following conditions have been met: employees rights to receive compensation is attributable to employees services already rendered; the obligation relates to rights that vest or accumulate; payment of the compensation is probable; and the amount can be reasonably estimated. In recording facilities lease restructuring reserve, we make various assumptions, including the time period over which the facilities are expected to be vacant, expected sublease terms, expected sublease rates, anticipated future operating expenses, and expected future use of the facilities. Our estimates involve a number of risks and uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control, including future real estate market conditions and our ability to successfully enter into subleases or lease termination agreements with terms as favorable as those assumed when arriving at our estimates. We regularly evaluate a number of factors to determine the appropriateness and reasonableness of our restructuring and lease loss accruals including the various assumptions noted above. If actual results differ significantly from our estimates, we may be required to adjust our restructuring and lease loss accruals in the future. In fiscal 2005, we estimated our facility restructuring reserve to be $4.5 million. Our fiscal 2006 estimate for the facility restructuring reserve was $2.7 million which included a $1.0 million adjustment due to the execution of new sublease agreement for our Tewksbury facility net of related cost. Impairment Losses on Investments As of April 30, 2006, our short-term investments have been classified as available-for-sale and are carried at fair value. There have been no significant declines in fair value of investments that are considered to be other-than-temporary, for any of the three years in the period ended April 30, 2006. The fair value of our available-for-sale investment reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets was $1,102.8 million and $976.4 million as of April 30, 2006 and 2005, respectively. We have not identified any of these declines to be other than temporary as market declines of our investments have been caused by interest rate changes and were not due to credit worthiness. Because we have the ability to hold these investments until maturity, we would not expect any significant decline in value of our investments caused by market interest rate changes. We have no impairment losses on our available-for-sale investment or investment in privately held companies for fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004. All of our available-for-sale investments and non-marketable equity securities are subject to a periodic impairment review. Investments are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value is judged to be 40 Table of Contents other-than-temporary. This determination requires significant judgment. For publicly traded investments, impairment is determined based upon the specific facts and circumstances present at the time, including factors such as current economic and market conditions, the credit rating of the security issuer, the length of time an investment fair value has been below our carrying value, and our ability to hold investments to maturity. If an investment decline in fair value, caused by factors other than changes in interest rates, is deemed to be other-than-temporary, we would reduce its carrying value to its estimated fair value, as determined based on quoted market prices or liquidation values. Our investments in privately held companies were $11.0 million and $1.8 million as of April 30, 2006 and 2005, respectively. For non-marketable equity securities, the impairment analysis requires the identification of events or circumstances that would likely have a significant adverse effect on the fair value of the investment, including, revenue and earnings trends, overall business prospects, limited capital resources, limited prospects of receiving additional financing, limited prospects for liquidity of the related securities and general market conditions in the investees industry. Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation We adopted the disclosure-only provisions of SFAS No. 123 as amended by SFAS No. 148 and provide pro forma disclosure using the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our employee stock options. The fair value of each option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and is not remeasured as a result of subsequent stock price fluctuations. Option pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected stock price volatility, expected life and forfeiture rate. We are currently evaluating the expected volatility rates in accordance with SAB No. 107, including the use of historical, blended and implied volatility. As of May 1, 2006, the contractual life of our stock options has been shortened to seven years from ten years for options issued on or after this date, and to the extent that the shorter life changes employees exercise behavior, it may change the expected term of an option going forward. SFAS No. 123R will require us to include estimated forfeitures, and therefore, the required adoption of SFAS No. 123R could have a material impact on the timing of and, based on the accuracy of estimates of future actual forfeiters, the amount stock compensation expense. Any changes in these highly objective assumptions may significantly impact the stock compensation expenses for the future. In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment ( SFAS No. 123R ), see discussion under New Accounting Standards below. In March 2005, the SEC issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 ( SAB 107 ). SAB 107 includes interpretive guidance for the initial implementation of SFAS No. 123R. We will apply the principles of SAB 107 in conjunction with our adoption of SFAS No. 123R in our first quarter of fiscal 2007, which begins on May 1, 2006. Loss Contingencies We are subject to the possibility of various loss contingencies arising in the course of business. We consider the likelihood of the loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset has been impaired and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. In fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, we did not identify or accrue for any loss contingencies. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted. New Accounting Standards In November 2005, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued FASB Staff Position FSP 115-1 which addresses the determination as to when an investment is considered impaired, whether that impairment is other-than-temporary, and the measurement of an impairment loss. This FSP also includes accounting considerations subsequent to the recognition of an other-than-temporary impairment and requires certain disclosures about unrealized losses that have not been recognized as other-than-temporary impairments. The guidance in this FSP amends Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 115, Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities and APB Opinion No. 18, The Equity Method of Accounting for Investments in Common Stock. The guidance in FSP 115-1 shall be applied to reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2005. We are required to adopt FSP 115-1 for fiscal years beginning after May 1, 2006. We are 41 Table of Contents currently evaluating the effect that the adoption of FSP 115-1 will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition but do not expect it to have a material impact. In June 2005, the FASB issued SFAS No. 154 ( SFAS No. 154 ), Accounting Changes and Error Corrections: a Replacement of Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 20 ( APB 20 ) and FASB Statement No 3. SFAS No. 154 requires retrospective application for voluntary changes in accounting principle unless it is impracticable to do so. Retrospective application refers to the application of a different accounting principle to previously issued financial statements as if that principle had always been used. SFAS No. 154 retrospective-application requirement replaces APB 20 requirement to recognize most voluntary changes in accounting principle by including in net income of the period of the change the cumulative effect of changing to the new accounting principle. This Statement defines retrospective application as the application of a different accounting principle to prior accounting periods as if that principle had always been used or as the adjustment of previously issued financial statements to reflect a change in the reporting entity. This Statement also redefines restatement as the revising of previously issued financial statements to reflect the correction of an error. The requirements are effective for accounting changes made in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2005 and will only impact the consolidated financial statements in periods in which a change in accounting principle is made. In November 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 151 Inventory Costs (SFAS No. 151). This statement amends the guidance in ARB No. 43, Chapter 4, Inventory Pricing, to clarify the accounting for abnormal amounts of idle facility expense, freight, handling costs, and wasted material (spoilage). SFAS No. 151 requires that those items be recognized as current-period charges. In addition, this Statement requires that allocation of fixed production overhead to costs of conversion be based upon the normal capacity of the production facilities. The provisions of SFAS No. 151 are effective for inventory cost incurred in fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005. As such, we are required to adopt these provisions at the beginning of fiscal 2007, which begins on May 1, 2006. We do not expect the adoption of SFAS No. 151 to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123R. Generally, the requirements of SFAS No. 123R are similar to those of SFAS No. 123. However, SFAS No. 123R requires companies to now recognize all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, in their statements of operations based on the fair value of the payments. Pro forma disclosure will no longer be an alternative. The effective date of the new standard for our consolidated financial statements is the first quarter of fiscal 2007, which begins on May 1, 2006. In March 2005, the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) issued Staff Accounting Bulletin ( SAB ) No. 107, which provides guidance on the implementation of SFAS No. 123R, Share-Based Payments (SFAS No. 123R) (see discussion below). In particular, SAB No. 107 provides key guidance related to valuation methods (including assumptions such as expected volatility and expected term), the accounting for income tax effects of share-based payment arrangements upon adoption of SFAS No. 123R, the modification of employee share options prior to the adoption of SFAS No. 123R, the classification of compensation expense, capitalization of compensation cost related to share-based payment arrangements, first-time adoption of SFAS No. 123R in an interim period, and disclosures in Management Discussion and Analysis subsequent to the adoption of SFAS No. 123R. In November 2005, the FASB issued FSP FAS 123R-3, Transition Election and Accounting for Tax Effects. The guidance provides a simplified method to calculate the Additional Paid-In Capital (APIC) pool for beginning balance of excess tax benefits and the method of determining the subsequent impact on the pool of option awards that are outstanding and fully or partially vested upon the adoption of SFAS No. 123R beginning on May 1, 2006. In addition, this FSP addresses that when the alternative APIC pool calculation is used, tax benefits related to certain employee awards should be included as a cash flow from financing activities and a cash outflow from operating activities within the statements of cash flows. The FSP allows companies up to one year from the later of the adoption date of SFAS No. 123R or November 10, 2005 to evaluate the available transition alternatives and make a one-time election. We are in the process of evaluating the impact of the new method provided by this guidance. SFAS No. 123R and its related guidance permits public companies to adopt its requirements using one of two methods: modified prospective method or modified retrospective method. We plan to adopt SFAS No. 123R using the modified prospective method, in which compensation cost is recognized beginning with the effective date (a) based on the requirements of SFAS No. 123R for all share-based payments granted after the effective date and 42 Table of Contents (b) based on the requirements of SFAS No. 123 for all awards granted to employees prior to the effective date of SFAS No. 123R that remain unvested on the effective date. We will recognize in our results of operations the compensation cost for stock-based awards issued after April 30, 2006 on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for the entire award. For stock-based awards issued prior to May 1, 2006, we amortized the related compensation costs using the graded-vesting method. As permitted by SFAS No. 123, we currently account for share-based payments to employees using the APB 25 intrinsic value method and, as such, generally recognize no compensation cost for employee stock options as grant date value equals fair value. The adoption of the SFAS No. 123R fair value method will have a significant impact on our reported results of operations because the stock-based compensation expense will be charged directly against our reported earnings. The pre-tax balance of unearned stock-based compensation to be expensed in the period fiscal 2007 through 2010 related to share-based awards unvested as of April 30, 2006, as previously calculated under the disclosure-only requirements of SFAS No. 123, is approximately $240.5 million. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested securities, we may be required to accelerate, increase, or cancel any remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense. To the extent that we grant additional equity securities to employees or assume unvested securities in connection with any acquisitions, our stock-based compensation expense will be increased by the additional unearned compensation resulting from those additional grants or acquisitions. We anticipate that we will grant additional employee stock options and restricted stock units in fiscal 2007. The fair value of these grants cannot be predicted with certainty at this time due to the fact that the expense amount will depend on the timing of new grants, the number of new grants, changes in the market price or the volatility of our common stock. However, we currently estimate that the impact on our first fiscal quarter will be between $0.07 $0.09 per share. As of May 1, 2006, the contractual life of our stock options has been shortened to seven years from ten years for options issued on or after this date, and to the extent that the shorter life changes employees exercise behavior, it may change the expected term of an option going forward. We are not aware of any other changes in business practices and do not expect any violations of debt covenants due to the adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Results of Operations The following table sets forth certain consolidated statements of income data as a percentage of total revenues for the periods indicated: Years Ended April 30, 2006 2005 2004 Revenues: Product 76.3 % 78.9 % 80.7 % Software subscriptions 11.6 10.6 9.7 Service 12.1 10.5 9.6 100.0 100.0 100.0 Cost of Revenues: Cost of product 30.1 30.4 31.6 Cost of software subscriptions 0.1 0.1 0.1 Cost of service 9.0 8.5 8.1 Gross Profit 60.8 61.0 60.2 43 Table of Contents Years Ended April 30, 2006 2005 2004 Operating Expenses: Sales and marketing 28.9 29.1 29.9 Research and development 11.8 10.7 11.3 General and administrative 4.4 4.8 4.7 Acquired in process research and development 0.2 0.4 Stock compensation 0.6 0.5 0.3 Restructuring charges (recoveries) 0.1 Total Operating Expenses 45.9 45.1 46.7 Income From Operations 14.9 15.9 13.5 Other Income (Expenses), Net: Interest income 2.1 1.5 1.2 Interest expense (0.1 ) Other expenses, net 0.1 (0.1 ) (0.2 ) Net gain on investments 0.1 Total Other Income, Net 2.1 1.4 1.1 Income Before Income Taxes 17.0 17.3 14.6 Provision for Income Taxes 4.1 3.2 1.6 Net Income 12.9 % 14.1 % 13.0 % Fiscal 2006 Compared to Fiscal 2005 Product Revenues Product revenues increased by 25.1% to $1,577.4 million in fiscal 2006, from $1,260.6 million in fiscal 2005. Product revenues growth was across all geographies. This net increase year over year was specifically attributable to increased software licenses, an increase in units shipped, and an increase in demand for data protection and mission-critical storage environments, partially offset by a decline in shipments and lower average selling prices of older generation products, lower cost-per-megabyte disks. Our systems are highly configurable because of customer requirements in the open systems storage markets we serve. As a result, the wide variation in customized configuration can significantly impact revenue, cost of revenues, and gross margin performance. Price changes, volumes and product model mix can have an effect on changes in product revenues, the impact on these forces is significantly affected by the configuration of systems shipped. Product revenues were favorably affected by the following factors: Increased revenues from our current product portfolio, such as FAS980, and FAS270 storage systems; and introduction of new products, such as FAS3020, FAS3050, and FAS6070 storage systems; V3020, and V3050 storage virtualization systems; NetCache C2300, and C3300 appliances and add-on software Revenue generated from disk-to-disk backup/archival, and security solutions increased by 28.1% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 Increased sales through indirect channels in absolute dollars, including sales through our resellers, distributors, and OEM partners, representing 55.5% and 51.2% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively Product revenues were negatively affected by the following factors: Lower-cost-per-megabyte disks which are a significant component of our hardware costs. As performance has improved on these devices, the related sales price we can charge per megabyte of storage has decreased as well. Declining average selling prices and unit sales of our older products. 44 Table of Contents The Decru acquisition and the IBM OEM relationship did not have a significant impact on the revenue for fiscal 2006. There can be no assurance that IBM and Decru will contribute meaningful revenue in future quarters. We also cannot assure you that we will be able to maintain or increase market demand for our products. Software Subscriptions Revenues Software subscriptions revenues increased by 40.9% to $239.1 million in fiscal 2006, from $169.7 million in fiscal 2005 due primarily to a larger installed base renewals, upgrades and an increasing number of new enterprise customers. Software subscriptions revenues represent 11.6% and 10.6% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Service Revenues Service revenues, which include hardware support, professional services, and educational services, increased by 48.9% to $249.9 million in fiscal 2006, from $167.8 million in fiscal 2005. The increase in absolute dollars was due to the following factors: Professional service revenue increased by 49.0% to $89.4 million in fiscal 2006 from $60.0 million in fiscal 2005 An increasing number of enterprise customers, which typically purchase more complete and generally longer-term service packages than our non-enterprise customers A growing installed base resulting in new customer support contracts in addition to support contract renewals by existing customers While it is an element of our strategy to expand and offer a more comprehensive, global enterprise support and service solution, we cannot assure you that service revenue will grow at the current rate in fiscal 2007. A large portion of our service revenues is deferred and, in most cases, recognized ratably over the service obligation periods, which are typically one to three years, and are classified as short-term and long-term deferred revenue on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Service revenues represented 12.1% and 10.5% of total revenues for fiscal year 2006 and 2005, respectively. International total revenues International total revenues (including U.S. exports) increased by 23.2% in fiscal year 2006 compared with fiscal 2005. International total revenues were $943.8 million, or 45.7% of total revenues for fiscal year 2006 compared with $765.8 million or 47.9% of total revenues for fiscal 2005. The increase in international sales was primarily a result of revenue growth from our European and Asia Pacific geographies, driven by increased demand for our solutions portfolio, new customers, and higher storage spending in certain geographic regions as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year. We cannot assure you that we will be able to maintain or increase international revenues in fiscal 2007. Product Gross Margins Product gross margins decreased to 60.5% for fiscal 2006, from 61.4% for fiscal 2005. Product gross margins were negatively affected by the following factors: Sales price reductions due to competitive pricing pressure and selective pricing discounts Increased sales through certain indirect channels, which may have lower gross margins than our direct sales in certain geographic regions Sales of relatively lower margin add-on storage shelves and hardware increased by 57.1% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 Product gross margins were favorably affected by the following factors: Favorable product and add-on software mix with software licenses increasing by 32.8% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 Better disk utilization rates associated with sales of higher-margins management software products like FlexClone and FlexVol that run on the Data ONTAP 7G operating system allowing customers to buy less disk storage but buy more high-value software Higher average selling prices for our newer products 45 Table of Contents We expect higher disk content associated with high-end storage systems will negatively affect our gross margins in the future, if not offset by software revenue and new products. Amortization of existing technology from acquisitions included in cost of product revenues was $11.8 million and $3.4 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Estimated future amortization of existing technology to cost of product revenues relating to acquisitions will be $15.5 million for each of fiscal years 2007 and 2008; $14.7 million for fiscal year 2009; $10.3 million for fiscal year 2010, $2.8 million for fiscal year 2011; and none thereafter. Software Subscriptions Gross Margins Software subscriptions gross margins increased slightly to 99.4% for fiscal 2006, from 99.1% for fiscal 2005 due primarily to improved headcount utilization and a larger installed base renewals, upgrades and an increasing number of new enterprise customers. Service Gross Margins Service gross margins increased to 25.9% in fiscal 2006 compared to 19.4% in fiscal 2005. Cost of service revenue increased by 36.9% to $185.0 million in fiscal 2006, from $135.2 million in fiscal 2005. The improvement in service gross margins for fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 was primarily due to an increase in services revenue and improved headcount utilization offset by the continued spending in our service infrastructure to support our increasing enterprise customer base. This spending included additional professional support engineers, increased support center activities, and global service partnership programs. Service gross margins will typically experience some variability over time due to the timing of technical support service initiations, renewals and additional investments in our customer support infrastructure. In fiscal 2007, we expect service gross margins to be in the mid 20% range, as we continue to build out our service capability and capacity to support our growing enterprise customers and new products. Our fiscal 2007 total gross margin will also be negatively impacted by stock compensation expenses as a result of the adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, advertising and promotional expenses, and certain customer service and support costs. Sales and marketing expenses increased 27.7% to $595.2 million for fiscal 2006, from $466.0 million for fiscal 2005. These expenses were 28.9% and 29.1% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was attributed to increased commission expenses resulting from increased revenues, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, higher partner program expenses, and the continued worldwide investment in our sales and global service organizations associated with selling complete enterprise solutions. Amortization of acquisitions-related trademarks/tradenames and customer contracts and relationships included in sales and marketing expenses was $2.1 million and $0.8 million for fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005, respectively. Estimated future amortization of trademarks, tradenames, customer contracts, and relationships relating to acquisitions and included in sales and marketing expenses will be $2.3 million for fiscal 2007, $2.2 million for fiscal 2008, 2009, and 2010, $1.3 million for fiscal 2011 and $0.3 million thereafter. Sales and marketing headcount increased to 1,927 at April 30, 2006, from 1,918 at April 30, 2005. We expect to continue to selectively add sales capacity in an effort to expand domestic and international markets, introduce new products, establish and expand new distribution channels, and increase product and company awareness. Our sales and market expenses will also increase as a result of the adoption of SFAS No. 123R. We expect to increase our sales and marketing expenses commensurate with future revenue growth. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, prototype expenses, non-recurring engineering charges, fees paid to outside consultants and amortization of capitalized patents. Research and development expenses increased 42.1% to $243.0 million for fiscal 2006 from $171.0 million for fiscal 2005. These expenses represented 11.8% and 10.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily a result of increased headcount, ongoing operating impact of the acquisitions, ongoing support of current and future product development and enhancement efforts, and higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability. Research and development 46 Table of Contents headcount increased to 1,246 as of April 30, 2006, compared to 827 as of April 30, 2005. For both fiscal 2006 and 2005, no software development costs were capitalized. Included in research and development expenses is amortization of acquired patents of $2.0 million and $1.8 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Based on acquired patents existing at April 30, 2006, estimated future capitalized patents amortization expenses will be $2.0 million for each of the fiscal years 2007 and 2008, respectively, and $0.5 and $0.2 million for fiscal 2009 and 2010. We believe that our future performance will depend in large part on our ability to maintain and enhance our current product line, develop new products that achieve market acceptance, maintain technological competitiveness, and meet an expanding range of customer requirements. We expect to continuously support current and future product development and enhancement efforts, and incur prototyping expenses and nonrecurring engineering charges associated with the development of new products and technologies. We intend to continuously broaden our existing product offerings and introduce new products that expand our solutions portfolio. We believe that our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2007, primarily due to ongoing costs associated with the development of new products and technologies, projected headcount growth, the operating impact of potential future acquisitions as compared to fiscal 2006, and stock-based compensation as a result of the adoption of SFAS No. 123R. General and Administrative General and administrative expenses increased 19.4% to $91.9 million for fiscal 2006, from $76.9 million for fiscal 2005. These expenses represented 4.4% and 4.8% of total revenues for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. This increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to expenses associated with expanded regulatory requirements, higher legal expenses and professional fees for general corporate matters including patents and higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability. General and administrative headcount increased to 568 at April 30, 2006, from 331 at April 30, 2005. We believe that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars for fiscal 2007 due to projected G&A headcount growth and the stock-based compensation as a result of the adoption of SFAS No. 123R. Amortization of acquisitions-related covenants not to compete included in general and administrative expenses was $2.2 million and $5.1 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Estimated future amortization of covenants not to compete relating to acquisitions will be $1.0 million for fiscal year 2007, and $0.2 million in fiscal year 2008. In-Process Research and Development We recorded in-process research and development charges of $5.0 million in fiscal 2006 related to the acquisition of Decru. The purchase price of the transaction was allocated to the acquired assets and liabilities based on their estimated fair values as of the date of the acquisition. Approximately $5.0 million was allocated to in-process research and development and charged to operations because the acquired technology had not reached technological feasibility and had no alternative uses. The value was determined by estimating the costs to develop the acquired in-process technology into commercially viable products, estimating the resulting future net cash flows from such projects, and discounting the net cash flows back to their present value. The discount rate included a factor that took into account the uncertainty surrounding the successful development of the acquired in-process technology. These estimates are subject to change, given the uncertainties of the development process, and no assurance can be given that deviations from these estimates will not occur. Research and development costs to bring the products from Decru to technological feasibility are not expected to have a material impact on our future results of operations or financial conditions. Stock Compensation Stock compensation expenses were $13.3 million and $8.1 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. This net increase in year-over-year stock compensation expenses reflected primarily higher stock compensation relating to stock options and restricted stocks assumed in acquisitions, and restricted stock awards, partially offset by forfeitures of unvested options and forfeited restricted stock assumed in the acquisitions. Based on deferred stock compensation recorded at April 30, 2006, estimated future deferred stock compensation amortization expenses, excluding the impact of SFAS No. 123R, are $20.3 million in fiscal 2007, $14.3 million in fiscal 2008, $8.1 million in fiscal 2009, and $6.6 million in fiscal 2010. Restructuring Charges In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in IT spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and consolidations of our facilities. As of April 30, 2006, we have no outstanding balance in our 47 Table of Contents restructuring liability for the first restructuring. The second restructuring related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to the Sunnyvale headquarters. In the second quarter of fiscal 2006, we implemented a third restructuring plan related to the move of our global services center operations from Sunnyvale to our new flagship support center at our Research Triangle Park facility in North Carolina. Our restructuring estimates are reviewed and revised periodically and may result in a substantial charge or reduction to restructuring expense should different conditions prevail than were anticipated in previous management estimates. Such estimates included various assumptions such as the time period over which the facilities will be vacant, expected sublease terms, and expected sublease rates. In fiscal 2006, we recorded a reduction in restructuring reserve of $1.3 million resulting from the execution of a new sublease agreement for our Tewksbury facility. In fiscal 2006, we recorded a restructuring charge of $1.1 million, primarily attributed to severance-related amounts and relocation expenses related to the third restructuring plan. Of the reserve balance at April 30, 2006, $0.9 million was included in other accrued liabilities and the remaining $2.1 million was classified as long-term obligations. The balance of the reserve is expected to be paid by fiscal 2011. The following analysis sets forth the significant components of the second restructuring at April 30, 2006 (in thousands): Severance- Fixed Assets Related Amounts Write-off Facility Total Restructuring charge $ 813 $ 473 $ 4,564 $ 5,850 Cash payments and others (706 ) (1,713 ) (2,419 ) Noncash portion (473 ) (473 ) Adjustments (107 ) 2,357 2,250 Reserve balance at April 30, 2004 5,208 5,208 Cash payments and others (705 ) (705 ) Reserve balance at April 30, 2005 4,503 4,503 Restructuring charges 859 281 1,140 Cash payments and others (521 ) (862 ) (1,383 ) Recoveries (1,256 ) (1,256 ) Reserve balance at April 30, 2006 $ 338 $ $ 2,666 $ 3,004 Interest Income Interest income was $41.5 million and $24.2 million for fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. Included in interest income for fiscal 2005 was a $1.3 million interest received on a tax refund. The increase in interest income was primarily driven by higher average interest rates on our investment portfolio. We expect interest income to increase for fiscal 2007 as a result of rising average interest rates and higher cash and invested balances in a higher interest-rate portfolio environment. Interest Expense Interest expense was $1.3 million and $0.1 million in fiscal 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase in fiscal 2006 was primarily due to interest incurred in connection with our debt. Other Income (Expense), Net Other Income (Expense), Net, included net exchange gains from foreign currency transactions of $1.7 million in fiscal 2006, due primarily to forecast variances offset by hedging costs as a result of higher U.S. interest rates compared to other countries. Net exchange losses from foreign currency transactions were $1.6 million in fiscal 2005 as a result of exchange rate volatility, forecast variances and higher hedging costs. Provision for Income Taxes The provision for income taxes for fiscal 2006 included an income tax provision of $22.5 million or $0.06 per share associated with the repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings which occurred during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006 under the one-time incentive created pursuant to Section 965 of the Jobs Act. We will invest these earnings pursuant to an approved Domestic Reinvestment Plan that conforms to the Jobs Act guidelines. 48 Table of Contents For fiscal 2006, we had an effective tax rate of 23.9% to pretax income, which included a 6.4% increase to account for the income tax provision of $22.5 million associated with the cash repatriation of cumulative foreign earnings. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2006 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to a beneficial foreign tax ruling for our principal European subsidiary, the availability of tax credits, and the generation of foreign earnings in lower tax jurisdictions. For fiscal 2005, our effective tax rate was 18.3%. Fiscal 2005 Compared to Fiscal 2004 Product Revenues Product revenues increased by 33.4% to $1,260.6 million in fiscal 2005, from $944.9 million in fiscal 2004. Product revenues growth was across all geographies. This increase in product revenues was specifically attributable to increased software licenses and an increase in units shipped, compared to the prior year. Product revenues were favorably affected by the following factors: Increased revenues from our then current products such as: FAS960, FAS940, FAS270, and FAS250 storage systems; NearStore R200 and R150 nearline storage systems; NetCache C2100 and C6200 appliances, as well as our gateway storage systems (gFiler), GF960, GF940 and GF825 Increased revenues from data management software products that are focused on solving enterprise customer storage challenges, including regulatory and compliance data needs, storage consolidation, Internet access and security, technical applications, and data protection Increased demand for regulatory compliance WORM solutions and backup-to-disk solutions Increased sales through indirect channels, including sales through our resellers, distributors, and OEM partners, representing 51.2% and 47.9% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. Product revenues were negatively affected by the following factors: Lower-cost-per-megabyte disks which are a significant component of our hardware costs. As performance has improved on these devices, the related sales price we can charge per megabyte of storage has decreased as well. Incremental revenue due to an extra week of business in fiscal 2004 compared to fiscal 2005 Declining average selling price and unit sales of our older storage systems. Software Subscriptions Revenues Software subscriptions revenues increased by 49.8% to $169.7 million in fiscal 2005, from $113.3 million in fiscal 2004 due primarily to a larger installed base renewals, upgrades and an increasing number of new enterprise customers. Software subscription revenues represent 10.6% and 9.7% of total revenues for fiscal year 2005 and 2004, respectively. Service Revenues Service revenues, which include hardware support, professional services, and educational services, increased by 49.7% to $167.8 million in fiscal 2005, from $112.1 million in fiscal 2004. Service revenues are generally deferred and, in most cases, recognized ratably over the service obligation periods, which are typically one to three years. Service revenues represented 10.5%, and 9.6% of total revenues for fiscal year 2005 and 2004, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was due to an increasing number of enterprise customers, which typically purchase more complete and generally longer-term service packages. Higher service revenues were also related to a growing installed base resulting in new customer support contracts in addition to support contract renewals by existing customers. International Total Revenues International total revenues (including U.S. exports) increased by 39.0% in fiscal year 2005 compared with fiscal 2004. International total revenues were $765.8 million, or 47.9% of total revenues for fiscal year 2005 compared with $551.0 million or 47.1% of total revenues for fiscal 2004. The increase in international sales for fiscal year 2005 was primarily a result of revenue growth from our European and Asia Pacific geography, driven by larger storage implementations, increased demand for our solutions portfolio, new customers, and higher storage spending in certain geographic regions, as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year. 49 Table of Contents Product Gross Margins Product gross margins increased to 61.4% for fiscal 2005, from 60.8% for fiscal 2004. Amortization of existing technology included in cost of product revenues was $3.4 million and $3.7 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. Product gross margins were favorably affected by the following factors: Favorable product and add-on software mix Competitive pricing solutions with our bundled software and solutions set Higher average selling prices for our newer products Growth in software subscription upgrades and software licenses due primarily to a larger installed base and an increasing number of new enterprise customers Transitional expenses incurred in fiscal 2004 associated with the initial implementation of a new Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system, which we did not incur in fiscal 2005 Product gross margins were negatively affected by the following factors: Higher disk content with an expanded storage capacity for the higher-end storage systems and NearStore systems, as resale of disk drives generates lower gross margins Increased sales through certain indirect channels, which typically carry lower gross margins than our direct sales Sales price reductions due to competitive pricing pressure and selective pricing discounts Lower average selling price of certain add-on software options Software Subscriptions Gross Margins Software Subscriptions gross margins increased to 99.1% for fiscal 2005, from 98.9% for fiscal 2004 due primarily to improved headcount utilization and a larger installed base renewals, upgrades and an increasing number of new enterprise customers. Service Gross Margins Service gross margins increased to 19.4% in fiscal 2005 as compared to 15.9% in fiscal 2004. Cost of service revenue increased by 43.4% to $135.2 million in fiscal 2005, from $94.3 million in fiscal 2004. The improvement in service gross margins for fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004 was primarily due to an increase in services revenue and improved headcount utilization offset by the continued spending in our service infrastructure to support our increasing enterprise customer base. This spending included additional professional support engineers, increased support center activities, and global service partnership programs. Service gross margins will typically experience some variability over time due to the timing of technical support service initiations and renewals and additional investments in our customer support infrastructure. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, advertising and promotional expenses, and certain global service and support costs. Sales and marketing expenses increased 33.3% to $466.0 million for fiscal 2005, from $349.5 million for fiscal 2004. These expenses were 29.1% and 29.9% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. The increase in absolute dollars was attributed to increased commission expenses resulting from increased revenues, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, higher sales kickoff expenses, higher partner program expenses, and the continued worldwide spending in our sales and global service organizations associated with selling complete enterprise solutions, partially offset by an extra week of business in fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal 2005. Amortization of acquired trademarks/tradenames and customer contracts, and relationships included in sales and marketing expenses was $0.8 million and $0.2 million for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. Sales and marketing headcount increased to 1,918 at April 30, 2005, from 1,421 at April 30, 2004. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, prototype expenses, nonrecurring engineering charges, fees paid to outside consultants and amortization of capitalized patents. Research and development expenses increased 29.7% to $171.0 million for fiscal 2005 from $131.9 million for fiscal 2004. These expenses represented 10.7% and 11.3% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and 50 Table of Contents 2004, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily a result of increased headcount, ongoing impact of the Spinnaker acquisition, ongoing support of current and future product development and enhancement efforts, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, partially offset by an extra week of expenses in fiscal 2004 compared to fiscal 2005, cost control, and reduction in discretionary spending efforts. Research and development headcount increased to 827 as of April 30, 2005, compared to 650 as of April 30, 2004. For both fiscal 2005 and 2004, no software development costs were capitalized. Included in research and development expenses is capitalized patents amortization of $1.8 million and $1.5 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. General and Administrative General and administrative expenses increased 41.0% to $76.9 million for fiscal 2005, from $54.6 million for fiscal 2004. These expenses represented 4.8% and 4.7% of total revenues for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. This increase in absolute dollars was primarily due to expenses associated with expanded regulatory requirements, higher legal expenses and professional fees for general corporate matters including patents, higher performance-based payroll expenses due to higher profitability, partially offset by reduced expenses as a result of one less week of expenses in fiscal 2005 compared to fiscal 2004 and higher expenses associated with investments in our enterprise-wide ERP system and back-office infrastructure in fiscal 2004, which we did not incur in fiscal 2005. General and administrative headcount increased to 432 at April 30, 2005, from 331 at April 30, 2004. Amortization of Spinnaker covenants not to compete included in general and administrative expenses was $5.1 million and $1.1 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. Stock Compensation Stock compensation expenses were $8.1 million and $3.9 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. This net increase year-over-year in stock compensation expenses reflected primarily higher stock compensation relating to stock options and restricted stocks assumed in the Spinnaker acquisition, restricted stock awards, partially offset by forfeitures of unvested options and forfeited restricted stock assumed in the Spinnaker acquisition. Restructuring Charges In fiscal 2002, as a result of continuing unfavorable economic conditions and a reduction in IT spending rates, we implemented two restructuring plans, which included reductions in our workforce and consolidations of our facilities. During fiscal 2005, we paid $0.6 million pursuant to final resolution of certain severance-related restructuring accruals. As of April 30, 2005, we have no outstanding balance in our restructuring liability for the first restructuring. The second restructuring related to the closure of an engineering facility and consolidation of resources to the Sunnyvale headquarters. Of the reserve balance at April 30, 2005, $0.8 million was included in other accrued liabilities and the remaining $3.7 million was classified as long-term obligations. Interest Income Interest income was $24.2 million and $13.7 million for fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. Included in interest income for fiscal 2005 was $1.3 million interest received on a tax refund. In addition, the increase in interest income was primarily driven by higher cash and investment balances provided by operating activities and higher average interest rates on our investment portfolio. Other Income (Expense), Net Other Income (Expense), Net, included net exchange losses from foreign currency transactions of $1.6 million and $2.9 million in fiscal 2005 and 2004, respectively. The net exchange loss was a result of the volatility of the currency exchange market and increased hedging costs associated with our forward and option activities. Provision for Income Taxes For fiscal 2005, we had an effective tax rate of 18.3% to pretax income. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2005 differed from the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to a beneficial foreign tax ruling for our principal European subsidiary, the availability of tax credits, and the generation of foreign earnings in lower tax jurisdictions. For fiscal 2004, our effective tax rate was 10.8% which included 9.9% reduction to account for the $16.8 million benefit from the retroactive portion of foreign tax ruling. 51 Table of Contents Liquidity and Capital Resources The following sections discuss the effects of changes in our balance sheet and cash flows, contractual obligations and other commercial commitments, stock repurchase program, capital commitments, other sources and uses of cash flows and tax opportunities on our liquidity and capital resources. Balance Sheet and Other Cash Flows As of April 30, 2006, compared to April 30, 2005, our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments increased by $152.9 million to $1,322.9 million. We derive our liquidity and capital resources primarily from our cash flows from operations and from working capital. Working capital increased by $60.3 million to $1,116.0 million as of April 30, 2006, compared to $1,055.7 million as of April 30, 2005. During fiscal 2006, we recorded cash flows from operating activities of $554.3 million as compared with $462.1 million and $313.0 million for fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. The largest driver of this increase was fiscal 2006 net income of $266.5 million as compared to $225.8 million and $152.1 million in fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. Noncash adjustments were higher in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005, including depreciation, which was higher by $9.2 million due to worldwide facilities expansion; amortization of intangible assets, which was higher by $6.8 million; stock compensation, which was higher by $5.1 million, and acquired in-process research and development of $5.0 million. The increase in these acquisition-related non-cash charges was related to the Decru and Alacritus acquisitions during fiscal 2006. In addition to higher net income and noncash adjustments in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, the primary factors that impacted the period-to-period change in cash flows relating to operating activities included the following: An increase in deferred revenues from higher software subscription and service billings attributable to our continuing shift toward larger enterprise customers, as well as increasing renewals of existing maintenance agreements in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 An increase in accounts payable in fiscal 2005, compared to fiscal 2006 and 2004, primarily attributable to elevated purchasing activity in fiscal 2005 required to support our business growth and facilities expansion projects Increased income taxes payable in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 and 2004, primarily reflecting the $22.5 million of federal and state income tax liability relating to the repatriation of accumulated foreign earnings under the Jobs Act and higher profitability in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 and 2004 The above factors were partially offset by the effects of the following: Increased accounts receivable balances due to increased sales in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, and a shipping profile weighted towards the second half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006 An increase in inventories in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 due primarily to higher consigned inventory for IBM sales, new products at customer sites and configured units to meet revenue growth and an increase in fiscal 2005 inventories compared to fiscal 2004 due primarily to end-of-life buys for certain products An increase in prepaid expenses and other assets in fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal 2005. The fiscal 2005 prepaid expenses included a tax refund of $9.0 million in connection with a carryback of net operating losses generated in fiscal 2000 We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, shipment linearity, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax and other payments. Cash used in investing activities was $326.0 million in fiscal 2006 as compared to $351.3 million and $259.8 million in fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. Capital expenditures for fiscal 2006 were $132.9 million, compared to $93.6 million and $48.7 million in fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. We used net proceeds of $128.5 million, $266.8 million, and $191.7 million in fiscal 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively, for net purchases/redemptions of short-term investments. In fiscal 2006, we acquired Alacritus and Decru and incurred total cash 52 Table of Contents payments including related transactions costs totaling $53.7 million. In fiscal 2004, we incurred $8.0 million on related transactions costs and assumed $1.2 million relating to the Spinnaker acquisition. In fiscal 2005 and 2004, we acquired additional patents for a purchase price of approximately $0.9 million and $9.0 million, respectively. Investing activities in fiscal 2006, 2005, and 2004 also included new investments in privately held companies of $9.3 million, $0.4 million and $0.9 million, respectively. We received $0.1 million, $0.3 million, and $1.1 million in proceeds from sales of investments in fiscal 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. Under a split dollar insurance arrangement with our CEO entered in May 2000, we paid total premiums of $10.2 million, including $0.2 million and $3.9 million for fiscal years 2005, and 2004, respectively. In April 2005, our CEO reimbursed us $10.2 million for these premiums. Cash provided by financing activities was $42.8 million in fiscal 2006 as compared to cash used in financing activities of $12.1 million and $54.6 million in fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004, respectively. During fiscal 2006, 2005 and 2004, we repurchased 17.4 million, 7.7 million and 6.9 million shares of common stock at a total of $488.9 million, $192.9 million and $136.2 million, respectively. Other financing activities provided $232.7 million, $181.9 million, and $81.5 million in fiscal 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively, which related to sales of common stock from employee stock transactions. Pursuant to the provisions of our Stock Option plans, we allowed optionees to satisfy withholding tax obligations by electing to have us withhold from the shares to be issued upon exercise of a restricted stock the equivalent shares having a fair market value equal to $1.1 million in withholding taxes in both fiscal 2006 and fiscal 2005 to cover for federal, state, and local withholding taxes. During fiscal 2006, we borrowed $300.0 million to fund the repatriation in cash from foreign earnings and investments under the Jobs Act. The change in cash flows from financing activities was primarily due to the effects of higher common stock repurchases partially offset by proceeds from issuance of common stock under employee programs compared to the same periods in the prior year. Net proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to employee participation in employee stock programs have historically been a significant component of our liquidity. The extent to which our employees participate in these programs generally increases or decreases based upon changes in the market price of our common stock. As a result, our cash flows resulting from the issuance of common stock related to employee participation in employee stock programs will vary. Stock Repurchase Program Through April 30, 2006, the Board of Directors had authorized the repurchase of up to $650.0 million in shares of our outstanding common stock. At April 30, 2006, $405.7 million remained available for future repurchases. The stock repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. Other Sources and Uses of Cash and Tax Opportunities The Jobs Act created a one-time incentive for U.S. corporations to repatriate accumulated income earned abroad by providing an 85% dividend-received deduction for certain dividends from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006, we repatriated $405.5 million of accumulated foreign earnings and recorded a $22.5 million federal and state income tax liability upon the remittance of these foreign earnings. For fiscal 2006, 2005, and 2004, we recorded tax benefits, in the form of reduced payments, of $42.2 million, $27.8 million, and $49.5 million, respectively, associated with disqualifying dispositions of employee stock options. If stock option exercise patterns change, we may receive less cash from stock option exercises and may not receive the same level of tax benefits in the future, which could cause our cash payments for income taxes to increase. Debt In March 2006, we received proceeds of the term loans totaling $300.0 million to finance a dividend under the Jobs Act. (See Note 6). The loan repayments of $166.2 million and $133.8 million are due in fiscal 2007 and 2008, respectively. This debt was collateralized by restricted investments totaling $241.2 million, as well as certain foreign receivables. In accordance with the payment terms of the loan agreement, interest payments will be approximately $12.4 million and $4.1 million in fiscal 2007 and 2008, respectively. As of April 30, 2006, we are in compliance with the liquidity and leverage ratio as required by the Loan Agreement with the lenders. 53 Table of Contents Contractual Cash Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments The following summarizes our contractual cash obligations and commercial commitments at April 30, 2006, and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands): 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Thereafter Total (In thousands) Contractual Obligations: Office operating lease payments(1) $ 15,466 $ 15,630 $ 14,942 $ 12,026 $ 9,703 $ 20,934 $ 88,701 Real estates lease payments(2) 1,252 2,147 2,147 2,147 35,766 43,459 Equipment operating lease payments(3) 7,215 6,534 4,083 50 6 17,888 Venture capital funding commitments(4) 381 368 356 343 331 21 1,800 Capital expenditures(5) 10,684 10,684 Communications and maintenance(6) 9,098 5,956 2,072 419 1 17,546 Restructuring charges(7) 806 579 603 637 379 3,004 Debt(8) 178,633 137,895 316,528 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 222,283 $ 168,214 $ 24,203 $ 15,622 $ 12,567 $ 56,721 $ 499,610 For purposes of the above table, contractual obligations for the purchase of goods and services are defined as agreements that are enforceable, legally binding on us, and subject us to penalties if we cancel the agreement. Some of the figures we include in this table are based on management estimates and assumptions about these obligations, including their duration, the possibility of renewal or termination, anticipated actions by third parties, and other factors. Because these estimates and assumptions are necessarily subjective, the enforceable and legally binding obligations we will actually pay in future periods may vary from those reflected in the table. 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Thereafter Total (In thousands) Other Commercial Commitments: Letters of credit(9) $ 1,471 $ $ $ $ $ 337 $ 1,808 (1) We enter into operating leases in the normal course of business. We lease sales offices, research and development facilities, and other property under operating leases throughout the U.S. and internationally, which expire through fiscal 2015. Substantially all lease agreements have fixed payment terms based on the passage of time and contain escalation clauses. Some lease agreements provide us with the option to renew the lease or to terminate the lease. Our future operating lease obligations would change if we were to exercise these options or if we were to enter into additional operating lease agreements. Sublease income of $0.03 million has been included as a reduction of the payment amounts shown in the table. Facilities operating lease payments exclude the leases impacted by the restructurings. The amounts for the leases impacted by the restructurings are included in subparagraph (7) below. (2) On December 16, 2005, we entered into financing, construction and leasing arrangements with BNP for office space to be located on land currently owned by us in Sunnyvale, California. This arrangements requires us to lease our land to BNP for a period of 50 years to construct approximately 190,000 square feet of office space costing up to $38.5 million. After completion of construction, we will pay minimum lease payments which vary based on London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) plus a spread (5.58% at April 30, 2006) on the cost of the facilities. We expect to begin paying lease payments on the completed buildings on September 2007 for a term of five years. We have the option to renew the lease for two consecutive five-year periods upon approval by BNP. 54 Table of Contents Upon expiration (or upon any earlier termination) of the lease term, we must elect one of the following options: we may (i) purchase the building from BNP for $38.5 million, (ii) if certain conditions are met, arrange for the sale of the building by BNP to a third party for an amount equal to at least $32.7 million, and be liable for any deficiency between the net proceeds received from the third party and $32.7 million, or (iii) pay BNP a supplemental payment of $32.7 million, in which event, we may recoup some or all of such payment by arranging for a sale of the building by BNP during the ensuing 2 year period. Included in the above contractual cash obligations are (a) lease commitments of $1.3 million in fiscal 2008, $2.1 million in each of the fiscal years 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and $0.9 million in fiscal 2013, which are based on the LIBOR rate at April 30, 2006 for a term of 5 years, and (b) at the expiration or termination of the lease, a supplemental payment obligation equal to our minimum guarantee of $32.7 million in the event that we elect not to purchase or arrange for a sale of the building. The lease also requires us to maintain specified financial covenants with which we were in compliance as of April 30, 2006. Such specified financial covenants include a maximum ratio of Total Debt to Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ( EBITDA ) and a Minimum Unencumbered Cash and Short Term Investments. (3) Equipment operating leases include servers and IT equipment used in our Engineering labs and data centers. (4) Venture capital funding commitments include a quarterly committed management fee based on a percentage of our committed funding to be payable through June 2011. (5) Capital expenditures include worldwide contractual commitments to purchase equipment and to construct building and leasehold improvements, which will be recorded as Property and Equipment. (6) We are required to pay based on a minimum volume under certain communication contracts with major telecommunication companies as well as maintenance contracts with multiple vendors. Such obligations expire in April 2010. (7) These amounts are included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets under Other accrued liabilities and Long-term Obligations, which is comprised of committed lease payments and operating expenses net of committed sublease income. (8) Included in these amounts are $300.0 million loan on our Consolidated Balance Sheets under Current portion of long-term debt and Long-term Debt. This amount also includes estimated interest payments of $12.4 million and $4.1 million for fiscal 2007 and 2008, respectively. (9) The amounts outstanding under these letters of credit relate to workers compensation, a customs guarantee, a corporate credit card program, and a foreign rent guarantee. Capital Expenditure Requirements We expect capital expenditures to increase in the future consistent with the growth in our business, as we continue to invest in people, land, buildings, capital equipment and enhancements to our worldwide infrastructure. We expect that our existing facilities and those being developed in Sunnyvale, California; RTP, North Carolina; and worldwide are adequate for our requirements over at least the next two years and that additional space will be available as needed. We expect to finance these construction projects, including our commitments under facilities and equipment operating leases, and any required capital expenditures over the next few years through cash from operations and existing cash, cash equivalents and investments. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As of April 30, 2006, our financial guarantees of $1.8 million that were not recorded on our balance sheet consisted of standby letters of credit related to workers compensation, a customs guarantee, a corporate credit card program, and a foreign lease. As of April 30, 2006, our notional fair values of foreign exchange forward and foreign currency option contracts totaled $345.1 million. We do not believe that these derivatives present significant credit risks because the counterparties to the derivatives consist of major financial institutions, and we manage the notional amount of contracts entered into with any one counterparty. We do not enter into derivative financial instruments for 55 Table of Contents speculative or trading purposes. Other than the risk associated with the financial condition of the counterparties, our maximum exposure related to foreign currency forward and option contracts is limited to the premiums paid. We have entered into indemnification agreements with third parties in the ordinary course of business. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by the third party due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with FASB, Interpretation 45, of FIN 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. See Guarantees in footnote 15 for further discussion of these indemnification agreements. We have commitments related to a lease arrangement with BNP for approximately 190,000 square feet of office space to be located on land currently owned by us in Sunnyvale, California (as further described above under Contractual Cash Obligations and Other Commercial Commitments ). We have evaluated our accounting for this lease under the provisions of FIN 46R, and have determined the following: BNP is a leasing company for BNP Paribas in the U.S. BNP is not a special purpose entity organized for the sole purpose of facilitating the lease to us. The obligation to absorb expected losses and receive expected residual returns rests with the parent BNP Paribas. Therefore, we are not the primary beneficiary of BNP as we do not absorb the majority of BNP expected losses or expected residual returns; and BNP has represented in the Closing Agreement (filed as Exhibit 10.40) that the fair value of the property leased to us by BNP is less than half of the total of the fair values of all assets of BNP, excluding any assets of BNP held within a silo. Further, the property leased to Network Appliance is not held within a silo. The definition of held within a silo means that BNP has obtained funds equal to or in excess of 95% of the fair value of the leased asset to acquire or maintain its investment in such asset through non-recourse financing or other contractual arrangements, the effect of which is to leave such asset (or proceeds thereof) as the only significant asset of BNP at risk for the repayment of such funds. Accordingly, under the current FIN 46R standard, we are not required to consolidate either the leasing entity or the specific assets that we lease under the BNP lease. Assuming this transaction will continue to meet the provisions of FIN 46R as new standards evolve over time, our future minimum lease payments under this real estates lease will amount to a total of $43.5 million reported under our Note 4 Commitments and Contingencies . As of April 30, 2006, except for operating leases and other contractual obligations outlined under the Contractual Cash Obligations table, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets, or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity. We also do not have any majority-owned subsidiaries that are not included in the consolidated financial statements. Additionally, we do not have any interest in or relationship with, any special purpose entities. Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements Key factors affecting our cash flows include our ability to effectively manage our working capital, in particular, accounts receivable and inventories and future demand for our products and related pricing. We expect to incur higher capital expenditures in the near future to expand our operations. We will from time to time acquire products and businesses complementary to our business. In the future, we may continue to repurchase our common stock, which would reduce cash, cash equivalents, and/or short-term investments available to fund future operations and meet other liquidity requirements. Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and cash generated from operations will satisfy our working capital needs, capital expenditures, stock repurchases, contractual obligations, and other liquidity requirements associated with our operations. 
