CIK: 1086222
Company Name: AKAMAI TECHNOLOGIES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-03-01


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview We provide services for accelerating and improving the delivery of content and applications over the Internet. We primarily derive income from the sale of services to customers executing contracts with terms of one year or longer, which we refer to as recurring revenue contracts or long-term contracts. These contracts generally commit the customer to a minimum monthly level of usage with additional charges applicable for actual usage above the monthly minimum. In recent years, however, we have entered into increasing numbers of customer contracts that have minimum usage commitments that are based on twelve-month or longer periods. Our goal of having a consistent and predictable base level of income is important to our financial success. Accordingly, to be successful, we must maintain our base of recurring revenue contracts by eliminating or reducing lost monthly or annual recurring revenue due to customer cancellations or terminations and build on that base by adding new customers and increasing the number of services, features and functions our existing customers purchase. At the same time, we must ensure that our expenses do not increase faster than, or at the same rate as, our revenues. Accomplishing these goals requires that we compete effectively in the marketplace on the basis of price, quality and the attractiveness of our services and technology. This Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto which appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See Risk Factors elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of certain risks associated with our business. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements do not include the potential impact of any mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures of business combinations that may be announced after the date hereof. Recent Events On December 13, 2006, we acquired all of the outstanding equity of Nine Systems in exchange for approximately 2.7 million shares of Akamai common stock and approximately $4.5 million in cash, and we assumed options that had been issued by Nine Systems Corporation that are exercisable for approximately 400,000 shares of Akamai common stock. The revenues and expenses generated from the acquisition date, December 13, 2006, to December 31, 2006 were not significant to our fiscal 2006 financial results reported in our consolidated statement of operations included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. On February 5, 2007, we announced that we had entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger to acquire Netli. Under the terms of the Agreement and Plan of Merger, upon consummation, we will acquire all of the outstanding equity of Netli in exchange for approximately 3.2 million shares of Akamai common stock, subject to certain closing adjustments. 19 Table of Contents Our improved financial results in 2006 as compared to 2005 and 2004 reflect the success of our efforts to increase our monthly and annual recurring revenues while limiting the expenses needed to support such growth. The following sets forth, as a percentage of revenues, consolidated statements of operations data for the years indicated: 2006 2005 2004 Revenues 100 % 100 % 100 % Cost of revenues 22 20 22 Research and development 8 6 6 Sales and marketing 28 28 27 General and administrative 21 19 22 Amortization of other intangible assets 2 2 Total costs and operating expenses 81 75 77 Income from operations 19 25 23 Interest income 4 2 1 Interest expense (1 ) (2 ) (5 ) Other income (expense), net 1 Gain (loss) on investments, net Loss on early extinguishment of debt (3 ) Income before provision (benefit) for income taxes 22 25 17 Provision (benefit) for income taxes 9 (91 ) 1 Net income 13 % 116 % 16 % We were profitable for fiscal years 2006, 2005 and 2004; however, we cannot guarantee continued profitability for any period in the future. We have observed the following trends and events that are likely to have an impact on our financial condition and results of operations in the foreseeable future: During each quarter in 2006 and 2005, the dollar volume of new recurring revenue contracts exceeded the dollar volume of the contracts we lost through cancellations, terminations and non-payment. A continuation of this trend would lead to increased revenues in the future. During 2006, no customer accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues. We expect that customer concentration levels will continue to decline compared to prior years if our customer base continues to grow. As of January 1, 2006, we adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment (revised 2004), or SFAS No. 123(R), which requires us to record compensation expense for employee stock awards at fair value at the time of grant. As a result, our stock-based compensation expense increased in 2006 as compared to 2005, causing our net income to decrease significantly. For the year ended December 31, 2006, our pre-tax stock-based compensation expense was $49.6 million, as compared to $3.8 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. We expect that stock-based compensation expense will continue at the current rate, or slightly increase in the future, because we have a significant number of unvested employee awards outstanding and plan to continue to grant equity-based compensation in the future. As of December 31, 2006, our total pre-tax unrecognized compensation costs for stock-based awards were $107.5 million, which we expect to recognize as expense over a weighted average period of 1.5 years. During 2006, revenues derived from customers outside the United States accounted for 22% of our total revenues. We expect that revenues from customers outside the United States as a percentage of our total revenues will be between 20% and 25% in 2007. During 2006, we continued to reduce our network bandwidth costs per unit by entering into new supplier contracts with lower pricing and amending existing contracts to take advantage of price reductions offered by our existing suppliers. However, due to increased traffic delivered over our network, our total bandwidth 20 Table of Contents costs increased during 2006. We believe that our overall bandwidth costs will continue to increase as a result of expected higher traffic levels, partially offset by continued reductions in bandwidth costs per unit that we have realized and may continue to realize in the future. If we do not experience lower per unit bandwidth pricing and we are unsuccessful at effectively routing traffic over our network through lower cost providers, network bandwidth costs could increase in excess of our expectations in 2007. Depreciation expense related to our network equipment increased in 2006 as compared to 2005 as we have increased our purchases of servers during the year in an effort to expand our network and improve the quality of our services. We expect this trend to continue in 2007; accordingly, we believe that depreciation expense related to our network equipment will continue to increase. In addition, we expect to continue to enhance and add functionality to our service offerings and, therefore, to increase the amount of capitalized internal-use software costs, which includes stock-based compensation expense attributable to employees working on such projects. As a result, we believe that the amortization of internal-use software development costs, which we include in cost of revenues, will increase in 2007. During 2006, our effective tax rate, including discrete items, was 41.5%. While we expect our annual effective tax rate to remain relatively constant in 2007, we do not expect to make significant cash tax payments due to the continued utilization of our net operating loss carryforwards. Based on our analysis of these identified trends and events, we expect to continue to generate net income on a quarterly and annual basis during 2007; however, our future results and our ability to generate profits will be affected by many factors identified below and in the section of this report entitled Risk Factors, including our ability to: increase our revenue by adding customers through long-term contracts and limiting customer cancellations and terminations; maintain the prices we charge for our services; prevent disruptions to our services and network due to accidents or intentional attacks; and maintain our network bandwidth costs and other operating expenses consistent with our revenues. Given these uncertainties, there is no assurance that we will achieve our expected financial objectives, including positive net income. Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Overview Our management discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. These principles require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, cash flow and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates include those related to revenue recognition, accounts receivable and related reserves, capitalized internal-use software costs, intangible assets and goodwill, income and other taxes, impairment and useful lives of long-lived assets, restructuring liabilities, loss contingencies and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results may differ from these estimates. For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Definitions We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America that require us to make subjective estimates about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. Our estimates are based upon assumptions and judgments about matters that are 21 Table of Contents highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made and applied and require us to assess a range of potential outcomes. Review of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Revenue Recognition: We recognize service revenue in accordance with the Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, Revenue Recognition, and the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 00-21, Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables. Revenue is recognized only when the price is fixed or determinable, persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, the service is performed and collectibility of the resulting receivable is reasonably assured. At the inception of a customer contract for service, we make an estimate as to that customer ability to pay for the services provided. We base our estimate on a combination of factors, including the successful completion of a credit check or financial review, our payment history with the customer and other forms of payment assurance. Upon the completion of these steps, we recognize revenue monthly in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. If we subsequently determine that collection from the customer is not reasonably assured, we record an allowance for doubtful accounts and bad debt expense for all of that customer unpaid invoices and cease recognizing revenue for continued services provided until cash is received. Changes in our estimates and judgments about whether collection is reasonably assured would change the timing of revenue or amount of bad debt expense that we recognize. We primarily derive income from the sale of services to customers executing contracts with terms of one year or longer. These contracts generally commit the customer to a minimum monthly or annual level of usage and provide the rate at which the customer must pay for actual usage above the monthly or annual minimum. For these services, we recognize the monthly minimum as revenue each month provided that an enforceable contract has been signed by both parties, the service has been delivered to the customer, the fee for the service is fixed or determinable and collection is reasonably assured. Should a customer usage of our service exceed the monthly minimum, we recognize revenue for such excess usage in the period of the usage. For annual revenue commitments, we recognize revenue monthly based upon the customer usage in such period. We typically charge the customer an installation fee when the services are first activated. The installation fees are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the estimated life of the customer arrangement. We also derive income from services sold as discrete, non-recurring events or based solely on usage. For these services, we recognize revenue after an enforceable contract has been signed by both parties, the fee is fixed or determinable, the event or usage has occurred and collection is reasonably assured. When more than one element is contained in a single arrangement, we allocate revenue between the elements based on each element relative fair value, provided that each element meets the criteria as a separate unit of accounting. An item is considered a separate unit of accounting if it has value to the customer on a standalone basis and there is objective and verifiable evidence of the fair value of the separate elements. Fair value is generally determined based upon the price charged when the element is sold separately. If the fair value of each element cannot be objectively determined, the total value of the arrangement is recognized ratably over the entire service period to the extent that all services have begun to be provided at the outset of the period. For most multi-element service arrangements to date, the fair value of each element has not been objectively determinable. Therefore, all revenue under these arrangements has been recognized ratably over the related service period to the extent that all services have begun to be provided at the outset of the period. We also license software under perpetual and term license agreements. We apply the provisions of Statement of Position, or SOP, 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, as amended by SOP 98-9, Modifications of SOP 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, With Respect to Certain Transactions. As prescribed by this guidance, we apply the residual method of accounting. The residual method requires that the portion of the total arrangement fee attributable to undelivered elements, as indicated by vendor specific objective evidence of fair value, is deferred and subsequently recognized when delivered. The difference between the total arrangement fee and the amount deferred for the undelivered elements is recognized as revenue related to the delivered elements, if all other revenue recognition criteria of SOP 97-2 are met. 22 Table of Contents We also sell our services through a reseller channel. Assuming all other revenue recognition criteria are met, we recognize revenue from reseller arrangements based on the reseller contracted non-refundable minimum purchase commitments over the term of the contract, plus amounts sold by the reseller to its customers in excess of the minimum commitments. These excess commitments are recognized as revenue in the period in which the service is provided. We recognize revenue from fixed-fee arrangements and software arrangements that require significant customization or modification using the percentage-of-completion method in accordance with Accounting Research Bulletin, or ARB, No. 45, Long-Term Construction-Type Contracts, and with the applicable guidance provided by SOP 81-1, Accounting for Performance of Construction-Type and Certain Production-Type Contracts. We generally recognize revenue under these arrangements based on the percentage of cost incurred to date compared to the estimated total cost to complete the project. In certain customer arrangements, we recognize revenue based on the progress made towards achieving milestones under the contract. The impact of any change in estimate is recorded prospectively from the date of the change. At the outset of a fixed-fee arrangement, if we are not able to estimate the total cost-to-complete, nor able to measure progress towards the achievement of contract milestones, we account for the arrangement using the completed-contract method of accounting. Under this method, we recognize revenue when the contract is complete and there are no remaining costs or deliverables. In the event that the estimated total cost on a fixed-fee contract indicates a loss, we will record the loss immediately. From time to time, we enter into contracts to sell our services or license our technology to unrelated companies at or about the same time we enter into contracts to purchase products or services from the same companies. If we conclude that these contracts were negotiated concurrently, we record as revenue only the net cash received from the vendor, unless the product or service received has a separate and identifiable benefit and the fair value to us of the vendor product or service can be objectively established. We may from time to time resell licenses or services of third parties. We record revenue for these transactions on a gross basis when we have risk of loss related to the amounts purchased from the third party and we add value to the license or service, such as by providing maintenance or support for such license or service. If these conditions are present, we recognize revenue when all other revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. Deferred revenue includes amounts billed to customers for which revenue has not been recognized. Deferred revenue primarily consists of the unearned portion of monthly billed service fees; prepayments made by customers for future periods; deferred installation and activation set-up fees; amounts billed under extended payment terms; and maintenance and support fees charged under license arrangements. Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves: Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amounts and do not bear interest. In addition to trade accounts receivable, our accounts receivable balance includes unbilled accounts that represent revenue recorded for customers that is typically billed within one month. We record reserves against our accounts receivable balance. These reserves consist of allowances for doubtful accounts, cash basis customers and service credits. Increases and decreases in the allowance for doubtful accounts are included as a component of general and administrative expenses. The reserve for cash basis customers increases as services are provided to customers for which collection is no longer assured. The reserve decreases and revenue is recognized when and if cash payments are received. The reserve for service credits increases as a result of specific service credits that are expected to be issued to customers during the ordinary course of business, as well as for billing disputes. These credits result in a reduction to revenues. Decreases to the reserve for service credits are the result of actual credits being issued to customers, causing a corresponding reduction in accounts receivable. Estimates are used in determining these reserves and are based upon our review of outstanding balances on a customer-specific, account-by-account basis. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based upon a review of customer receivables from prior sales with collection issues where we no longer believe that the customer has the ability to pay for prior services provided. We reserve for all invoices that have been outstanding greater than one year. We perform on-going credit evaluations of our customers. If such an evaluation indicates that payment is no longer reasonably assured for services provided, any future services provided to that customer will result in creation of a cash basis reserve until we receive consistent payments. In addition, we reserve a portion of revenues as a 23 Table of Contents reserve for service credits. Reserves for service credits are measured based on an analysis of revenue credits to be issued after the month of billing and an estimate for future credits. These credits typically relate to management estimate of the resolution of customer disputes and billing adjustments. We do not have any off-balance sheet credit exposure related to our customers. Impairment and Useful Lives of Long-Lived Assets: We review our long-lived assets, such as fixed assets and intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events that would trigger an impairment review include a change in the use of the asset or forecasted negative cash flows related to the asset. When such events occur, we compare the carrying amount of the asset to the undiscounted expected future cash flows related to the asset. If this comparison indicates that an impairment is present, the amount of the impairment is calculated as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset. If a readily determinable market price does not exist, fair value is estimated using discounted expected cash flows attributable to the asset. The estimates required to apply this accounting policy include forecasted usage of the long-lived assets and the useful lives of these assets and expected future cash flows. Changes in these estimates could materially impact results from operations. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets We test goodwill for impairments on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We performed an impairment test of goodwill as of January 1, 2006 and January 1, 2007. These tests did not result in an impairment of goodwill. Other intangible assets consist of completed technologies, customer relationships, trademarks and non-compete agreements arising from acquisitions of businesses and acquired license rights. Purchased intangible assets, other than goodwill, are amortized over their estimated useful lives based upon the economic value derived from the related intangible assets. Goodwill is carried at its historical cost. Restructuring Liabilities Related to Facility Leases: When we vacate a facility subject to a non-cancelable long-term lease, we record a restructuring liability for either the estimated costs to terminate the lease or the estimated costs that will continue to be incurred under the lease for its remaining term where there is no economic benefit to us. In the latter case, we measure the amount of the restructuring liability as the amount of contractual future lease payments reduced by an estimate of sublease income. To date, we have recorded a restructuring liability when our management approves and commits us to a plan to terminate a lease, the plan specifically identifies the actions to be taken, and the actions are scheduled to begin soon after management approves the plan. In accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, or SFAS, No. 146, Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities, we record restructuring liabilities, discounted at the appropriate rate, for a facility lease only when we have both vacated the space and completed all actions needed to make the space readily available for sublease. As of December 31, 2006, we had approximately $900,000 in accrued restructuring liabilities related to vacated facilities, which we expect will be paid within 12 months. Loss Contingencies: We define a loss contingency as a condition involving uncertainty as to a possible loss related to a previous event that will not be resolved until one or more future events occur or fail to occur. Our primary loss contingencies relate to pending or threatened litigation. We record a liability for a loss contingency when we believe that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. When we believe the likelihood of a loss is less than probable and more than remote, we do not record a liability. Material loss contingencies are disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Tax Reserves: Our provision for income taxes is comprised of a current and a deferred portion. The current income tax provision is calculated as the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current year. The deferred 24 Table of Contents income tax provision is calculated for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards using expected tax rates in effect in the years during which the differences are expected to reverse. We currently have significant deferred tax assets resulting from net operating loss carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards and deductible temporary differences. Our management periodically weighs the positive and negative evidence to determine if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. During 2005, our management determined it was more likely than not that substantially all of the deferred tax assets would be realized, and, accordingly released substantially all of our valuation allowance. This decision was based on our cumulative history of earnings before taxes for financial reporting purposes over a 12-quarter period and on the projections of expected future taxable income. The tax assets estimated to be realized in future periods have been calculated by applying a blended federal and state tax rate of 39.1%, which is based upon the tax rates expected to be in effect, apportioned by jurisdiction, in the periods during which the attributes are expected to be utilized. Changes in this blended rate in future periods could have a material effect on both the tax provision in the period of change as well as the net deferred tax asset carrying value. We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our sales and use and franchise tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of these tax reserves contains assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the costs of the ultimate tax liability or benefit from these matters may be materially greater or less than the amount that we estimated. In November 2005, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position SFAS No. 123(R)-3, Transition Election to Accounting for the Tax Effect of Share-Based Payment Awards. We have elected to adopt the modified prospective transition method for calculating the tax effects of stock-based compensation pursuant to SFAS No. 123(R). Under the modified prospective transition method, no adjustment is made to the deferred tax balances associated with stock-based payments that continue to be classified as equity awards. Additionally, we elected to use the long-form method, as provided in paragraph 81 of SFAS No. 123(R) to determine the pool of windfall tax benefits. The long-form method requires us to analyze the book and tax compensation for each award separately as if it had been issued following the recognition provisions of SFAS No. 123, subject to adjustments for net operating loss carryforwards. Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation Since January 1, 2006, we have accounted for stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R). Historically, we recognized stock-based compensation costs pursuant to Accounting Principles Bulletin No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees, and elected to disclose the impact of expensing stock options pursuant to SFAS No. 123, Share-Based Payment in the notes to our financial statements. See Note 16 to the Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Under the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS No. 123(R), stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award and is recognized as expense over the vesting period. We have selected the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine fair value of stock option awards. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires judgment, including estimating the expected life of the stock awards and the volatility of the underlying common stock. Our assumptions may differ from those used in prior periods because of adjustments to the calculation of such assumptions based upon the guidance of SFAS No. 123(R) and Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment. Changes to the assumptions may have a significant impact on the fair value of stock options, which could have a material impact on our financial statements. In addition, judgment is also required in estimating the amount of stock-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. Should our actual forfeiture rates differ significantly from our estimates, our stock-based compensation expense and results of operations could be materially impacted. Capitalized Internal-Use Software Costs: We capitalize the salaries and payroll-related costs of employees and consultants who devote time to the development of internal-use software projects. If a project constitutes an enhancement to previously developed software, we assess whether the enhancement is significant and creates additional functionality to the software, thus 25 Table of Contents qualifying the work incurred for capitalization. Once the project is complete, we estimate the useful life of the internal-use software, and we periodically assess whether the software is impaired. Changes in our estimates related to internal-use software would increase or decrease operating expenses or amortization recorded during the period. Results of Operations Revenues. Total revenues increased 51%, or $145.6 million, to $428.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $283.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Total revenues increased 35%, or $73.1 million, to $283.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $210.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. The increase in total revenues for 2006 as compared to 2005 was attributable to an increase in service revenue of $146.0 million. Service revenue, which consists of revenue from our content and application delivery services, increased 52%, to $427.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $281.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Service revenue was $206.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. The increases in service revenue during the periods presented were primarily attributable to increases in the number of customers under recurring revenue contracts, as well as increases in traffic and additional services sold to new and existing customers and increases in the average revenue per customer. The increases in service revenue 2006 and 2005 are attributable to greater market acceptance of our services among new customers and improvements in our ability to sell additional features to our existing customers. Our delivery of streaming services for a number of high-profile media events during 2006 also contributed to higher service revenue. Also contributing to the increases in service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2006 were revenues generated from customers of Speedera, which we acquired in June 2005. As of December 31, 2006, we had 2,347 customers under recurring revenue contracts as compared to 1,910 as of December 31, 2005, and 1,310 as of December 31, 2004. Software and software-related revenue decreased 27%, or $449,000, to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Software and software-related revenue was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. Software and software-related revenue includes sales of customized software projects and technology licensing. The decreases in software and software-related revenue over the periods presented reflect a reduction in the number of customized software projects that we undertook for customers and a decrease in the number of software licenses executed with customers. We do not expect software and software-related revenue to increase as a percentage of revenues in 2007. For 2006 and 2005, 22% and 21%, respectively, of our total revenues was derived from our operations located outside of the United States, of which 18% and 16% of total revenues, respectively, was derived from operations in Europe. For 2004, 19% of our total revenues was derived from our operations located outside of the United States, of which 14% of total revenues was derived from operations in Europe. No single country accounted for 10% or more of revenues derived outside of the United States during these periods. We do not expect international sales to increase as a percentage of our overall sales in 2007. Resellers accounted for 20% of revenues in 2006, 24% in 2005 and 27% in 2004. For 2006 and 2005, no single customer accounted for 10% or more of total revenues. For 2004, Microsoft Corporation accounted for 10% of total revenues. Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues includes fees paid to network providers for bandwidth and co-location of our network equipment. Cost of revenues also includes payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation for network operations personnel, cost of software licenses, depreciation of network equipment used to deliver our services, amortization of internal-use software and amortization of capitalized stock-based compensation. Cost of revenues increased 69%, or $38.4 million, to $94.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $55.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Cost of revenues increased 21%, or $9.5 million, to $55.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to $46.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. These increases were primarily due to an increase in the amounts paid to network providers due to higher traffic levels, partially offset by reduced bandwidth costs per unit, and an increase in depreciation expense of network equipment as we continue to invest in our infrastructure. Additionally, cost of revenues increased in 2006 due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense resulting from our adoption of SFAS No. 123(R). Cost of revenues during 2006, 2005 and 2004 also included credits received of approximately $1.5 million, $1.2 million and $1.0 million, respectively, from settlements and renegotiations entered into in connection with 26 Table of Contents billing disputes related to bandwidth contracts. Credits of this nature may occur in the future; however, the timing and amount of future credits, if any, will vary. Cost of revenues is comprised of the following (in millions): For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Bandwidth, co-location and storage fees $ 59.1 $ 35.6 $ 27.7 Payroll and related costs of network operations personnel 5.8 3.8 3.5 Stock-based compensation 2.0 Cost of software licenses 0.1 0.7 1.0 Depreciation and impairment of network equipment and amortization of internal-use software and stock-based compensation 27.1 15.6 14.0 Total cost of revenues $ 94.1 $ 55.7 $ 46.2 We have long-term purchase commitments for bandwidth usage and co-location with various networks and Internet service providers. For the years ending December 31, 2007, 2008 and 2009, the minimum commitments related to bandwidth usage and co-location services are approximately $20.0 million, $8.4 million and $897,000, respectively. We believe cost of revenues will increase in 2007. We expect to deliver more traffic on our network, which would result in higher expenses associated with the increased traffic; however, such costs are likely to be partially offset by lower bandwidth costs per unit. Additionally, we anticipate increases in depreciation expense related to our network equipment and amortization of internal-use software development costs, along with increased payroll and related costs, as we continue to make investments in our network to service our customer base. Cost of revenues is also expected to increase as we continue to expense employee stock awards at fair value in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R). The adoption of SFAS No. 123(R) will also result in additional expense associated with the amortization of stock-based compensation. Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation for research and development personnel who design, develop, test and enhance our services and our network. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred, except certain internal use software development costs eligible for capitalization. During the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, we capitalized software development costs of $11.7 million, $8.5 million and $7.5 million, respectively, net of impairments. These development costs consisted of external consulting and payroll and payroll-related costs for personnel involved in the development of internal-use software used to deliver our services and operate our network. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2006, we capitalized $4.3 million of stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R). These capitalized internal-use software costs are amortized to cost of revenues over their estimated useful lives of two years. Research and development expenses increased 83%, or $15.0 million, to $33.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Research and development expenses increased 49%, or $5.9 million, to $18.1 for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2004. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2004 were $12.1 million. Research and development expense increased in 2006 due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense resulting from SFAS No. 123(R). The increase in 2005 was due to an increase in payroll and related costs due to an increase in headcount. 27 Table of Contents The following table quantifies the net changes in research and development expenses over periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in Research and Development Expenses 2006 to 2005 2005 to 2004 Payroll and related costs $ 5.9 $ 5.0 Stock-based compensation 10.4 0.9 Capitalization of internal-use software development costs and other (1.3 ) Total net increase $ 15.0 $ 5.9 We believe that research and development expenses will increase in 2007, as we continue to increase our hiring of development personnel and make investments in our core technology and refinements to our other service offerings. Additionally, research and development expenses are expected to increase as a result of expensing stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R). Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs, stock-based compensation and commissions for personnel engaged in marketing, sales and service support functions, as well as advertising and promotional expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased 54%, or $41.8 million, to $119.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $77.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Sales and marketing expenses increased 40%, or $22.2 million, to $77.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $55.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. The increase in sales and marketing expenses during these periods was partially the result of higher payroll and related costs, particularly commissions, for sales and marketing personnel, due to revenue growth. Additionally, marketing and related expense increased in 2006 due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense as a result of SFAS No. 123(R). The following table quantifies the net changes in sales and marketing expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in Sales and Marketing Expenses 2006 to 2005 2005 to 2004 Payroll and related costs $ 23.4 $ 17.0 Stock-based compensation 17.8 0.1 Marketing and related costs (0.4 ) 2.4 Other expense 1.0 2.7 Total net increase $ 41.8 $ 22.2 We believe that sales and marketing expenses will continue to increase in 2007 due to an expected increase in commissions on higher forecasted sales of our services, the expected increase in hiring of sales and marketing personnel and additional expected increases in other marketing costs such as advertising. Additionally, sales and marketing expenses are expected to increase as a result of expensing stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123(R). General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the following components: payroll, stock-based compensation and other related costs, including expenses for executive, finance, business applications, internal network management, human resources and other administrative personnel; depreciation of property and equipment used by us internally; fees for professional services; 28 Table of Contents non-income related taxes; insurance costs; the provision for doubtful accounts; and rent and other facility-related expenditures for leased properties. General and administrative expenses increased 70%, or $37.2 million, to $90.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $53.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. General and administrative expenses increased 13%, or $6.0 million, to $53.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $47.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. The increase in general and administrative expenses during 2006 was primarily due to an increase in payroll and related costs as a result of headcount growth, as well as stock-based compensation expense. The increase in general and administrative expenses during 2005 was primarily due to an increase in payroll and related costs as a result of headcount growth, as well as stock-based compensation expense. These increases were offset by a reduction in legal and consulting costs associated with the dismissal of the lawsuits between Akamai and Speedera as a result of our acquisition of Speedera and a reduction in non-income taxes as a result of settlements with state taxation authorities in 2005 that allowed us to reduce the related accrual. These one-time savings resulted in higher non-income taxes in 2006 as compared to the prior year. The following table quantifies the net changes in general and administrative expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in General and Administrative Expenses 2006 to 2005 2005 to 2004 Payroll and related costs $ 10.0 $ 6.4 Stock-based compensation 15.6 1.6 Non-income taxes 3.7 (2.4 ) Facilities and related costs 1.2 0.3 Depreciation and amortization 1.4 (1.1 ) Provision for doubtful accounts 0.2 1.5 Consulting and advisory services 0.6 (2.6 ) Other expenses 4.5 2.3 Total net increase $ 37.2 $ 6.0 During the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, we capitalized software development costs of $889,000 and $718,000, respectively, consisting of external consulting fees and payroll and payroll-related costs associated with the development of internally-used software applications. Once the projects are completed, such costs will be amortized and included in general and administrative expenses. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in 2007 due to increased payroll and related costs attributable to increased hiring, an increase in non-income tax expense and an increase in rent and facilities costs because we expanded leased office space during 2006. Additionally, general and administrative expenses are expected to increase as a result of higher stock-based compensation expense as a result of SFAS No. 123(R). Amortization of Other Intangible Assets. Amortization of other intangible assets consists of the amortization of intangible assets acquired in business combinations and amortization of acquired license rights. Amortization of other intangible assets increased to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Amortization of other intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2004 was $48,000. The increase in amortization of other intangible assets in 2006 was due to the amortization of intangible assets of $3.4 million in connection with the acquisition of Nine Systems in December 2006 and Speedera in June 2005. The increase in amortization of intangible assets in 2005 as compared to 2004 was due to the amortization of intangible assets of $5.1 million in connection with our acquisition of Speedera. We expect to amortize approximately $10.7 million, $10.2 million, $9.2 million, $7.6 million and $6.4 million for fiscal years 29 Table of Contents 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively, as a result of the Nine Systems and Speedera acquisitions. In January 2007, we announced a plan to acquire Netli, Inc. If this acquisition is completed, we expect that amortization of other intangible assets will increase in the future. Interest Income. Interest income includes interest earned on invested cash balances and marketable securities. Interest income increased 315%, or $13.4 million, to $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Interest income increased 98%, or $2.1 million, to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. The increase in interest income in 2006 as compared to 2005 and 2004 was due to an increase in our invested marketable securities period over period, due to the investment of $202.1 million in net proceeds we received from our public equity offering of 12.0 million shares of our common stock in November 2005, as well as generating greater cash flows from operations. We also experienced an increase in interest rates earned on our investments. Interest Expense. Interest expense includes interest paid on our debt obligations as well as amortization of deferred financing costs. Interest expense decreased 41%, or $2.2 million, to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Interest expense decreased 48%, or $4.9 million, to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. The decrease during each of these periods was due to lower interest expense as a result of redemptions and repurchases of our 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes. During 2005 and 2004, we redeemed or repurchased $56.6 million and $169.4 million, respectively, in aggregate principal amount of our 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes. As of December 31, 2006, there was an aggregate principal amount of $200 million of our 1.0% convertible senior notes outstanding. We believe that interest expense on our debt obligations, including deferred financing amortization, will not exceed $3.1 million in 2007. Other Income (Expense), net. Other income (expense), net primarily represents net foreign exchange gains and losses incurred during the periods presented, as well as gains and losses on legal settlements. Other net expense decreased 212%, or $1.1 million, to other net income of $570,000 for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to other net expense of $507,000 for the year ended December 31, 2005. Other net income was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. Other net income for the year ended December 31, 2006 represented $90,000 of foreign exchange gains and $480,000 of net gains on legal settlements. Other net expense of $507,000 for the year ended December 31, 2005 represented approximately $1.5 million of foreign exchange losses, offset by $1.0 million of net gains on legal settlements. For the year ended December 31, 2004, other net income of $1.1 million represented approximately $518,000 of gains on legal settlements and $543,000 of foreign exchange gains. Other net income (expense) may fluctuate in the future based upon movements in foreign exchange rates, the outcome of legal proceedings and other events. Gain (Loss) on Investments, net. During the year ended December 31, 2006, we recorded a net gain on investments of $261,000 on the sale of marketable securities. During the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004, we recorded a net loss on investments of $27,000 and $69,000, respectively, from the sale of marketable securities. We do not expect significant gains or losses on investments in 2007. Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt. We had no loss on early extinguishment of debt during 2006 because we did not redeem or repurchase any debt during the year. Loss on early extinguishment of debt decreased to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 as compared to $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. The decrease in loss on early extinguishment of debt in 2005 is due to costs incurred in connection with our redemption of $56.6 million in aggregate principal amount of our 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes during 2005. This loss of $1.4 million consists of $889,000 in premiums above par value paid to redeem such notes and $481,000 of deferred financing costs associated with redeeming such notes prior to their maturity. During 2004, we repurchased $169.4 million in principal amount of our 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes which resulted in a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $6.8 million. Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes. Provision for income taxes increased to $41.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to a benefit for income taxes of $257.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2005. Provision for income taxes was $772,000 for the year ended December 31, 2004. During 2005, in connection with the release of our deferred tax asset valuation allowance, we recorded an income tax benefit of $285.8 million which was offset by provision for income taxes primarily related to our alternative minimum tax 30 Table of Contents obligations and income earned in profitable foreign jurisdictions. As a result of the release of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance in 2005, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $41.1 million in 2006. The provision for income taxes for 2004 was primarily related to our alternative minimum tax payment obligations and income earned in foreign jurisdictions where we were profitable. As of December 31, 2004, our United States and foreign net operating losses, or NOLs, and other deferred tax assets were fully offset by a valuation allowance primarily because at the time, pursuant to SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, we did not have sufficient history of taxable income to conclude that it was more likely than not that we would be able to realize the tax benefits of those deferred tax assets. Based upon our cumulative history of earnings over a 12-quarter period and an assessment of our expected future results of operations, during the third quarter of 2005, we determined that it had become more likely than not that we would be able to realize a substantial portion of our United States and foreign NOL carryforward tax assets prior to their expiration and other deferred tax assets. As a result, during 2005, we released a total of $349.5 million of our United States and foreign deferred tax asset valuation allowance. Of the $349.5 million, $285.8 million of the valuation release was recorded as an income tax benefit in our statement of operations, $61.0 million of the valuation release was attributable to stock option exercises, which was recorded as an increase in additional paid-in capital on our balance sheet, and approximately $2.7 million of the valuation release was recorded as a reduction to acquired goodwill and intangible assets. As of December 31, 2006, we had a remaining valuation allowance of $6.3 million. During the fourth quarter of 2006, we recorded additional deferred tax assets related to acquired NOL carryforwards from Nine Systems. However, these NOLs are subject to limitation pursuant to section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code due to changes in ownership of more than 50%. Because the realization of these deferred tax assets does not meet the more likely than not criterion under SFAS No. 109, we recorded a valuation allowance of $4.4 million against the acquired NOLs. We continue to maintain a valuation allowance of $1.9 million related to certain state NOLs that we expect will expire unused. While we expect our consolidated annualized effective tax rate in 2007 to remain relatively consistent with 2006, this expectation does not take into consideration the effect of discrete items recorded as a result of our compliance with SFAS No. 123(R). The effective tax rate including the effect of discrete items could be materially different depending on the nature and timing of the disposition of incentive and other employee stock options. Because of the availability of the NOLs discussed above, a significant portion of our future provision for income taxes is expected to be a non-cash expense; consequently, the amount of cash paid with respect to income taxes is expected to be a relatively small portion of the total annualized tax expense during periods in which the NOLs are utilized. In determining our net deferred tax assets and valuation allowances, and projections of our future provision for income taxes, annualized effective tax rates, and cash paid for income taxes, management is required to make judgments and estimates about domestic and foreign profitability, the timing and extent of the utilization of NOL carryforwards, applicable tax rates, transfer pricing methodologies and tax planning strategies. Judgments and estimates related to our projections and assumptions are inherently uncertain; therefore, actual results could differ materially from our projections. We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our sales and use and franchise tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of these tax reserves reflects assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the ultimate tax liability or benefit from of these matters may be materially greater or less than the amount that we have estimated. Liquidity and Capital Resources To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the following transactions: private sales of capital stock and subordinated notes, which notes were repaid in 1999; an initial public offering of our common stock in October 1999, which generated net proceeds of $217.6 million; 31 Table of Contents the sale in June 2000 of an aggregate of $300 million in principal amount of our 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes, which generated net proceeds of $290.2 million and were repaid or redeemed in full between December 2003 and September 2005; the sale in December 2003 and January 2004 of an aggregate of $200 million in principal amount of our 1% convertible senior notes, which generated net proceeds of $194.1 million; the public offering of 12.0 million shares of our common stock in November 2005, which generated net proceeds of $202.1 million; proceeds from the exercise of stock awards; and cash generated by operations. As of December 31, 2006, cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $434.5 million, of which $4.2 million is subject to restrictions limiting our ability to withdraw or otherwise use such cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. See Letters of Credit below. Cash provided by operating activities increased $49.2 million to $132.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $82.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Cash provided by operating activities increased $31.6 million to $82.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to cash provided by operating activities of $51.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. The increase in cash provided by operating activities for each of 2006 and 2005 as compared to 2004 was primarily due to increased service revenue as well as increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses. We expect that cash provided by operating activities will continue to increase as a result of an upward trend in cash collections related to higher revenues, partially offset by an expected increase in operating expenses that require cash outlays, such as salaries, in connection with expected increases in headcount. The timing and amount of future working capital changes and our ability to manage our days sales outstanding will also affect the future amount of cash used in or provided by operating activities. Cash used in investing activities was $205.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, compared to $183.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Cash provided by investing activities was $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. Cash used in investing activities for 2006 reflects net purchases of short and long-term investments of $131.6 million and capital expenditures of $69.3 million, consisting of the capitalization of internal-use development costs related to our current and future service offerings and purchases of network infrastructure equipment. In addition, approximately $5.1 million of cash, including transaction costs, was used to acquire Nine Systems. These investments were offset by a decrease of $400,000 in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2005 reflects net purchases of marketable securities of $149.5 million primarily related to the cash received from our equity financing in November 2005. Additionally, cash used in investing activities for 2005 includes capital expenditures of $36.2 million. These investments were offset by $1.7 million of cash acquired through the Speedera acquisition and a decrease of $202,000 in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. Cash provided by investing activities for 2004 reflects proceeds from net sales and maturities of investments of $24.1 million, offset by capital expenditures of $20.1 million. During 2004, cash provided by investing activities also included a decrease of $5.0 million in restricted cash to reflect our repurchase of $5.0 million in principal amount of our 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes in early 2004 and a decrease of $96,000 in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. For 2007, we expect total capital expenditures, a component of cash used in investing activities, to be approximately the same percentage of revenues as 2006. Cash provided by financing activities was $60.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, compared to $159.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Cash used in financing activities was $131.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2004. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2006 included proceeds of $27.9 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and the sale of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2006 also includes $32.5 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from the exercise of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities in 2005 reflects net proceeds from our November 2005 equity offering of $202.1 million and proceeds from issuances of common stock under our equity compensation plans of 32 Table of Contents $14.5 million, offset by payments made to redeem $56.6 million in principal amount of our outstanding 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes and payments on capital lease obligations of $818,000. Cash used in financing activities in 2004 reflects payments for the repurchase of approximately $169.4 million in aggregate principal amount of our 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes and payments on our capital leases of $543,000, offset by net proceeds received from the issuance of our 1% convertible senior notes of $24.3 million and proceeds from issuances of common stock under our equity compensation plans of $13.8 million. Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are dependent upon changes in working capital items such as deferred revenue, accounts payable, accounts receivable and various accrued expenses, as well as changes in our capital and financial structure, including debt repurchases and issuances, stock option exercises, sales of equity investments and similar events. The following table represents the net inflows and outflows of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities for the periods presented (in millions): For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively $ 314.1 $ 108.4 $ 208.4 Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities: Receipts from customers 412.3 271.7 206.2 Payments to vendors (201.0 ) (135.1 ) (91.0 ) Payments for employee payroll (134.6 ) (90.4 ) (68.4 ) Debt repurchases (58.1 ) (169.4 ) Debt proceeds 24.3 Debt interest and premium payments (2.0 ) (5.1 ) (18.1 ) Stock option exercises and employee stock purchase plan issuances 27.9 14.5 13.8 Equity offering proceeds 202.1 Cash (used in) acquired through business acquisitions (4.5 ) 3.9 Interest income 17.7 4.3 2.2 Other 4.6 (2.1 ) 0.4 Net increase 120.4 205.7 (100.0 ) Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively $ 434.5 $ 314.1 $ 108.4 We believe, based on our current business plan, that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $434.5 million as of December 31, 2006 and forecasted cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures and restructuring expenses for at least the next 24 months. If the assumptions underlying our business plan regarding future revenue and expenses change or if unexpected opportunities or needs arise, we may seek to raise additional cash by selling equity or debt securities. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of equity or debt securities, these securities could have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those accruing to holders of common stock, and the terms of such debt could impose restrictions on our operations. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities would also result in additional dilution to our stockholders. See Risk Factors elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of potential dilution. 33 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities and Commercial Commitments The following table presents our contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2006 over the next five years and thereafter (in millions): Payments Due by Period Contractual Less than 12 to 36 36 to 60 More than Obligations Total 12 Months Months Months 60 Months 1% convertible senior notes $ 200.0 $ $ $ $ 200.0 Interest on convertible notes outstanding assuming no early redemption or repurchases 54.0 2.0 4.0 4.0 44.0 Real estate operating leases 23.0 9.0 13.2 0.8 Bandwidth and co-location agreements 29.3 20.0 9.3 Vendor equipment purchase obligations 0.5 0.5 Open vendor purchase orders 12.5 12.5 Total contractual obligations $ 319.3 $ 44.0 $ 26.5 $ 4.8 $ 244.0 Letters of Credit As of December 31, 2006, we had outstanding $4.2 million in irrevocable letters of credit issued by us in favor of third-party beneficiaries, primarily related to long-term facility leases. The letters of credit are collateralized by restricted marketable securities, of which $3.1 million are classified as long-term marketable securities and $1.1 million are classified as short-term marketable securities on our consolidated balance sheet dated as of December 31, 2006. The restrictions on these marketable securities lapse as we fulfill our obligations or as such obligations expire under the terms of the letters of credit. These restrictions are expected to lapse at various times through May 2011. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We have entered into various indemnification arrangements with third parties, including vendors, customers, landlords, our officers and directors, stockholders of acquired companies, joint venture partners and third parties to whom and from whom we license technology. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by third parties due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement or our negligence. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with FASB Interpretation 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. To date, we have not encountered material costs as a result of such obligations and have not accrued any liabilities related to such indemnification obligations in our financial statements. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of these indemnification agreements. The conversion features of our 1% convertible senior notes are equity-linked derivatives. As such, we recognize these instruments as off-balance sheet arrangements. The conversion features associated with these notes would be accounted for as derivative instruments, except that they are indexed to our common stock and classified in stockholders equity. Therefore, these instruments meet the scope exception of paragraph 11(a) of SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, and are accordingly not accounted for as derivatives for purposes of SFAS No. 133. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements for more information. Litigation We are party to litigation which we consider routine and incidental to our business. Management does not expect the results of any of these actions to have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition. See Legal Proceedings elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion on litigation. 34 Table of Contents Recent Accounting Pronouncements In June 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109, or FIN No. 48. FIN No. 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with FASB Statement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. FIN No. 48 prescribes a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. FIN No. 48 will be effective for us beginning in 2007. We do not expect the implementation of FIN No. 48 to have a material impact on our financial statements. In September 2006, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC, released Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 108, or SAB 108. SAB 108 expresses the SEC staff views regarding the process of quantifying financial statement misstatements. SAB 108 also states that correcting prior year financial statements for immaterial errors would not require previously filed reports to be amended. Such correction may be made the next time the registrant files the prior year financial statements. Registrants electing not to restate prior periods should reflect the effects of initially applying the guidance in SAB 108 in their annual financial statements covering the first fiscal year ending after November 15, 2006. The cumulative effect of the initial application should be reported in the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities as of the beginning of that fiscal year and the offsetting adjustment should be made to the opening balance of retained earnings for that year. Registrants should disclose the nature and amount of each individual error being corrected in the cumulative adjustment. The disclosure should also include when and how each error arose and the fact that the errors had previously been considered immaterial. The SEC staff encourages early application of the guidance in SAB 108 for interim periods of the first fiscal year ending after November 15, 2006. The implementation of SAB 108 did not have a material impact on our financial statements. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements, or SFAS 157. SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS 157 does not require any new fair value measurements but may change current practice for some entities. SFAS 157 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and interim periods within those years. We do not expect the implementation of SAB 157 to have a material impact on our financial statements. 
