CIK: 1086222
Company Name: AKAMAI TECHNOLOGIES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-03-01


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview We provide services for accelerating and improving the delivery of content and applications over the Internet. We primarily derive income from the sale of services to customers executing contracts with terms of one year or longer, which we refer to as recurring revenue contracts or long-term contracts. These contracts generally commit the customer to a minimum monthly level of usage with additional charges applicable for actual usage above the monthly minimum. In recent years, however, we have entered into increasing numbers of customer contracts that have minimum usage commitments that are based on quarterly, twelve-month or longer periods. Our goal of having a consistent and predictable base level of income is important to our financial success. Accordingly, to be successful, we must maintain our base of recurring revenue contracts by eliminating or reducing lost monthly or annual recurring revenue due to customer cancellations or terminations and build on that base by adding new customers and increasing the number of services, features and functions that our existing customers purchase. At the same time, we must manage the rate of growth in our expenses as we invest in strategic initiatives that we anticipate will generate future revenue growth. Accomplishing these goals requires that we compete effectively in the marketplace on the basis of quality, price and the attractiveness of our services and technology. This Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto which appear elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. See Risk Factors elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of certain risks associated with our business. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements do not include the potential impact of any mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures of business combinations that may be announced after the date hereof. Our increase in net income in 2009 as compared to 2008 and 2007 reflects the success of our efforts to increase our monthly and annual recurring revenues while effectively managing the expenses needed to support such growth. The following sets forth, as a percentage of revenues, consolidated statements of operations data for the years indicated: 2009 2008 2007 Revenues 100 % 100 % 100 % Cost of revenues 29 28 26 Research and development 5 5 7 Sales and marketing 21 21 23 General and administrative 17 17 19 Amortization of other intangible assets 2 2 2 Restructuring charge (benefit) Total costs and operating expenses 74 73 77 Income from operations 26 27 23 Interest income 2 3 4 Interest expense Other income, net Gain (loss) on investments, net Loss on early extinguishment of debt Income before provision for income taxes 28 30 27 Provision for income taxes 11 11 11 Net income 17 % 19 % 16 % 26 Table of Contents We were profitable for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007; however, we cannot guarantee continued profitability or profitability at the levels we have recently experienced for any period in the future. We have observed the following trends and events that are likely to have an impact on our financial condition and results of operations in the foreseeable future: During each quarter of 2009, the dollar volume of new recurring and usage-based revenue contracts that we booked exceeded the dollar volume of the contracts we lost through cancellations, terminations and non-payment. A continuation of this trend would likely lead to increased revenues. During each quarter of 2009, unit prices we charged to some new and existing customers declined. Some of these price reductions were for customers with large service commitments, reflecting volume discounts. Additionally, increased competition from new entrants into the market that are willing to use low unit prices as a method of differentiation contributed to price declines. If we continue to experience decreases in unit prices for new and existing customers, our operating profit percentage could decrease. During each quarter of 2009, we reduced our network bandwidth costs per unit by entering into new supplier contracts with lower pricing, delivering higher amounts of Internet traffic that allowed us to take advantage of volume price discounts and amending existing contracts to take advantage of price reductions offered by our existing suppliers. Additionally, we continue to invest in internal-use software development to improve the performance and efficiency of our network. Due to increased traffic delivered over our network, however, our total bandwidth costs increased during these quarters. We believe that our overall bandwidth costs will continue to increase as a result of expected higher traffic levels, but we anticipate continued reductions in bandwidth costs per unit. If we do not experience lower per unit bandwidth pricing or we are unsuccessful at effectively routing traffic over our network through lower cost providers, total network bandwidth costs could increase in excess of our expectations in 2010. During each quarter of 2009, no customer accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues. We expect that customer concentration levels will continue to decline compared to those in prior years if our customer base continues to grow. During the year ended December 31, 2009, revenues derived from customers outside the United States accounted for 28% of our total revenues. We expect revenues from such customers as a percentage of our total revenues to be between 28% and 30% in 2010. For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, stock-based compensation expense was $58.8 million, $57.9 million and $66.6 million, respectively. We expect that stock-based compensation expense will continue at the current level, as we continue to grant full value restricted stock units to employees, partially offset by a slight reduction in stock-based compensation from employee stock options as they become fully vested. As of December 31, 2009, our total unrecognized compensation costs for stock-based awards were $103.1 million, which we expect to recognize as expense over a weighted average period of 1.4 years. This expense is expected to be recognized through 2013. Depreciation and amortization expense related to our network equipment and internal-use software development costs increased by $15.6 million during 2009 as compared to 2008. Due to expected future purchases of network equipment during 2010, we believe that depreciation expense related to our network equipment will continue to increase in 2010. We expect to continue to enhance and add functionality to our service offerings and capitalize stock-based compensation expense attributable to employees working on such projects, which would increase the amount of capitalized internal-use software costs. As a result, we believe that the amortization of internal-use software development costs, which we include in cost of revenues, will be higher in 2010 as compared to 2009. As of December 31, 2009, we have recorded a pre-tax cumulative net unrealized loss in stockholders equity of $19.0 million related to the temporary impairment of our marketable security investments. For the year ended December 31, 2009, we recorded an unrealized gain of $3.3 million in our statement 27 Table of Contents of operations related to a decrease in the other-than-temporary impairment of our investments in auction rate securities, or ARS. For the year ended December 31, 2009, we also recorded an unrealized loss of $2.9 million in our statement of operations related to a decrease in the net unrealized gain from a put option we recorded in connection with an agreement we entered into with one our investment advisors. Under the terms of the agreement, the investment advisor agreed to repurchase, in June 2010, the ARS it previously sold to us. The loss related to the put option incorporated into this agreement was included in gain (loss) on investments, net in our 2009 statement of operations. Based upon our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance of $1,061 million at December 31, 2009 and expected operating cash flows, we do not anticipate that the lack of liquidity associated with our ARS will adversely affect our ability to conduct business during 2010. We believe we have the ability to hold these ARS until a recovery of the auction process, a buyer is found outside the auction process, the securities are called or refinanced by the issuer, or until maturity. During the year ended December 31, 2009, our effective income tax rate was 38.5%. We expect our annual effective income tax rate in 2010 to remain relatively consistent with 2009; this expectation does not take into consideration the effect of discrete items recorded as a result of our compliance with the accounting guidance for stock-based compensation or any tax planning strategies. In 2009, due to our continued utilization of available net operating losses, or NOL, and tax credit carryforwards, our tax payments were significantly lower than our recorded income tax provision. If we continue to generate taxable income at levels consistent with recent years, we may utilize substantially all of our NOL and tax credit carryforwards in 2010 or 2011. Once we have done so, the amount of cash tax payments we make will increase over those made in previous years. Based on our analysis of, among other things, the aforementioned trends and events, as of the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, we expect to continue to generate net income on a quarterly and annual basis during 2010; however, our future results are likely to be affected by many factors identified in the section captioned Risk Factors and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K, including our ability to: increase our revenue by adding customers through recurring revenue contracts and limiting customer cancellations and terminations; offset unit price declines for our services with higher volumes of traffic delivered on our network as well as increased sales of our value-added solutions; prevent disruptions to our services and network due to accidents or intentional attacks; and maintain our network bandwidth costs and other operating expenses consistent with our revenues. As a result, there is no assurance that we will achieve our expected financial objectives, including generating positive net income, in any future period. Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Overview Our MD&A is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. These principles require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, cash flow and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates include those related to revenue recognition, accounts receivable and related reserves, valuation and impairment of investments and marketable securities, capitalized internal-use software costs, goodwill and other intangible assets, tax reserves, impairment and useful lives of long-lived assets, loss contingencies and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results may differ from these estimates. For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. 28 Table of Contents Definitions We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. Our estimates are based upon assumptions and judgments about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made and applied and require us to assess a range of potential outcomes. Review of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Revenue Recognition: We recognize service revenue in accordance with the authoritative guidance for revenue recognition, including guidance on revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables. Revenue is recognized only when the price is fixed or determinable, persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, the service is performed and collectability of the resulting receivable is reasonably assured. We primarily derive revenues from the sale of services to customers executing contracts with terms of one year or longer. These contracts generally commit the customer to a minimum monthly, quarterly or annual level of usage and specify the rate at which the customer must pay for actual usage above the monthly, quarterly or annual minimum. For these services, we recognize the monthly minimum as revenue each month, provided that an enforceable contract has been signed by both parties, the service has been delivered to the customer, the fee for the service is fixed or determinable and collection is reasonably assured. Should a customer usage of our service exceed the monthly minimum, we recognize revenue for such excess usage in the period of the usage. For annual or other non-monthly period revenue commitments, we recognize revenue monthly based upon the customer actual usage each month of the commitment period and only recognize any remaining committed amount for the applicable period in the last month thereof. We typically charge customers an integration fee when the services are first activated. The integration fees are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the estimated life of the customer arrangement. We also derive revenue from services sold as discrete, non-recurring events or based solely on usage. For these services, we recognize revenue once the event or usage has occurred. When more than one element is contained in a single arrangement, we allocate revenue between the elements based on each element relative fair value. Fair value is determined based upon the price charged when the element is sold separately or based on the renewal rate for service contractually offered to the customer. At the inception of a customer contract for service, we make an estimate as to that customer ability to pay for the services provided. We base our estimate on a combination of factors, including the successful completion of a credit check or financial review, our collection experience with the customer and other forms of payment assurance. Upon the completion of these steps, we recognize revenue monthly in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. If we subsequently determine that collection from the customer is not reasonably assured, we record an allowance for doubtful accounts and bad debt expense for all of that customer unpaid invoices and cease recognizing revenue for continued services provided until cash is received from the customer. Changes in our estimates and judgments about whether collection is reasonably assured would change the timing of revenue or amount of bad debt expense that we recognize. We also sell our services through a reseller channel. Assuming all other revenue recognition criteria are met, we recognize revenue from reseller arrangements based on the reseller contracted non-refundable minimum purchase commitments over the term of the contract, plus amounts sold by the reseller to its customers in excess of the minimum commitments. Amounts attributable to this excess usage are recognized as revenue in the period in which the service is provided. 29 Table of Contents From time to time, we enter into contracts to sell our services to unrelated companies at or about the same time we enter into contracts to purchase products or services from the same companies. If we conclude that these contracts were negotiated concurrently, we record as revenue only the net cash received from the vendor, unless the product or service received has a separate and identifiable benefit and the fair value to us of the vendor product or service can be objectively established. We may from time to time resell licenses or services of third parties. We record revenue for these transactions on a gross basis when we have risk of loss related to the amounts purchased from the third party and we add value to the license or service, such as by providing maintenance or support for such license or service. If these conditions are present, we recognize revenue when all other revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. Deferred revenue represents amounts billed to customers for which revenue has not been recognized. Deferred revenue primarily consists of the unearned portion of monthly billed service fees; prepayments made by customers for future periods; deferred integration and activation set-up fees; and amounts billed under customer arrangements with extended payment terms. Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves: Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amounts and do not bear interest. In addition to trade accounts receivable, our accounts receivable balance includes unbilled accounts that represent revenue recorded for customers that is typically billed within one month. We record reserves against our accounts receivable balance. These reserves consist of allowances for doubtful accounts and revenue from certain customers on a cash-basis. Increases and decreases in the allowance for doubtful accounts are included as a component of general and administrative expenses. Increases in the reserve for cash-basis customers are recorded as reduction of revenue. The reserve for cash-basis customers increases as services are provided to customers for which collection is no longer assured. The reserve decreases and revenue is recognized when and if cash payments are received. Estimates are used in determining these reserves and are based upon our review of outstanding balances on a customer-specific, account-by-account basis. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based upon a review of customer receivables from prior sales with collection issues where we no longer believe that the customer has the ability to pay for prior services provided. We perform on-going credit evaluations of our customers. If such an evaluation indicates that payment is no longer reasonably assured for services provided, any future services provided to that customer will result in creation of a cash basis reserve until we receive consistent payments. Valuation and Impairment of Investments and Marketable Securities: Effective January 1, 2008, we implemented a then-newly-required accounting standard related to fair value measurement for our financial assets and liabilities that are re-measured and reported at fair value at each reporting period, and non-financial assets and liabilities that are re-measured and reported at fair value at least annually. The guidance defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. We have certain financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value (principally cash equivalents and short- and long-term marketable securities) that have been classified as Level 1, 2 or 3 within the fair value hierarchy as described in the fair value measurement guidance. Fair values determined by Level 1 inputs utilize quoted prices (unadjusted) in accessible active markets for identical assets or liabilities. Fair values determined by Level 2 inputs utilize data points that are observable such as quoted prices, interest rates and yield curves. Fair values determined by Level 3 inputs are based on unobservable data points for the asset or liability. Investments and marketable securities are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value below cost basis is determined to be other-than-temporary. We periodically evaluate whether a decline in fair value below cost basis is other-than-temporary by considering available evidence regarding these investments including, among other factors, the duration of the period that, and extent to which, the fair value is less than cost basis; the 30 Table of Contents financial health of and business outlook for the issuer, including industry and sector performance and operational and financing cash flow factors; overall market conditions and trends; and our intent and ability to retain our investment in the security for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in market value. Once a decline in fair value is determined to be other-than-temporary, a write-down is recorded and a new cost basis in the security is established. Assessing the above factors involves inherent uncertainty. Write-downs, if recorded, could be materially different from the actual market performance of investments and marketable securities in our portfolio if, among other things, relevant information related to our investments and marketable securities was not publicly available or other factors not considered by us would have been relevant to the determination of impairment. Included in our short- and long-term marketable securities at December 31, 2009 and 2008 are auction rate securities, or ARS, that are primarily AAA-rated bonds, most of which are collateralized by federally-guaranteed student loans. ARS are long-term variable rate bonds tied to short-term interest rates that may reset through a Dutch auction process that is designed to occur every seven to 35 days. Historically, the carrying value (par value) of ARS approximated fair market value due to the resetting of variable interest rates. Beginning in mid-February 2008 and continuing throughout the period ended December 31, 2009, however, the auctions for ARS then held by us were unsuccessful. As a result, the interest rates on ARS reset to the maximum rate per the applicable investment offering statements. We will not be able to liquidate affected ARS until a future auction on these investments is successful, a buyer is found outside the auction process, the securities are called or refinanced by the issuer, or the securities mature. In light of these liquidity issues, we performed a discounted cash flow analysis to determine the estimated fair value of these ARS investments. The discounted cash flow analysis we performed considered the timing of expected future successful auctions, the impact of extended periods of maximum interest rates, collateralization of underlying security investments and the creditworthiness of the issuer. The discounted cash flow analysis performed as of December 31, 2009 assumed a weighted average discount rate of 3.98% and expected term of five years. The discount rate was determined using a proxy based upon the current market rates for similar debt offerings within the AAA-rated ARS market. The expected term was based on management estimate of future liquidity. As a result, as of December 31, 2009, we have estimated an aggregate loss of $30.4 million, of which $20.8 million was related to the impairment of ARS deemed to be temporary and included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within stockholders equity and of which $9.6 million was related to the impairment of ARS deemed other-than-temporary and included in gain (loss) on investments, net in our 2009 and 2008 consolidated statements of operations on a cumulative basis. Despite the failed auctions, we continue to receive cash flows in the form of specified interest payments from the issuers of ARS. In addition, except for ARS with respect to which we have entered into an agreement allowing us to sell such ARS in June 2010, we believe it is more likely than not that we will not be required to sell the ARS prior to a recovery of par value and intend to hold the investments until such time because we believe we have sufficient cash and other marketable securities on-hand and from projected cash flows from operations. See Liquidity and Capital Resources below. Impairment and Useful Lives of Long-Lived Assets: We review our long-lived assets, such as fixed assets and intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events that would trigger an impairment review include a change in the use of the asset or forecasted negative cash flows related to the asset. When such events occur, we compare the carrying amount of the asset to the undiscounted expected future cash flows related to the asset. If this comparison indicates that impairment is present, the amount of the impairment is calculated as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset. If a readily determinable market price does not exist, fair value is estimated using discounted expected cash flows attributable to the asset. The estimates required to apply this accounting policy include forecasted usage of the long-lived assets, the useful lives of these assets and expected future cash flows. Changes in these estimates could materially impact results from operations. 31 Table of Contents Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets: We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We concluded that we had one reporting unit and assigned the entire balance of goodwill to this reporting unit as of December 31, 2009 and 2008. The fair value of the reporting unit was determined using our market capitalization as of December 31, 2009 and 2008. We performed an impairment test of goodwill as of December 31, 2009 and 2008. These tests did not indicate an impairment of goodwill. Other intangible assets consist of completed technologies, customer relationships, trademarks and non-compete agreements arising from acquisitions of businesses and acquired license rights. Purchased intangible assets, other than goodwill, are amortized over their estimated useful lives based upon the estimated economic value derived from the related intangible assets. Goodwill is carried at its historical cost. Loss Contingencies: We define a loss contingency as a condition involving uncertainty as to a possible loss related to a previous event that will not be resolved until one or more future events occur or fail to occur. Our primary loss contingencies relate to pending or threatened litigation. We record a liability for a loss contingency when we believe that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. When we believe the likelihood of a loss is less than probable and more than remote, we do not record a liability. Material loss contingencies are disclosed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Tax Reserves: Our provision for income taxes is comprised of a current and a deferred portion. The current income tax provision is calculated as the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current year. The deferred income tax provision is calculated for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards using expected tax rates in effect in the years during which the differences are expected to reverse or the carryforwards are expected to be realized. We currently have significant deferred tax assets, comprised of NOL carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards and deductible temporary differences. Our management periodically weighs the positive and negative evidence to determine if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our income tax and sales and use tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of our tax reserves contains assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the costs of the ultimate tax liability or benefit from these matters may be materially more or less than the amount that we estimated. As of January 1, 2007, we adopted a then-newly-required accounting standard related to the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements. That guidance prescribes a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of the date of adoption, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $2.1 million, including accrued interest and penalties, and did not record any cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings as a result of adopting the guidance. As of December 31, 2009, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $10.2 million, including accrued interest and penalties. Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation: We issue stock-based compensation awards including stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units and deferred stock units. Related to such awards, we measure stock-based compensation at the grant date based 32 Table of Contents on the fair value of the award, and we recognize such fair value as expense over the vesting period. We have selected the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock option awards. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires judgment, including estimating the expected life of the stock awards and the volatility of the underlying common stock. Our assumptions may differ from those used in prior periods. Changes to the assumptions may have a significant impact on the fair value of stock options, which could have a material impact on our financial statements. Judgment is also required in estimating the amount of stock-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. Should our actual forfeiture rates differ significantly from our estimates, our stock-based compensation expense and results of operations could be materially impacted. In addition, for awards that vest and become exercisable only upon achievement of specified performance conditions, we make judgments and estimates each quarter about the probability that such performance conditions will be met or achieved. Changes to the estimates we make from time to time may have a significant impact on our stock-based compensation expense recorded and could materially impact our result of operations. For stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units and deferred stock units that contain only a service-based vesting feature, we recognize compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the awards vesting periods for those awards that contain only a service vesting feature. For awards with a performance condition-based vesting feature, we recognize compensation cost on a graded-vesting basis over the awards expected vesting periods. Capitalized Internal-Use Software Costs: We capitalize the salaries and payroll-related costs of employees and consultants who devote time to the development of internal-use software projects. If a project constitutes an enhancement to previously-developed software, we assess whether the enhancement is significant and creates additional functionality to the software, thus qualifying the work incurred for capitalization. Once the project is complete, we estimate the useful life of the internal-use software, and we periodically assess whether the software is impaired. Changes in our estimates related to internal-use software would increase or decrease operating expenses or amortization recorded during the period. Results of Operations Revenues. Total revenues increased 9%, or $68.8 million, to $859.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $790.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Total revenues increased 24%, or $154.5 million, to $790.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $636.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. The increases in revenue over the years presented were primarily attributable to an increase in each of 2009 and 2008 in the number of customers under recurring revenue contracts, as well as increases in traffic and additional services sold to new and existing customers. Also contributing to increased revenues in 2009 as compared to 2008 were revenues generated through growth in our new advertising decision solutions service offering. Increased sales to existing customers contributed to increases in the average revenue per customer during each year, partially offset by reduced unit prices offered to new and renewing customers. We believe that the continued growth in use of the Internet by businesses and consumers was the principal factor driving increased purchases of our services. We expect this trend to continue in 2010 but at lower rates of growth due to general economic conditions and a leveling off of the rate of increased growth in use of the Internet. As of December 31, 2009, we had 3,122 customers under recurring revenue contracts as compared to 2,858 at December 31, 2008 and 2,645 at December 31, 2007. For 2009 and 2008, 28% and 25%, respectively, of our total revenues were derived from our operations located outside of the United States, of which 18% of total revenues for each of the years was derived from operations in Europe. For 2007, 23% of our total revenues was derived from our operations located outside of the United States, of which 17% of total revenues was derived from operations in Europe. Other than the United States, no single country accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues during these periods. We expect international sales to increase slightly as a percentage of our total sales in 2010 as compared to prior years. 33 Table of Contents Resellers accounted for 18% of total revenues in 2009, 16% in 2008 and 18% in 2007. For 2009, 2008 and 2007, no single customer accounted for 10% or more of total revenues. Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues includes fees paid to network providers for bandwidth and co-location of our network equipment. Cost of revenues also includes payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation expense for network operations personnel, cost of software licenses, depreciation of network equipment used to deliver our services and amortization of internal-use software. Cost of revenues was comprised of the following (in millions): For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Bandwidth, co-location and storage fees $ 145.7 $ 136.8 $ 103.2 Payroll and related costs of network operations personnel 11.6 10.8 8.8 Stock-based compensation, including amortization of prior capitalized amounts 8.6 6.6 5.1 Depreciation and impairment of network equipment 63.7 55.2 41.1 Amortization of internal-use software 20.3 13.2 9.2 Total cost of revenues $ 249.9 $ 222.6 $ 167.4 Cost of revenues increased 12%, or $27.3 million, to $249.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $222.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Cost of revenues increased 33%, or $55.2 million, to $222.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $167.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. In each instance, these increases were primarily due to an increase in the amounts paid to network providers due to higher traffic levels, partially offset by reduced bandwidth costs per unit, and increases in depreciation expense of network equipment and amortization of internal-use software as we continued to invest in our infrastructure. Additionally, in 2009, 2008 and 2007, cost of revenues included stock-based compensation expense and amortization of capitalized stock-based compensation; such expense increased by $2.0 million in 2009 as compared to 2008 and $1.5 million in 2008 as compared to 2007. Cost of revenues during 2009, 2008 and 2007 also included credits received of approximately $3.5 million, $3.3 million and $3.4 million, respectively, from settlements and renegotiations entered into in connection with billing disputes related to bandwidth contracts. Credits of this nature may occur in the future; however, the timing and amount of future credits, if any, will vary. We have long-term purchase commitments for bandwidth usage and co-location with various networks and Internet service providers. For the years ending December 31, 2010 and 2011, the minimum commitments related to bandwidth usage and co-location services are approximately $41.6 million and $4.0 million, respectively. We believe cost of revenues will increase in 2010 as compared to 2009. We expect to deliver more traffic on our network, which would result in higher expenses associated with the increased traffic; however, such costs are likely to be partially offset by lower bandwidth costs per unit. Additionally, for 2010, we anticipate increases in depreciation expense related to our network equipment and amortization of internal-use software development costs, along with increased payroll and related costs, as we continue to make investments in our network with the expectation that our customer base will continue to expand. Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation expense for research and development personnel who design, develop, test, deploy and enhance our services and our network. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred, except for certain internal-use software development costs eligible for capitalization. During the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, we capitalized software development costs of $25.8 million, $23.9 million and $17.8 million, respectively, net of impairments. These development costs consisted of external consulting, payroll and payroll-related costs for personnel involved in the development of internal-use software used to deliver our services and operate our network. Additionally, for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 34 Table of Contents 2007, we capitalized as internal-use software $6.2 million, $7.4 million and $6.4 million, respectively, of non-cash stock-based compensation. These capitalized internal-use software costs are amortized to cost of revenues over their estimated useful lives of two years. Research and development expenses increased 11%, or $4.4 million, to $43.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $39.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Research and development expenses decreased 11%, or $4.9 million, to $39.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $44.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. The increase in research and development expenses in 2009 as compared to 2008 was due to increases in payroll and related costs, partially offset by higher capitalized salaries and a decrease in stock-based compensation expense. The decrease in research and development expenses in 2008 as compared to 2007 was due to decreases in stock-based compensation expense and an increase in amount of costs capitalized as internal-use software, partially offset by an increase in payroll and related costs resulting from higher headcount. The following table quantifies the net changes in the various components of our research and development expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in Research and Development Expenses 2009 to 2008 2008 to 2007 Payroll and related costs $ 5.5 $ 6.2 Stock-based compensation (0.1 ) (4.6 ) Capitalized salaries and other (1.0 ) (6.5 ) Total net increase (decrease) $ 4.4 $ (4.9 ) We believe that research and development expenses will increase in 2010 as compared to 2009 because we expect to continue to hire additional development personnel in order to make improvements in our core technology, develop new services and make refinements to our other service offerings. Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs, stock-based compensation expense and commissions for personnel engaged in marketing, sales and support functions, as well as advertising and promotional expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased 9%, or $15.1 million, to $179.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $164.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Sales and marketing expenses increased 11%, or $16.8 million, to $164.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $147.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. The increases in sales and marketing expenses during these periods was primarily due to higher payroll and related costs, particularly commissions for sales and sales support personnel, attributable to revenue growth. In 2009, these increases were partially offset by a reduction in marketing and related costs, as well as a decrease in other expenses, such as travel costs, as compared to 2008. The following table quantifies the net increase in the various components of our sales and marketing expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in Sales and Marketing Expenses 2009 to 2008 2008 to 2007 Payroll and related costs $ 17.0 $ 8.8 Stock-based compensation 1.1 Marketing and related costs (2.1 ) 4.5 Other expense (0.9 ) 3.5 Total net increase $ 15.1 $ 16.8 35 Table of Contents We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase in 2010 due to an expected increase in commissions on higher forecasted sales of our services and an increase in payroll and related costs due to continued growth in our sales and marketing personnel. General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the following components: payroll, stock-based compensation expense and other related costs, including expenses for executive, finance, business applications, network management, human resources and other administrative personnel; depreciation and amortization of property and equipment we use internally; fees for professional services; rent and other facility-related expenditures for leased properties; the provision for doubtful accounts; insurance costs; and non-income related taxes. General and administrative expenses increased 7%, or $10.1 million, to $146.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $136.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. General and administrative expenses increased 12%, or $14.9 million, to $136.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $121.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. The increase in general and administrative expenses during both periods was primarily due to an increase in payroll and related costs as a result of headcount growth. Additionally, both facilities-related costs and amortization of leasehold improvements increased as a result of office expansions. The increase in 2009 as compared to 2008 was also attributable to an increase in the provision for doubtful accounts. These increases were offset by a reduction in legal fees during 2009 as compared to 2008 and a decrease in stock-based compensation expense during 2008 as compared to 2007. The following table quantifies the net increase in various components of our general and administrative expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in General and Administrative Expenses 2009 to 2008 2008 to 2007 Payroll and related costs $ 3.2 $ 4.7 Stock-based compensation 0.1 (3.2 ) Non-income taxes 0.3 2.0 Facilities-related costs 4.4 3.6 Depreciation and amortization 3.8 3.2 Provision for doubtful accounts 3.2 (0.1 ) Legal fees (5.4 ) 0.4 Consulting and advisory services 1.0 1.1 Other expenses (0.5 ) 3.2 Total net increase $ 10.1 $ 14.9 We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in 2010 as compared to 2009 due to increased payroll and related costs attributable to increased hiring and an increase in rent and facilities costs. 36 Table of Contents Amortization of Other Intangible Assets. Amortization of other intangible assets consists of the amortization of intangible assets acquired in business combinations and amortization of acquired license rights. Amortization of other intangible assets increased 20%, or $2.8 million, to $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Amortization of other intangible assets increased 22%, or $2.5 million, to $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. The increase in amortization of other intangible assets in 2009 as compared to 2008 was due to a full year of amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of acerno in November 2008. The increase in amortization of other intangible assets in 2008 as compared to 2007 was due to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of acerno in November 2008 and a full year of amortization of intangible assets from the Netli and Red Swoosh acquisitions in March and April 2007, respectively. Based on current circumstances, amortization expense is expected to be approximately $16.4 million, $16.4 million, $15.4 million, $12.6 million and $7.2 million for the years ending December 31, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014, respectively. Interest Income. Interest income includes interest earned on invested cash balances and marketable securities. Interest income decreased 37%, or $9.1 million, to $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Interest income decreased 4%, or $1.0 million, to $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. The decreases in 2009 as compared to 2008 and in 2008 as compared to 2007 were primarily due to a decrease in the interest rates, offsetting higher cash and marketable securities balances driven by an increase in cash generated from our operations. Interest Expense. Interest expense includes interest paid on our debt obligations as well as amortization of deferred financing costs. Interest expense remained consistent at $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to the year ended December 31, 2008. Interest expense decreased 8%, or $0.3 million, to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Interest expense during these periods was primarily attributable to interest payable on the outstanding amount of our 1% convertible senior notes. Based upon our outstanding indebtedness at December 31, 2009, we believe that interest expense on our debt obligations, including deferred financing amortization, will not exceed $2.9 million in 2010. Other Income, net. Other income, net primarily represents net foreign exchange gains and losses incurred during the periods presented as well as gains on legal settlements. Other income, net decreased 65%, or $0.3 million, to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Other income, net was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2009 consisted of $0.8 million of gains on legal settlements and $1.1 million of gains on divesture of certain assets, offset by $1.7 million of foreign exchange losses. Other income, net for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007 consisted mostly of foreign exchange gains and proceeds from legal settlements, respectively. Other income, net may fluctuate in the future based upon movements in foreign exchange rates, the outcome of legal proceedings and other events. Gain (Loss) on Investments, net. During the year ended December 31, 2009, we recorded a net gain on investments of $0.8 million, which relates primarily to an unrealized gain of $3.3 million from a decrease in the other-than-temporary impairment of certain marketable securities and an unrealized loss of $2.9 million on a put option related to our auction rate securities holdings. During the year ended December 31, 2008, we recorded a net loss on investments of $0.2 million, which reflects a loss of $12.9 million due to other-than-temporary impairments on certain marketable securities; a gain of $12.5 million realized on a put option related to our auction rate securities received from one of our investment advisors in November 2008; and a gain of $0.2 million on the sale of marketable securities. During the year ended December 31, 2007, we recorded a net gain on investments of $24,000 from the sale of marketable securities. 37 Table of Contents Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt. During 2007, we recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt in the amount of $3,000, as a result of conversions to common stock of $0.1 million in principal amount of our 1% convertible notes in August 2007 and $40,000 in principal amount of such notes in January 2007. We did not record any loss on the early extinguishment of debt in the 2008 or 2009. Provision for Income Taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2009, our effective tax rate of 38.5% was higher than the 35% statutory federal income tax rate applicable to corporations due primarily to state income taxes and the effect of non-deductible stock-based compensation, partially offset by the benefit recorded for research and development tax credits. For the years ended December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007, our effective tax rates of 38.1% and 40.0%, respectively, were higher than the 35% statutory federal income tax rate due primarily to state income taxes and the effect of non-deductible stock-based compensation, partially offset by the benefit recorded for research and development tax credits. Provision for income taxes increased by 2%, or $1.9 million, to $91.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $89.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Provision for income taxes increased by 33%, or $22.2 million, to $89.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $67.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. These increases were primarily due to increases in our operating income. While we expect our consolidated annualized effective tax rate in 2010 to remain relatively consistent with 2009, this expectation does not take into consideration the effect of discrete items recorded as a result of stock-based compensation or any potential tax planning strategies. Our effective tax rate could be materially different depending on the nature and timing of the disposition of incentive and other employee stock options. Further, our effective tax rate may fluctuate within a fiscal year and from quarter to quarter, due to items arising from discrete events, including settlements of tax audits and assessments, the resolution or identification of tax position uncertainties and acquisitions of other companies. In 2009, due to our continued utilization of available net operating losses, or NOL, and tax credit carryforwards, our tax payments were significantly lower than our recorded income tax provision. If we continue to generate taxable income at levels consistent with recent years, we may utilize substantially all of our NOL and tax credit carryforwards in 2010 or 2011. Once we have done so, the amount of cash tax payments we make will increase over those made in previous years. In determining our net deferred tax assets and valuation allowances, annualized effective tax rates, and cash paid for income taxes, management is required to make judgments and estimates about domestic and foreign profitability, the timing and extent of the utilization of NOL carryforwards, applicable tax rates, transfer pricing methodologies and tax planning strategies. Judgments and estimates related to our projections and assumptions are inherently uncertain; therefore, actual results could differ materially from our projections. We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our income tax and sales and use tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of these tax reserves reflects assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the ultimate tax liability or benefit from of these matters may be materially greater or less than the amount that we have estimated. Non-GAAP Measures In addition to the traditional financial measurements that are reflected in our financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, we also compile and monitor certain non-GAAP financial measures related to the performance of our business. We typically discuss the non-GAAP financial measures described below on our quarterly public earnings release calls. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company historical or future financial performance that excludes amounts that are included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in the GAAP statement of operations. 38 Table of Contents We believe that making available the non-GAAP financial measures described below helps investors to gain a meaningful understanding of our past performance and future prospects, especially when comparing such results to previous periods, forecasts or competitors. Our management uses these non-GAAP measures, in addition to GAAP financial measures, as the basis for measuring our core operating performance and comparing such performance to that of prior periods and to the performance of our competitors. These measures are also used by management in its financial and operational decision-making. We consider normalized net income and normalized net income per diluted common share to be important indicators of our overall performance as they eliminate the effects of events that are either not part of our core operations or are non-cash. We define normalized net income as net income determined in accordance with GAAP excluding amortization of other acquired intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, stock-based compensation reflected as a component of amortization of capitalized internal-use software, restructuring charges and benefits, certain gains and losses on investments, loss on early extinguishment of debt and the utilization of NOL carryforwards and credits. The weighted average shares used in the normalized net income per diluted common share calculation exclude the effect of stock-based compensation under the treasury stock method. In 2009, we stopped calculating shares used in normalized net income per diluted share because the impact of this non-GAAP measure was no longer materially different from the GAAP measurement of diluted weighted average shares. The following table reconciles net income to normalized net income and net income per diluted share to normalized net income per diluted share for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007: Unaudited For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 (in thousands) Net income $ 145,913 $ 145,138 $ 100,967 Amortization of other acquired intangible assets 16,722 13,905 11,414 Stock-based compensation 58,797 57,899 66,555 Amortization of capitalized stock-based compensation 6,413 4,212 1,829 (Gain) loss on investments, net (457 ) 157 (24 ) Utilization of tax NOLs/credits 84,203 84,722 63,869 Loss on early extinguishment of debt 3 Restructuring charge (benefit) 454 2,509 (178 ) Total normalized net income $ 312,045 $ 308,542 $ 244,435 Normalized net income per diluted share $ 1.67 $ 1.66 $ 1.32 Shares used in GAAP net income per diluted share calculation 188,658 186,685 185,094 Less: the effect of stock-based compensation under the treasury stock method 697 1,615 Shares used in normalized net income per diluted share calculation 188,658 187,382 186,709 We consider Adjusted EBITDA to be another important indicator of our operational strength and performance of our business and a good measure of our historical operating trend. Adjusted EBITDA eliminates items that are either not part of our core operations or do not require a cash outlay. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization of tangible and intangible assets, stock-based compensation expense, stock-based compensation reflected as a component of amortization of capitalized internal-use software, restructuring charges and benefits, certain gains and losses on investments, foreign exchange gains and losses, loss on early extinguishment of debt, gains or losses on legal settlements and utilization of NOL carryforwards and credits. 39 Table of Contents The following table reconciles net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007: Unaudited For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 (in thousands) Net income $ 145,913 $ 145,138 $ 100,967 Amortization of other acquired intangible assets 16,722 13,905 11,414 Stock-based compensation 58,797 57,899 66,555 Amortization of capitalized stock-based compensation 6,413 4,212 1,829 (Gain) loss on investments, net (457 ) 157 (24 ) Utilization of tax NOLs/credits 84,203 84,722 63,869 Loss on early extinguishment of debt 3 Restructuring charge (benefit) 454 2,509 (178 ) Interest income, net of interest expense (13,132 ) (21,967 ) (22,729 ) Provision for income taxes 7,116 4,675 3,369 Depreciation and amortization 99,358 79,964 58,651 Other income, net (163 ) (461 ) (527 ) Adjusted EBITDA $ 405,224 $ 370,753 $ 283,199 These non-GAAP financial measures should be used in addition to and in conjunction with results presented in accordance with GAAP. Liquidity and Capital Resources To date, we have financed our operations primarily through public and private sales of debt and equity securities, proceeds from exercise of stock awards and cash generated by operations. As of December 31, 2009, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, which consisted of corporate debt securities, United States treasury and government agency securities, commercial paper, corporate debt securities and student loan-backed ARS, totaled $1,061.5 million. We place our cash investments in instruments that meet high credit quality standards, as specified in our investment policy. Our investment policy also limits the amount of our credit exposure to any one issue or issuer and seeks to manage these assets to achieve our goals of preserving principal, maintaining adequate liquidity at all times, and maximizing returns subject to our investment policy. We held approximately $274.9 million and $287.1 million in par value of ARS at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The ARS are primarily AAA-rated bonds, most of which are guaranteed by the U.S. government as part of the Federal Family Education Loan Program through the U.S. Department of Education. None of the ARS in our portfolio are mortgage-backed or collateralized debt obligations. In mid-February 2008, all of our ARS experienced failed auctions, which failures continued throughout the period ended December 31, 2009. As a result, we have been unable to liquidate most of our holdings of ARS. Based on our ability to access our cash and other short-term investments, our expected operating cash flows and our other sources of cash, we do not anticipate the current lack of liquidity on these investments to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations in 2010. In November 2008, we entered into an agreement with one of our investment advisors that provides for the repurchase in June 2010 of $76.2 million of the ARS we hold if we have been unable to achieve liquidity with respect to such securities before that time. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $80.9 million to $424.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $343.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Cash provided by operating activities increased $106.5 million to $343.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $237.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. We expect that cash provided by operating 40 Table of Contents activities will continue to increase as a result of an expected increase in cash collections related to higher revenues, partially offset by an expected increase in operating expenses that require cash outlays such as salaries and higher commissions. Current economic conditions could negatively impact our cash provided by operating activities if we are unable to manage our days sales outstanding or our business otherwise deteriorates. Net cash used in investing activities was $357.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $364.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2008. Net cash used in investing activities was $226.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Cash used in investing activities for 2009 reflects a $5.8 million earn-out payment associated with our purchase of acerno, net purchases of short- and long-term marketable securities of $790.4 million and purchases of property and equipment of $108.1 million, including the capitalization of internal-use software development costs. Amounts attributable to these purchases and investments were offset, in part, by proceeds from sales and maturities of short- and long-term marketable securities of $545.1 million. Net cash used in investing activities for 2008 reflects the purchase of acerno in November 2008 for $83.7 million, net purchases of short- and long-term marketable securities of $533.1 million and purchases of property and equipment of $115.4 million, including capitalization of internal-use software development costs. Amounts attributable to these purchases and investments were offset, in part, by the proceeds from sales and maturities of short- and long-term marketable securities of $367.7 million. Net cash used in investing activities for 2007 reflects net purchases of short- and long-term marketable securities of $550.6 million and purchases of property and equipment of $100.5 million, including capitalization of internal-use software development costs. Amounts attributable to these purchases and investments were offset, in part, by proceeds from sales and maturities of short- and long-term marketable securities of $415.8 million and $7.9 million of net cash acquired through our acquisitions of Netli in March 2007 and Red Swoosh in April 2007. Additionally, net cash used in investing activities during 2007 included a decrease of $0.7 million in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. For 2010, we expect total capital expenditures, a component of cash used in investing activities, to be approximately 15% of total revenue for the year. We expect to fund such capital expenditures through cash generated from operations. Cash used by financing activities was $42.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 as compared to $33.1 million provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2008. Cash provided by financing activities was $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Cash used in financing activities for the year-ended December 31, 2009 consisted of $66.5 million related to a common stock repurchase program we initiated in April 2009. This amount was offset by cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2009, which included proceeds of $21.7 million from the issuance of common stock upon exercises of stock options and sales of shares under our employee stock purchase plan and $2.2 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from exercises of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2008 included proceeds of $22.0 million from the issuance of common stock upon exercises of stock options and sales of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2008 also included $11.2 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from exercises of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2007 included proceeds of $31.6 million from the issuance of common stock upon exercises of stock options and sales of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2007 also included $20.9 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from exercises of stock options. Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are dependent upon changes in, among other things, working capital items such as deferred revenue, accounts payable, accounts receivable and various accrued expenses, as well as changes in our capital and financial structure, including debt repurchases and issuances, stock option exercises, sales of equity investments and similar events. 41 Table of Contents The following table represents the net inflows and outflows of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities for the periods presented (in millions): For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively $ 771.6 $ 633.5 $ 434.5 Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities: Receipts from customers 893.0 786.6 627.8 Payments to vendors (383.6 ) (378.3 ) (322.1 ) Payments for employee payroll (204.1 ) (184.2 ) (179.6 ) Common stock repurchases (66.5 ) Realized gain (loss) on investments and other investment-related assets 0.8 (0.2 ) Debt interest payments (2.0 ) (2.0 ) (2.0 ) Stock option exercises and employee stock purchase plan issuances 21.7 22.0 31.6 Cash (used) acquired in business acquisitions (5.8 ) (83.7 ) 8.8 Unrealized gain (loss) on marketable securities, net 19.2 (38.1 ) Interest income 15.6 24.8 25.8 Other 1.6 (8.8 ) 8.7 Net increase 289.9 138.1 199.0 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively $ 1,061.5 $ 771.6 $ 633.5 As part of an agreement entered into with one of our investment advisors under which it agreed to repurchase $76.2 million of our ARS in June 2010, we were also offered the ability to enter into a line of credit that would be collateralized by the underlying ARS investments. In January 2009, the line of credit for $76.2 million was approved by the investment advisor. We have not yet used the line of credit. We believe, based on our present business plan, that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and forecasted cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 24 months. If the assumptions underlying our business plan regarding future revenue and expenses change or if unexpected opportunities or needs arise, we may seek to raise additional cash by selling equity or debt securities. We may not, however, be able to sell equity or debt securities on terms we consider reasonable or at all. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of equity or debt securities, these securities could have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those accruing to holders of common stock, and the terms of such debt could impose restrictions on our operations. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities would also result in additional dilution to our existing stockholders. See Risk Factors elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of additional factors that could affect our liquidity. 42 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities and Commercial Commitments The following table presents our contractual obligations and commercial commitments, as of December 31, 2009, for the next five years and thereafter (in millions): Payments Due by Period Contractual Obligations Total Less than 12 Months 12 to 36 Months 36 to 60 Months More than 60 Months 1% convertible senior notes, assuming full redemption in December 2010 $ 199.8 $ 199.8 $ $ $ Interest on convertible notes outstanding, assuming full redemption in December 2010 2.0 2.0 Real estate operating leases 172.6 21.7 40.4 68.7 41.8 Bandwidth and co-location agreements 45.6 41.6 4.0 Open vendor purchase orders 37.5 37.5 Total contractual obligations $ 457.5 $ 302.6 $ 44.4 $ 68.7 $ 41.8 Our 1% convertible senior notes provide for the bondholders to redeem the bonds at par value plus accrued interest at various times. The first redemption date is December 15, 2010. Based upon the ability of the bondholders to redeem the outstanding 1% convertible senior notes within less than 12 months, the outstanding balance has been classified as short-term debt on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2009. In accordance with the authoritative guidance for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, as of December 31, 2009, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $10.2 million, which included $3.2 million of accrued interest and penalties. We do not expect to recognize any of these tax benefits in 2010. We are not, however, able to provide a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of future payments relating to these obligations. Letters of Credit As of December 31, 2009, we had outstanding $5.6 million in irrevocable letters of credit issued by us in favor of third-party beneficiaries, primarily related to facility leases. Approximately $0.6 million and $36,000 of these letters of credit are collateralized by restricted marketable securities and are classified as short-term and long-term marketable securities, respectively, on our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2009. The restrictions on these marketable securities lapse as we fulfill our obligations or as such obligations expire under the terms of the letters of credit. These restrictions are expected to lapse at various times through October 2014. The remaining $5.0 million of irrevocable letters of credit are unsecured and are expected to remain in effect until December 2019. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We have entered into various indemnification arrangements with third parties, including vendors, customers, landlords, our officers and directors, shareholders of acquired companies and third party licensees of our technology. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by third parties due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement or our negligence. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with the authoritative guidance for guarantor accounting and disclosure requirements for guarantees, including indirect guarantees of indebtedness of others. To date, we have not encountered material costs as a result of such obligations and have not accrued any significant liabilities related to such indemnification obligations in our financial statements. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion of these indemnification agreements. The conversion features of our 1% convertible senior notes due December 15, 2033 are equity-linked derivatives. As such, we recognize these instruments as off-balance sheet arrangements. The conversion features 43 Table of Contents associated with these notes would be accounted for as derivative instruments, except that they are indexed to our common stock and classified in stockholders equity. Therefore, these instruments meet the scope exception of the authoritative guidance on accounting for derivative instruments and hedging activities, and are accordingly not accounted for as derivatives for purposes of the guidance. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information. Litigation We are party to litigation that we consider routine and incidental to our business. Management does not currently expect the results of any of these litigation matters to have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition. See Legal Proceedings elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion on litigation. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In February 2008, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or the FASB, issued authoritative guidance for fair value measurement for all non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities, except for items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). We adopted this guidance on January 1, 2009, and it did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. In June 2008, the FASB issued authoritative guidance for determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities. We adopted this guidance on January 1, 2009. This guidance provides that unvested share-based payment awards that contain nonforfeitable rights to dividends or dividend equivalents (whether paid or unpaid) are participating securities and shall be included in the computation of earnings per share pursuant to the two-class method. Upon adoption, a company is required to adjust retrospectively its earnings per share data (including any amounts related to interim periods, summaries of earnings and selected financial data) to conform with the provisions in this guidance. The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. In December 2007, the FASB issued authoritative guidance on accounting for business combinations. We adopted this guidance on January 1, 2009. The standard significantly changes the accounting for business combinations in a number of areas including the treatment of contingent consideration, contingencies, acquisition costs, in-process research and development and restructuring costs. In addition, under the standard, changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances and acquired income tax uncertainties in a business combination that occur after the measurement period will impact income tax expense. The standard may have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements if or when we enter into any business combinations in the future. In April 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance clarifying how companies should determine fair value measurements when the level of market activity for an asset or liability has significantly decreased. The authoritative guidance is effective for periods ending after June 15, 2009. The adoption of the guidance did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. In April 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance for recognition and presentation of other-than-temporary impairments. The authoritative guidance requires an entity to recognize the credit component of an other-than-temporary impairment of a debt security in earnings and the non-credit component in other comprehensive loss when the entity does not intend to sell the security and it is more likely than not that the entity will not be required to sell the security prior to recovery. The guidance is effective for periods ending after June 15, 2009. As of December 31, 2009, we did not have any debt securities that had other-than-temporary impairments that contained both a credit and non-credit component. Accordingly, adoption of this guidance did not have an impact on our consolidated financial statements. In June 2009, the FASB issued the FASB Accounting Standards Codification, which we refer to as the Codification. The Codification became the single source for all authoritative accounting principles recognized by 44 Table of Contents the FASB to be applied for financial statements issued for periods ending after September 15, 2009. The Codification does not change GAAP and did not have an effect on our financial position, results of operations or liquidity. In September 2009, the FASB Emerging Issues Task Force issued authoritative guidance on revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables. This guidance provides another alternative for establishing fair value for a deliverable. When vendor-specific objective evidence or third-party evidence for deliverables in an arrangement cannot be determined, companies will be required to develop a best estimate of the selling price for separate deliverables and allocate arrangement consideration using the relative selling price method. This guidance is effective January 1, 2011, and early adoption is permitted. We expect to adopt this guidance effective January 1, 2010. We are currently evaluating the impact of this guidance on our financial position and results of operations. In January 2010, the FASB issued authoritative guidance related to additional requirements and guidance regarding disclosures of fair value measurements. The guidance requires the gross presentation of activity within the Level 3 fair value measurement roll-forward and details of transfers in and out of Level 1 and 2 fair value measurements. It also clarifies two existing disclosure requirements on the level of disaggregation of fair value measurements and disclosures on inputs and valuation techniques. The new requirements and guidance are effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2009, except for the Level 3 roll-forward which is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2010 (including interim periods within those fiscal years). We do not expect this guidance to have any impact on our financial position or results of operations. 45 Table of Contents 
