CIK: 1086222
Company Name: AKAMAI TECHNOLOGIES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-02-29


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview We provide services for accelerating and improving the delivery of content and applications over the Internet. We primarily derive income from the sale of services to customers executing contracts with terms of one year or longer, which we refer to as recurring revenue contracts or long-term contracts. These contracts generally commit the customer to a minimum monthly level of usage with additional charges applicable for actual usage above the monthly minimum. In recent years, however, we have entered into increasing numbers of customer contracts that have minimum usage commitments that are based on quarterly, twelve-month or longer periods. Our goal of having a consistent and predictable base level of income is important to our financial success. Accordingly, to be successful, we must maintain our base of recurring revenue contracts by eliminating or reducing lost monthly or annual recurring revenue due to customer cancellations or terminations and build on that base by adding new customers and increasing the number of services, features and functions that our existing customers purchase. At the same time, we must ensure that our expenses do not increase faster than, or at the same rate as, our revenues. Accomplishing these goals requires that we compete effectively in the marketplace on the basis of quality, price and the attractiveness of our services and technology. This Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto which appear elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. See Risk Factors elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of certain risks associated with our business. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements do not include the potential impact of any mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures of business combinations that may be announced after the date hereof. Our improved financial results in 2007 as compared to 2006 and 2005 reflect the success of our efforts to increase our monthly and annual recurring revenues while limiting the expenses needed to support such growth. The following sets forth, as a percentage of revenues, consolidated statements of operations data for the years indicated: 2007 2006 2005 Revenues 100 % 100 % 100 % Cost of revenues 26 22 20 Research and development 7 8 6 Sales and marketing 23 28 28 General and administrative 19 21 19 Amortization of other intangible assets 2 2 2 Total costs and operating expenses 77 81 75 Income from operations 23 19 25 Interest income 4 4 2 Interest expense (1 ) (2 ) Other income (expense), net Gain (loss) on investments, net Loss on early extinguishment of debt Income before provision for (benefit from) income taxes 27 22 25 Provision for (benefit from) income taxes 11 9 (91 ) Net income 16 % 13 % 116 % 23 Table of Contents We were profitable for fiscal years 2007, 2006 and 2005; however, we cannot guarantee continued profitability or profitability at the levels we have recently experienced for any period in the future. We have observed the following trends and events that are likely to have an impact on our financial condition and results of operations in the foreseeable future: During each quarter of 2007, the dollar volume of new recurring revenue contracts that we booked exceeded the dollar volume of the contracts we lost through cancellations, terminations and non-payment. A continuation of this trend would lead to increased revenues. During each quarter of 2007, unit prices offered to some new and existing customers declined, including contracts signed with certain customers at higher committed service levels, which contributed to the declining unit prices due to volume discounts. Additionally, increased competition from new entrants into the market that are willing to use low unit prices as a method of differentiation contributed to these price declines. If we continue to experience decreases in unit prices for new and existing customers, our operating profit percentage could decrease. During each quarter of 2007, we continued to reduce our network bandwidth costs per unit by entering into new supplier contracts with lower pricing and amending existing contracts to take advantage of price reductions offered by our existing suppliers. Additionally, we continue to invest in internal-use software development to improve the performance and efficiency of our network. However, due to increased traffic delivered over our network, our total bandwidth costs increased during these periods. We believe that our overall bandwidth costs will continue to increase as a result of expected higher traffic levels, but we anticipate continued reductions in bandwidth costs per unit. If we do not experience lower per unit bandwidth pricing or we are unsuccessful at effectively routing traffic over our network through lower cost providers, network bandwidth costs could increase in excess of our expectations in 2008. During each quarter of 2007, no customer accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues. We expect that customer concentration levels will continue to decline compared to those in prior years if our customer base continues to grow. During the year ended December 31, 2007, revenues derived from customers outside the United States accounted for 23% of our total revenues. We expect revenues from such customers as a percentage of our total revenues to be between 20% and 25% in 2008. As of January 1, 2006, we adopted SFAS No. 123R, which requires us to record compensation expense for employee stock awards at fair value at the time of grant. For the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, our stock-based compensation expense was $66.6 million and $49.6 million, respectively. We expect that stock-based compensation expense will continue at the current level, or slightly increase in the future, because we have a significant number of unvested employee awards outstanding and plan to continue to grant stock-based compensation awards in the future. As of December 31, 2007, our total unrecognized compensation costs for stock-based awards were $100.7 million, which we expect to recognize as expense over a weighted average period of 1.3 years. This expense is expected to be recognized through 2011. Depreciation expense related to our network equipment increased during 2007 as compared to 2006. Due to expected future purchases of network equipment during 2008, we believe that depreciation expense related to our network equipment will continue to increase in 2008. We expect to continue to enhance and add functionality to our service offerings and capitalize stock-based compensation expense attributable to employees working on such projects, which would increase the amount of capitalized internal-use software costs. As a result, we believe that the amortization of internal-use software development costs, which we include in cost of revenues, will increase in 2008 compared to 2007. During the year ended December 31, 2007, our effective income tax rate, including discrete items, was 40.0%. While we expect our annual effective income tax rate to remain relatively constant during 2008, we do not expect to make significant cash tax payments due to the continued utilization of our deferred tax assets. 24 Table of Contents Based on our analysis of, among other things, the aforementioned trends and events, as of the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, we expect to continue to generate net income on a quarterly and annual basis during 2008; however, our future results are likely to be affected by many factors identified in the section captioned Risk Factors and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K, including our ability to: increase our revenue by adding customers through long-term contracts and limiting customer cancellations and terminations; offset unit price declines for our services with higher volumes of traffic delivered on our network; prevent disruptions to our services and network due to accidents or intentional attacks; and maintain our network bandwidth costs and other operating expenses consistent with our revenues. As a result, there is no assurance that we will achieve our expected financial objectives, including generating positive net income, in any future period. Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Overview Our MD&A is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. These principles require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, cash flow and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates include those related to revenue recognition, accounts receivable and related reserves, capitalized internal-use software costs, intangible assets and goodwill, income and other taxes, impairment and useful lives of long-lived assets, loss contingencies and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results may differ from these estimates. For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K. Definitions We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America that require us to make subjective estimates about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. Our estimates are based upon assumptions and judgments about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made and applied and require us to assess a range of potential outcomes. Review of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Revenue Recognition: We recognize service revenue in accordance with the Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, Revenue Recognition, and the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 00-21, Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables. Revenue is recognized only when the price is fixed or determinable, persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, the service is performed and collectability of the resulting receivable is reasonably assured. We primarily derive revenues from the sale of services to customers executing contracts with terms of one year or longer. These contracts generally commit the customer to a minimum monthly or annual level of usage and specify the rate at which the customer must pay for actual usage above the monthly or annual minimum. For these services, we recognize the monthly minimum as revenue each month provided that an enforceable contract 25 Table of Contents has been signed by both parties, the service has been delivered to the customer, the fee for the service is fixed or determinable and collection is reasonably assured. Should a customer usage of our service exceed the monthly minimum, we recognize revenue for such excess usage in the period of the usage. For annual or other non-monthly period revenue commitments, we recognize revenue monthly based upon the customer actual usage each month and only recognize any remaining committed amount for the applicable period in the last month thereof. We typically charge customers an installation fee when the services are first activated. The installation fees are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the estimated life of the customer arrangement. We also derive income from services sold as discrete, non-recurring events or based solely on usage. For these services, we recognize revenue after an enforceable contract has been signed by both parties, the fee is fixed or determinable, the event or usage has occurred, and collection is reasonably assured. When more than one element is contained in a single arrangement, we allocate revenue between the elements based on each element relative fair value, provided that each element meets the criteria as a separate unit of accounting. An item is considered a separate unit of accounting if it has value to the customer on a standalone basis and there is objective and verifiable evidence of the fair value of the separate elements. Fair value is generally determined based upon the price charged when the element is sold separately. If the fair value of each element cannot be objectively determined, the total value of the arrangement is recognized ratably over the entire service period to the extent that all services have begun to be provided at the outset of the period. For most multi-element service arrangements to date, the fair value of each element has not been objectively determinable. Therefore, all revenue under these arrangements has been recognized ratably over the related service period provided that all services have begun to be provided at the outset of the period. At the inception of a customer contract for service, we make an estimate as to that customer ability to pay for the services provided. We base our estimate on a combination of factors, including the successful completion of a credit check or financial review, our collection experience with the customer and other forms of payment assurance. Upon the completion of these steps, we recognize revenue monthly in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. If we subsequently determine that collection from the customer is not reasonably assured, we record an allowance for doubtful accounts and bad debt expense for all of that customer unpaid invoices and cease recognizing revenue for continued services provided until cash is received. Changes in our estimates and judgments about whether collection is reasonably assured would change the timing of revenue or amount of bad debt expense that we recognize. We also sell our services through a reseller channel. Assuming all other revenue recognition criteria are met, we recognize revenue from reseller arrangements based on the reseller contracted non-refundable minimum purchase commitments over the term of the contract, plus amounts sold by the reseller to its customers in excess of the minimum commitments. These excess commitments are recognized as revenue in the period in which the service is provided. In limited instances (resulting in less than 1% of total revenue in each year reported), we also license software under perpetual and term license agreements. We apply the provisions of Statement of Position, or SOP, 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, as amended by SOP 98-9, Modifications of SOP 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition, With Respect to Certain Transactions. As prescribed by this guidance, we apply the residual method of accounting. The residual method requires that the portion of the total arrangement fee attributable to undelivered elements, as indicated by vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value, be deferred and subsequently recognized when delivered. The difference between the total arrangement fee and the amount deferred for the undelivered elements is recognized as revenue related to the delivered elements so long as all other revenue recognition criteria of SOP 97-2 are met. We recognize revenue from fixed-fee arrangements and software arrangements that require significant customization or modification using the percentage-of-completion method in accordance with Accounting Research Bulletin, or ARB, No. 45, Long-Term Construction-Type Contracts, and with the applicable guidance provided by SOP 81-1, Accounting for Performance of Construction-Type and Certain Production-Type 26 Table of Contents Contracts. We generally recognize revenue under these arrangements based on the percentage of cost incurred to date compared to the estimated total cost to complete the project. In certain customer arrangements, we recognize revenue based on the progress made towards achieving milestones under the contract. The impact of any change in estimate is recorded prospectively from the date of the change. At the outset of a fixed-fee arrangement, if we are not able to estimate the total cost to complete, nor able to measure progress towards the achievement of contract milestones, we account for the arrangement using the completed-contract method of accounting. Under this method, we recognize revenue when the contract is complete and there are no remaining costs or deliverables. In the event that the estimated total cost on a fixed-fee contract indicates a loss, we will record the loss immediately. From time to time, we enter into contracts to sell our services or license our technology to unrelated companies at or about the same time we enter into contracts to purchase products or services from the same companies. If we conclude that these contracts were negotiated concurrently, we record as revenue only the net cash received from the vendor, unless the product or service received has a separate and identifiable benefit and the fair value to us of the vendor product or service can be objectively established. We may from time to time resell licenses or services of third parties. We record revenue for these transactions on a gross basis when we have risk of loss related to the amounts purchased from the third party and we add value to the license or service, such as by providing maintenance or support for such license or service. If these conditions are present, we recognize revenue when all other revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. Deferred revenue includes amounts billed to customers for which revenue has not been recognized. Deferred revenue primarily consists of the unearned portion of monthly billed service fees; prepayments made by customers for future periods; deferred installation and activation set-up fees; and amounts billed under extended payment terms. Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves: Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amounts and do not bear interest. In addition to trade accounts receivable, our accounts receivable balance includes unbilled accounts that represent revenue recorded for customers that is typically billed within one month. We record reserves against our accounts receivable balance. These reserves consist of allowances for doubtful accounts and revenue from certain customers on a cash basis. Increases and decreases in the allowance for doubtful accounts are included as a component of general and administrative expenses. Increases in the reserve for cash basis customers are recorded as reduction of revenue. The reserve for cash basis customers increases as services are provided to customers for which collection is no longer assured. The reserve decreases and revenue is recognized when and if cash payments are received. Estimates are used in determining these reserves and are based upon our review of outstanding balances on a customer-specific, account-by-account basis. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based upon a review of customer receivables from prior sales with collection issues where we no longer believe that the customer has the ability to pay for prior services provided. We perform on-going credit evaluations of our customers. If such an evaluation indicates that payment is no longer reasonably assured for services provided, any future services provided to that customer will result in creation of a cash basis reserve until we receive consistent payments. Valuation and impairment of investments and marketable securities: The fair value of our investments and marketable securities is generally determined from quoted market prices based upon transactions in active markets. We also have investments in auction rate securities that consist entirely of municipal debt securities, recorded at cost, which approximates fair market value (unless the auction fails) due to their variable interest rates, which reset through an auction process typically every 28 days. This auction mechanism generally allows existing investors to continue to own their securities with a revised interest 27 Table of Contents rate based on the auction or liquidate their holdings by selling their securities at par value. Because of these short intervals between interest reset dates, we monitor these auctions to ensure they are successful, which provides evidence that the recorded values of these investments approximate their fair values. To the extent an auction were to fail such that the securities were deemed to be not liquid, we would need to seek other alternatives to determine the fair value of these securities, which may not be based on quoted market transactions. Investments and marketable securities are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value below cost basis is determined to be other than temporary. We periodically evaluate whether a decline in fair value below cost basis is other than temporary by considering available evidence regarding these investments including, among other factors, the duration of the period that, and extent to which, the fair value is less than cost basis; the financial health of and business outlook for the issuer, including industry and sector performance and operational and financing cash flow factors; and overall market conditions and trends. Once a decline in fair value is determined to be other than temporary, a write-down is recorded and a new cost basis in the security is established. Assessing the above factors involves inherent uncertainty. Write-downs, if recorded, could be materially different from the actual market performance of investments and marketable securities in our portfolio, if, among other things, relevant information related to our investments and marketable securities was not publicly available or other factors not considered by us would have been relevant to the determination of impairment. Impairment and Useful Lives of Long-Lived Assets: We review our long-lived assets, such as fixed assets and intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events that would trigger an impairment review include a change in the use of the asset or forecasted negative cash flows related to the asset. When such events occur, we compare the carrying amount of the asset to the undiscounted expected future cash flows related to the asset. If this comparison indicates that impairment is present, the amount of the impairment is calculated as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset. If a readily determinable market price does not exist, fair value is estimated using discounted expected cash flows attributable to the asset. The estimates required to apply this accounting policy include forecasted usage of the long-lived assets, the useful lives of these assets and expected future cash flows. Changes in these estimates could materially impact results from operations. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets: We test goodwill for impairments on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We performed an impairment test of goodwill as of December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2006. These tests did not result in an impairment of goodwill. Other intangible assets consist of completed technologies, customer relationships, trademarks and non-compete agreements arising from acquisitions of businesses and acquired license rights. Purchased intangible assets, other than goodwill, are amortized over their estimated useful lives based upon the economic value derived from the related intangible assets. Goodwill is carried at its historical cost. Loss Contingencies: We define a loss contingency as a condition involving uncertainty as to a possible loss related to a previous event that will not be resolved until one or more future events occur or fail to occur. Our primary loss contingencies relate to pending or threatened litigation. We record a liability for a loss contingency when we believe that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. When we believe the likelihood of a loss is less than probable and more than remote, we do not record a liability. Material loss contingencies are disclosed in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. 28 Table of Contents Tax Reserves: Our provision for income taxes is comprised of a current and a deferred portion. The current income tax provision is calculated as the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current year. The deferred income tax provision is calculated for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards using expected tax rates in effect in the years during which the differences are expected to reverse or the carryforwards are expected to be realized. We currently have significant deferred tax assets, comprised of net operating loss carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards and deductible temporary differences. Our management periodically weighs the positive and negative evidence to determine if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. During 2005, our management determined it was more likely than not that substantially all of the deferred tax assets would be realized, and, accordingly released substantially all of our valuation allowance. This decision was based on our cumulative history of earnings before taxes for financial reporting purposes over a twelve-quarter period and on the projections of expected future taxable income at that time. We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our income tax and sales and use tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of our tax reserves contains assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the costs of the ultimate tax liability or benefit from these matters may be materially more or less than the amount that we estimated. In November 2005, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position SFAS 123R-3, Transition Election to Accounting for the Tax Effect of Share-Based Payment Awards. We elected to adopt the modified prospective transition method for calculating the tax effects of stock-based compensation pursuant to SFAS No. 123R. Under the modified prospective transition method, no adjustment is made to the deferred tax balances associated with stock-based payments that continue to be classified as equity awards. Additionally, we elected to use the long-form method, as provided in paragraph 81 of SFAS No. 123R, to determine the pool of windfall tax benefits upon adoption of SFAS No. 123R. The long-form method required us to analyze the book and tax compensation for each award separately as if it had been issued following the recognition provisions of SFAS No. 123, subject to adjustments for net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards. In June 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation, or FIN, No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109. FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with FASB Statement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. FIN 48 prescribes a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We adopted the provisions of FIN 48 on January 1, 2007. As of the date of adoption, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $2.1 million, including accrued interest and penalties, and did not record any cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings as a result of adopting FIN 48. As of December 31, 2007, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $4.0 million, including accrued interest and penalties. Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation: Since January 1, 2006, we have accounted for stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123R. Prior to that date, we recognized stock-based compensation costs pursuant to Accounting Principles Bulletin No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees, and elected to disclose the impact of expensing stock options pursuant to SFAS No. 123, Share-Based Payment, in the notes to our financial 29 Table of Contents statements. See Note 16 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. Under the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS No. 123R, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the value of the award and is recognized as expense over the vesting period. We have selected the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine fair value of stock option awards. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires judgment, including estimating the expected life of the stock awards and the volatility of the underlying common stock. Our assumptions may differ from those used in prior periods because of adjustments to the calculation of such assumptions based upon the guidance of SFAS No. 123R and Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment. Changes to the assumptions may have a significant impact on the fair value of stock options, which could have a material impact on our financial statements. In addition, judgment is also required in estimating the amount of stock-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. Should our actual forfeiture rates differ significantly from our estimates, our stock-based compensation expense and results of operations could be materially impacted. For stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units and deferred stock units, we recognize compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the awards vesting periods for those awards that contain only a service vesting feature. For awards with a performance condition vesting feature, we recognize compensation cost on a graded-vesting basis over the awards expected vesting periods. Capitalized Internal-Use Software Costs: We capitalize the salaries and payroll-related costs of employees and consultants who devote time to the development of internal-use software projects. If a project constitutes an enhancement to previously developed software, we assess whether the enhancement is significant and creates additional functionality to the software, thus qualifying the work incurred for capitalization. Once the project is complete, we estimate the useful life of the internal-use software, and we periodically assess whether the software is impaired. Changes in our estimates related to internal-use software would increase or decrease operating expenses or amortization recorded during the period. Results of Operations Revenues. Total revenues increased 48%, or $207.7 million, to $636.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $428.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Total revenues increased 51%, or $145.6 million, to $428.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $283.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. The increases in revenue during the years presented were primarily attributable to an increase in the number of customers under recurring revenue contracts, as well as increases in traffic and additional services sold to new and existing customers, the latter leading to increases in the average revenue per customer during each year, partially offset by reduced unit prices offered to new and renewing customers. We believe that the continued growth in use of the Internet by businesses and consumers, particularly in the media and entertainment segment, is the principal factor driving increased purchases of our services. We expect this trend to continue in 2008. Also contributing to the increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2007 were revenues generated through our acquisitions of Netli and Nine Systems. As of December 31, 2007, we had 2,645 customers under recurring revenue contracts as compared to 2,347 at December 31, 2006, and 1,910 at December 31, 2005. For 2007 and 2006, 23% and 22%, respectively, of our total revenues was derived from our operations located outside of the United States, of which 17% and 18% of total revenues, respectively, was derived from operations in Europe. For 2005, 21% of our total revenues was derived from our operations located outside of the United States, of which 16% of total revenues was derived from operations in Europe. Other than the United States, no single country accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues during these periods. We expect international sales to increase slightly as a percentage of our overall sales in 2008 as compared to prior years. Resellers accounted for 18% of revenues in 2007, 20% in 2006 and 24% in 2005. For 2007, 2006 and 2005, no single customer accounted for 10% or more of total revenues. 30 Table of Contents Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues includes fees paid to network providers for bandwidth and co-location of our network equipment. Cost of revenues also includes payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation for network operations personnel, cost of software licenses, depreciation of network equipment used to deliver our services and amortization of internal-use software. Cost of revenues was comprised of the following (in millions): For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 2005 Bandwidth, co-location and storage fees $ 103.2 $ 59.2 $ 36.3 Payroll and related costs of network operations personnel 8.8 5.8 3.8 Stock-based compensation 3.3 2.0 Depreciation and impairment of network equipment 41.1 19.4 9.0 Amortization of internal-use software 11.0 7.7 6.6 Total cost of revenues $ 167.4 $ 94.1 $ 55.7 Cost of revenues increased 78%, or $73.3 million, to $167.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $94.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Cost of revenues increased 69%, or $38.4 million, to $94.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $55.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. These increases were primarily due to an increase in the amounts paid to network providers due to higher traffic levels, partially offset by reduced bandwidth costs per unit, and an increase in depreciation expense of network equipment as we continued to invest in our infrastructure. Additionally, in 2007 and 2006, cost of revenues included stock-based compensation expense, which increased by $1.4 million and $2.0 million, respectively, as compared to 2006 and 2005, respectively. Cost of revenues during 2007, 2006 and 2005 also included credits received of approximately $3.4 million, $1.5 million and $1.2 million, respectively, from settlements and renegotiations entered into in connection with billing disputes related to bandwidth contracts. Credits of this nature may occur in the future; however, the timing and amount of future credits, if any, will vary. We have long-term purchase commitments for bandwidth usage and co-location with various networks and Internet service providers. For the years ending December 31, 2008, 2009 and 2010, the minimum commitments related to bandwidth usage and co-location services are approximately $38.2 million, $6.6 million and $2.4 million, respectively. We believe cost of revenues will increase in 2008. We expect to deliver more traffic on our network, which would result in higher expenses associated with the increased traffic; however, such costs are likely to be partially offset by lower bandwidth costs per unit. Additionally, for 2008, we anticipate increases in depreciation expense related to our network equipment and amortization of internal-use software development costs, along with increased payroll and related costs, as we continue to make investments in our network with the expectation that our customer base will continue to expand. Additionally, cost of revenues is expected to increase as a result of higher stock-based compensation expense due to additional equity awards we expect to grant to network-related personnel. Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation for research and development personnel who design, develop, test and enhance our services and our network. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred, except for certain internal-use software development costs eligible for capitalization. During the years ended December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, we capitalized software development costs of $17.8 million, $11.7 million and $8.5 million, respectively, net of impairments. These development costs consisted of external consulting and payroll and payroll-related costs for personnel involved in the development of internal-use software used to deliver our services and operate our network. Additionally, for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, we 31 Table of Contents capitalized $6.4 million and $4.3 million, respectively, of non-cash stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123R. These capitalized internal-use software costs are amortized to cost of revenues over their estimated useful lives of two years. Research and development expenses increased 33%, or $11.0 million, to $44.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $33.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Research and development expenses increased 83%, or $15.0 million, to $33.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, as compared $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. The research and development expense increases in both 2007 and 2006 as compared to the prior years were due to increases in payroll and related costs resulting from higher headcount, as well as additional stock-based compensation expense. The following table quantifies the net increase in the various components of our research and development expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in Research and Development Expenses 2007 to 2006 2006 to 2005 Payroll and related costs $ 12.5 $ 5.9 Stock-based compensation 4.2 10.4 Capitalized salaries and other (5.7 ) (1.3 ) Total net increase $ 11.0 $ 15.0 We believe that research and development expenses will increase in 2008, as we expect to continue to hire additional development personnel in order to make investments in our core technology, develop new services and make refinements to our other service offerings. Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs, stock-based compensation expense and commissions for personnel engaged in marketing, sales and support functions, as well as advertising and promotional expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased 23%, or $27.9 million, to $147.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $119.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Sales and marketing expenses increased 54%, or $41.8 million, to $119.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $77.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in sales and marketing expenses during these periods was primarily due to higher payroll and related costs, particularly commissions for sales and marketing personnel, attributable to revenue growth and as a result of higher stock-based compensation expense, particularly for the year ended December 31, 2006, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2005. The following table quantifies the net increase in the various components of our sales and marketing expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in Sales and Marketing Expenses 2007 to 2006 2006 to 2005 Payroll and related costs $ 12.6 $ 23.4 Stock-based compensation 7.8 17.8 Marketing and related costs 2.9 (0.4 ) Other expense 4.6 1.0 Total net increase $ 27.9 $ 41.8 32 Table of Contents We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase in 2008 due to an expected increase in commissions on higher forecasted sales of our services, the expected increase in hiring of sales and marketing personnel and additional expected increases in other marketing costs such as advertising. General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the following components: payroll, stock-based compensation and other related costs, including expenses for executive, finance, business applications, network management, human resources and other administrative personnel; depreciation of property and equipment we use internally; fees for professional services; rent and other facility-related expenditures for leased properties; the provision for doubtful accounts; insurance costs; and non-income related taxes. General and administrative expenses increased 34%, or $30.9 million, to $121.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $90.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. General and administrative expenses increased 70%, or $37.2 million, to $90.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $53.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in general and administrative expenses during both periods was primarily due to an increase in payroll and related costs as a result of headcount growth, as well as higher stock-based compensation expense. Additionally, facilities-related costs have increased due to office expansions, and we have incurred increased expenditures for professional services, particularly legal fees related to current litigation matters. The following table quantifies the net increase in various components of our general and administrative expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in General and Administrative Expenses 2007 to 2006 2006 to 2005 Payroll and related costs $ 7.8 $ 10.0 Stock-based compensation 3.5 15.6 Non-income taxes (0.5 ) 3.7 Facilities-related costs 5.2 1.2 Depreciation and amortization 3.4 1.4 Provision for doubtful accounts 1.2 0.2 Legal fees 6.9 (0.1 ) Consulting and advisory services 0.8 0.7 Other expenses 2.6 4.5 Total net increase $ 30.9 $ 37.2 We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in 2008 due to increased payroll and related costs attributable to increased hiring, an increase in rent and facilities costs, and higher litigation-related expenses in connection with a trial that commenced in February 2008. Amortization of Other Intangible Assets. Amortization of other intangible assets consists of the amortization of intangible assets acquired in business combinations and amortization of acquired license rights. Amortization of other intangible assets increased 35%, or $2.9 million, to $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 33 Table of Contents as compared to $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Amortization of other intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2006 increased by $3.4 million, or 66%, over amortization of other intangible assets in the year ended December 31, 2005 of $5.1 million. The increase in amortization of other intangible assets in 2007 as compared to 2006 was due to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisitions of Netli in March 2007 and Nine Systems in December 2006. The increase in amortization of intangible assets in 2006 as compared to 2005 was due to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of Speedera in June 2005. Based on our currently owned intangible assets, we expect amortization of other intangible assets to be approximately $13.4 million, $13.6 million, $12.9 million, $12.3 million and $11.5 million for the years ending December 31, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012, respectively. Interest Income. Interest income includes interest earned on invested cash balances and marketable securities. Interest income increased 46%, or $8.1 million, to $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Interest income increased 315%, or $13.4 million, to $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 as compared to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. The increase in 2007 as compared to 2006 was primarily due to an increase in our total invested marketable securities as a result of an increase in our cash from operations. The increase in interest income in 2006 as compared to 2005 was also due to an increase in our invested marketable securities in 2006 as compared to 2005, an increase in cash from operations, as well as the investment of the $202.1 million in net proceeds we received from our public equity offering of 12.0 million shares of our common stock in November 2005. Interest Expense. Interest expense includes interest paid on our debt obligations as well as amortization of deferred financing costs. Interest expense decreased 3%, or $85,000, to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Interest expense decreased 41%, or $2.2 million, to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Based upon our outstanding indebtedness at December 31, 2007, we believe that interest expense on our debt obligations, including deferred financing amortization, will not exceed $3.1 million in 2008. Other Income (Expense), net. Other income (expense), net primarily represents net foreign exchange gains and losses incurred during the periods presented, as well as gains and losses on legal settlements. Other income, net decreased 8%, or $43,000, to other income, net of $527,000 for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to other income, net of $570,000 for the year ended December 31, 2006. Other expense, net was $507,000 for the year ended December 31, 2005. Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2007 consisted of $35,000 of foreign exchange gains and $492,000 of net gains on legal settlements. Other income, net of $570,000 for the year ended December 31, 2006 consisted of approximately $90,000 of foreign exchange gains and $480,000 of net gains on legal settlements. For the year ended December 31, 2005, other expense, net of $507,000 consisted of approximately $1.5 million of foreign exchange losses, offset by $1.0 million of net gains on legal settlements. Other income (expense), net may fluctuate in the future based upon movements in foreign exchange rates, the outcome of legal proceedings and other events. Gain (Loss) on Investments, net. During the year ended December 31, 2007, we recorded a net gain on investments of $24,000 on the sale of marketable securities. During the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, we recorded a net gain on investments of $261,000 and a net loss on investments of $27,000, respectively, from the sale of marketable securities. We do not expect significant gains or losses on investments in 2008. Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt. Loss on early extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2005 was $1.4 million as a result of our redemption of $56.6 million in aggregate principal amount of our 5 1 / 2 % convertible subordinated notes during 2005. This loss of $1.4 million consisted of $889,000 in premiums above par value paid to redeem such notes and $481,000 of deferred financing costs associated with redeeming such notes prior to their maturity. 34 Table of Contents Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2007, our effective tax rate of 40.0% was higher than the 35% statutory federal income tax rate applicable to corporations due primarily to state income taxes, the effect of non-deductible stock-based compensation, and an increase in our tax valuation allowance for capital loss carryforwards; partially offset by the benefit recorded for research and development tax credits. For the year ended December 31, 2006, our effective tax rate of 41.5% was higher than the 35% statutory federal income tax rate due primarily to state income taxes and the effect of non-deductible stock-based compensation, partially offset by the benefit recorded for research and development tax credits. For the year ended December 31, 2005, our effective tax rate was a benefit of 363.5% and was higher than the 35% statutory federal income tax rate due primarily to a tax benefit of $285.8 million recorded in connection with the release of substantially all of the valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. Provision for income taxes increased by 64%, or $26.2 million, to $67.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $41.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2006. Benefit from income taxes was $257.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. During 2005, in connection with the release of our deferred tax asset valuation allowance, we recorded an income tax benefit of $285.8 million which was offset by provisions for income taxes primarily related to our alternative minimum tax obligations and income earned in profitable foreign jurisdictions. As a result of the release of the deferred tax asset valuation allowance in 2005, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $41.1 million and $67.2 million in 2006 and 2007, respectively. Based upon our cumulative history of earnings over a twelve-quarter period and an assessment of our expected future results of operations, during the third quarter of 2005, we determined that it had become more likely than not that we would be able to realize a substantial portion of our United States and foreign NOL carryforward tax assets prior to their expiration. As a result, during 2005, we released a total of $349.5 million of our United States and foreign deferred tax asset valuation allowance. Of such amount, $285.8 million was recorded as an income tax benefit in our statement of operations; $61.0 million was attributable to stock option exercises, which was recorded as an increase in additional paid-in capital on our balance sheet; and approximately $2.7 million was recorded as a reduction to acquired goodwill and intangible assets. As of December 31, 2007, we had a total valuation allowance of $11.2 million. During the fourth quarter of 2007, we recorded a valuation allowance of $6.7 million against capital loss carryforwards that are expected to expire unused and also reversed an existing valuation allowance of $1.9 million related to certain state NOL carryforwards. While we expect our consolidated annualized effective tax rate in 2008 to remain relatively consistent with 2007, this expectation does not take into consideration the effect of discrete items recorded as a result of our compliance with SFAS No. 123R or any potential tax planning strategies. Our effective tax rate could be materially different depending on the nature and timing of the disposition of incentive and other employee stock options. Further, our effective tax rate may fluctuate within a fiscal year and from quarter to quarter, due to items arising from discrete events, including settlements of tax audits and assessments, the resolution or identification of tax position uncertainties and acquisitions of other companies. Because of the availability of the NOLs discussed above, a significant portion of our future provision for income taxes is expected to be a non-cash expense; consequently, the amount of cash paid with respect to income taxes is expected to be a relatively small portion of the total annualized tax expense during periods in which the NOLs are utilized. In determining our net deferred tax assets and valuation allowances, annualized effective tax rates, and cash paid for income taxes, management is required to make judgments and estimates about domestic and foreign profitability, the timing and extent of the utilization of NOL carryforwards, applicable tax rates, transfer pricing methodologies and tax planning strategies. Judgments and estimates related to our projections and assumptions are inherently uncertain; therefore, actual results could differ materially from our projections. 35 Table of Contents We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our income tax and sales and use tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of these tax reserves reflects assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the ultimate tax liability or benefit from of these matters may be materially greater or less than the amount that we have estimated. Liquidity and Capital Resources To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the following transactions: private sales of capital stock and subordinated notes, which notes were repaid in 1999; an initial public offering of our common stock in October 1999, which generated net proceeds of $217.6 million; the sale in June 2000 of an aggregate of $300 million in principal amount of our 5 1/2% convertible subordinated notes, which generated net proceeds of $290.2 million and were repaid or redeemed in full between December 2003 and September 2005; the sale in December 2003 and January 2004 of an aggregate of $200 million in principal amount of our 1% convertible senior notes, which generated net proceeds of $194.1 million; the public offering of 12.0 million shares of our common stock in November 2005, which generated net proceeds of $202.1 million; proceeds from the exercise of stock awards; and cash generated by operations. As of December 31, 2007, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, which consisted of corporate debt securities, U.S. treasury and government agency securities, commercial paper, municipal debt securities, and municipal auction rate securities, totaled $633.5 million. We place our cash investments in instruments that meet high credit quality standards, as specified in our investment policy. Our investment policy also limits the amount of our credit exposure to any one issue or issuer and seeks to manage these assets to achieve our goals of preserving principal, maintaining adequate liquidity at all times, and maximizing returns subject to our investment policy. We held approximately $280.0 million in municipal auction rate securities at December 31, 2007. These investments consisted solely of municipal debt securities; none of the auction rate securities in our portfolio are mortgage-backed. In mid-February 2008, many of our municipal auction rate securities experienced failed auctions. Of the $280.0 million of auction rate securities we held at December 31, 2007, approximately $145.5 million had experienced failed auctions through February 26, 2008. The continued uncertainty in the credit markets, which has caused our auction rate securities to fail, prevented us from liquidating certain of our holdings of auction rate securities. Based on our ability to access our cash and other short-term investments, our expected operating cash flows, and our other sources of cash, we do not anticipate the current lack of liquidity on these investments to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operation. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $103.4 million to $235.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to $132.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Cash provided by operating activities increased $49.2 million to $132.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $82.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. We expect that cash provided by operating activities will continue to increase as a result of an expected increase in cash collections related to higher revenues, partially 36 Table of Contents offset by an expected increase in operating expenses that require cash outlays such as salaries in connection with expected increases in headcount and higher commissions. The timing and amount of future working capital changes and our ability to manage our days sales outstanding will also affect the future amount of cash used in or provided by operating activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $226.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $205.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Cash provided by investing activities was $183.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Cash used in investing activities for 2007 reflects net purchases of short- and long-term available-for-sale securities of $550.6 million and purchases of property and equipment of $100.5 million, including the capitalization of internal-use software development costs related to our current and future service offerings. Amounts attributable to these purchases and investments were offset, in part, by the proceeds from the sales and maturities of short- and long-term marketable securities of $415.8 million and $7.9 million of net cash acquired in our acquisitions of Netli in March 2007 and Red Swoosh in April 2007. Additionally, cash used in investing activities during 2007 included a decrease of $0.7 million in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. Cash used in investing activities for 2006 reflects net purchases of short- and long-term investments of $395.9 million and purchases of property and equipment of $69.3 million. In addition, approximately $5.1 million of cash, including transaction costs, was used to acquire Nine Systems in December 2006. These purchases and investments were offset by the proceeds from the sales and maturities of short- and long-term securities of $264.3 million and a decrease of $0.4 million in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2005 reflects purchases of property and equipment of $36.2 million and net purchases of short- and long-term marketable securities of $215.6 million primarily related to the cash received from our equity financing in November 2005. These investments were offset by sales and maturities of short- and long-term securities of $66.1 million, acquisition of $1.7 million in cash through the acquisition of Speedera and a decrease of $0.2 million in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. For 2008, we expect total capital expenditures, a component of cash used in investing activities, to be approximately 16% of total revenues. Cash provided by financing activities was $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $60.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Cash provided by financing activities was $159.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2005. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2007 included proceeds of $31.6 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and the sale of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2007 also included $20.9 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from the exercise of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2006 included proceeds of $27.9 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and the sale of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2006 also included $32.5 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from the exercise of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities in 2005 reflects net proceeds from our November 2005 equity offering of $202.1 million and proceeds from issuances of common stock under our equity compensation plans of $14.5 million, offset by payments made to redeem $56.6 million in principal amount of our outstanding 5 1/2% convertible subordinated notes and payments on capital lease obligations of $0.8 million. Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are dependent upon changes in, among other things, working capital items such as deferred revenue, accounts payable, accounts receivable and various accrued expenses, as well as changes in our capital and financial structure, including debt repurchases and issuances, stock option exercises, sales of equity investments and similar events. 37 Table of Contents The following table represents the net inflows and outflows of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities for the periods presented (in millions): For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 2005 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively $ 434.5 $ 314.1 $ 108.4 Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities: Receipts from customers 627.8 412.3 271.7 Payments to vendors (322.1 ) (201.0 ) (135.1 ) Payments for employee payroll (179.6 ) (134.6 ) (90.4 ) Debt repurchases (58.1 ) Debt interest and premium payments (2.0 ) (2.0 ) (5.1 ) Stock option exercises and employee stock purchase plan issuances 31.6 27.9 14.5 Equity offering proceeds 202.1 Cash acquired (used) in business acquisitions 8.8 (4.5 ) 3.9 Interest income 25.8 17.7 4.3 Other 8.7 4.6 (2.1 ) Net increase 199.0 120.4 205.7 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively $ 633.5 $ 434.5 $ 314.1 We believe, based on our present business plan, that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and forecasted cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 24 months. If the assumptions underlying our business plan regarding future revenue and expenses change or if unexpected opportunities or needs arise, we may seek to raise additional cash by selling equity or debt securities. We may not, however, be able to sell equity or debt securities on terms we consider reasonable or at all. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of equity or debt securities, these securities could have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those accruing to holders of common stock, and the terms of such debt could impose restrictions on our operations. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities would also result in additional dilution to our existing stockholders. See Risk Factors elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of additional factors that could affect our liquidity. Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities and Commercial Commitments The following table presents our contractual obligations and commercial commitments, as of December 31, 2007, over the next five years and thereafter (in millions): Payments Due by Period Contractual Obligations Total Less than 12 Months 12 to 36 Months 36 to 60 Months More than 60 Months 1% convertible senior notes $ 199.9 $ $ $ $ 199.9 Interest on convertible notes outstanding assuming no early redemption or repurchases 52.0 2.0 4.0 4.0 42.0 Real estate operating leases 152.3 12.8 27.8 25.7 86.0 Bandwidth and co-location agreements 47.2 38.2 9.0 Vendor equipment purchase obligations 0.5 0.5 Open vendor purchase orders 14.3 14.3 Total contractual obligations $ 466.2 $ 67.8 $ 40.8 $ 29.7 $ 327.9 38 Table of Contents In accordance with FIN No. 48, as of December 31, 2007, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $4.0 million, which included approximately $0.8 million of accrued interest and penalties. We do not expect to recognize any of these tax benefits in 2008. We are not, however, able to provide a reasonable reliable estimate of the timing of future payments relating to these obligations. Letters of Credit As of December 31, 2007, we had outstanding $8.6 million in irrevocable letters of credit issued by us in favor of third-party beneficiaries, primarily related to facility leases. Approximately $3.6 million of these letters of credit are collateralized by restricted marketable securities, of which $3.1 million are classified as long-term marketable securities and $0.5 million are classified as short-term marketable securities on our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2007. The restrictions on these marketable securities lapse as we fulfill our obligations or as such obligations expire under the terms of the letters of credit. These restrictions are expected to lapse at various times through May 2011. The remaining $5.0 million irrevocable letters of credit are unsecured and are expected to remain in effect until December 2019. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We have entered into various indemnification arrangements with third parties, including vendors, customers, landlords, our officers and directors, shareholders of acquired companies, joint venture partners and third party licensees of our technology. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by third parties due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement or our negligence. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with FASB Interpretation 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. To date, we have not encountered material costs as a result of such obligations and have not accrued any significant liabilities related to such indemnification obligations in our financial statements. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion of these indemnification agreements. The conversion features of our 1% convertible senior notes due December 15, 2033 are equity-linked derivatives. As such, we recognize these instruments as off-balance sheet arrangements. The conversion features associated with these notes would be accounted for as derivative instruments, except that they are indexed to our common stock and classified in stockholders equity. Therefore, these instruments meet the scope exception of paragraph 11(a) of SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, and are accordingly not accounted for as derivatives for purposes of SFAS No. 133. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information. Litigation We are party to litigation which we consider routine and incidental to our business. Management does not expect the results of any of these actions to have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition. See Legal Proceedings elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion on litigation. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements, or SFAS No. 157, which addresses how companies should measure fair value when they are required to use a fair value measure for recognition or disclosure purposes under generally accepted accounting principles. SFAS No. 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS No. 157 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal 39 Table of Contents years beginning after November 15, 2007 and should be applied prospectively, except in the case of a limited number of financial instruments that require retrospective application. In February 2008, the FASB deferred the implementation of SFAS No. 157 for certain non-financial assets and liabilities for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2008. We are currently evaluating the potential impact of SFAS No. 157 on our financial position and results of operations. In February 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities including an amendment of SFAS 115, or SFAS No. 159. The new statement allows entities to choose, at specified election dates, to measure eligible financial assets and liabilities at fair value that are not otherwise required to be measured at fair value. If a company elects the fair value option for an eligible item, changes in that item fair value in subsequent reporting periods must be recognized in current earnings. SFAS No. 159 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007. We are currently evaluating the potential impact of SFAS No. 159 on our financial position and results of operations. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141 (revised 2007), Business Combinations, or SFAS No. 141R. This statement establishes principles and requirements for how the acquirer in a business combination (i) recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree, (ii) recognizes and measures the goodwill acquired in the business combination or a gain from a bargain purchase and (iii) determines what information to disclose to enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial effects of the business combination. SFAS No. 141R is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008. We are currently evaluating the potential impact of SFAS No. 141R on our financial position and results of operations. 40 Table of Contents 
