CIK: 1086222
Company Name: AKAMAI TECHNOLOGIES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-03-02


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview We provide services for accelerating and improving the delivery of content and applications over the Internet. We primarily derive income from the sale of services to customers executing contracts with terms of one year or longer, which we refer to as recurring revenue contracts or long-term contracts. These contracts generally commit the customer to a minimum monthly level of usage with additional charges applicable for actual usage above the monthly minimum. In recent years, however, we have entered into increasing numbers of customer contracts that have minimum usage commitments that are based on quarterly, twelve-month or longer periods. Our goal of having a consistent and predictable base level of income is important to our financial success. Accordingly, to be successful, we must maintain our base of recurring revenue contracts by eliminating or reducing lost monthly or annual recurring revenue due to customer cancellations or terminations and build on that base by adding new customers and increasing the number of services, features and functions that our existing customers purchase. At the same time, we must ensure that our expenses do not increase faster than, or at the same rate as, our revenues. Accomplishing these goals requires that we compete effectively in the marketplace on the basis of quality, price and the attractiveness of our services and technology. This Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, or MD&A, should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto which appear elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. See Risk Factors elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of certain risks associated with our business. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements do not include the potential impact of any mergers, acquisitions, or divestitures of business combinations that may be announced after the date hereof. Our increase in net income in 2008 as compared to 2007 and 2006 reflects the success of our efforts to increase our monthly and annual recurring revenues while limiting the expenses needed to support such growth. The following sets forth, as a percentage of revenues, consolidated statements of operations data for the years indicated: 2008 2007 2006 Revenues 100 % 100 % 100 % Cost of revenues 28 26 22 Research and development 5 7 8 Sales and marketing 21 23 28 General and administrative 17 19 21 Amortization of other intangible assets 2 2 2 Restructuring charge (benefit) Total costs and operating expenses 73 77 81 Income from operations 27 23 19 Interest income 3 4 4 Interest expense (1 ) Other income (expense), net Gain (loss) on investments, net Loss on early extinguishment of debt Income before provision for income taxes 30 27 22 Provision for income taxes 11 11 9 Net income 19 % 16 % 13 % 24 Table of Contents We were profitable for fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006; however, we cannot guarantee continued profitability or profitability at the levels we have recently experienced for any period in the future. We have observed the following trends and events that are likely to have an impact on our financial condition and results of operations in the foreseeable future: During each quarter of 2008, the dollar volume of new recurring revenue contracts that we booked exceeded the dollar volume of the contracts we lost through cancellations, terminations and non-payment. A continuation of this trend would lead to increased revenues. During each quarter of 2008, unit prices offered to some new and existing customers declined, including contracts signed with certain customers at higher committed service levels that reflected volume discounts. Additionally, increased competition from new entrants into the market that are willing to use low unit prices as a method of differentiation contributed to these price declines. If we continue to experience decreases in unit prices for new and existing customers, our operating profit percentage could decrease. During each quarter of 2008, we reduced our network bandwidth costs per unit by entering into new supplier contracts with lower pricing and amending existing contracts to take advantage of price reductions offered by our existing suppliers. Additionally, we continue to invest in internal-use software development to improve the performance and efficiency of our network. Due to increased traffic delivered over our network, however, our total bandwidth costs increased during these quarters. We believe that our overall bandwidth costs will continue to increase as a result of expected higher traffic levels, but we anticipate continued reductions in bandwidth costs per unit. If we do not experience lower per unit bandwidth pricing or we are unsuccessful at effectively routing traffic over our network through lower cost providers, total network bandwidth costs could increase in excess of our expectations in 2009. During each quarter of 2008, no customer accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues. We expect that customer concentration levels will continue to decline compared to those in prior years if our customer base continues to grow. During the year ended December 31, 2008, revenues derived from customers outside the United States accounted for 25% of our total revenues. We expect revenues from such customers as a percentage of our total revenues to be between 25% and 30% in 2009. As of January 1, 2006, we adopted SFAS No. 123R, which requires us to record compensation expense for employee stock awards at fair value at the time of grant. For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, our stock-based compensation expense was $57.9 million, $66.6 million and $49.6 million, respectively. We expect that stock-based compensation expense will continue at the current level, because we have a significant number of unvested employee awards outstanding that we expect will be offset by grants of stock-based compensation awards in the future at lower fair values than those previously granted. As of December 31, 2008, our total unrecognized compensation costs for stock-based awards were $75.9 million, which we expect to recognize as expense over a weighted average period of 1.2 years. This expense is expected to be recognized through 2012. Depreciation and amortization expense related to our network equipment and internal-use software development costs increased by $18.1 million during 2008 as compared to 2007. Due to expected future purchases of network equipment during 2009, we believe that depreciation expense related to our network equipment will continue to increase in 2009. We expect to continue to enhance and add functionality to our service offerings and capitalize stock-based compensation expense attributable to employees working on such projects, which would increase the amount of capitalized internal-use software costs. As a result, we believe that the amortization of internal-use software development costs, which we include in cost of revenues, will increase in 2009 as compared to 2008. 25 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2008, we have recorded a pre-tax cumulative unrealized loss in stockholders equity of $38.1 million related to the temporary impairment of our marketable security investments and $12.9 million of realized loss in our statement of operations related to the other-than-temporary impairment of our investments in auction rate securities, or ARS. We also recorded a realized gain of $12.5 million related to an agreement we entered into with one of our investment advisors. Under the terms of the agreement, the investment advisor agreed to repurchase, in June 2010, the ARS it previously sold to us. The gain represented by the put option incorporated into this agreement was included in gain (loss) on investments, net in our statement of operations. Based upon our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance of $771.6 million and expected operating cash flows, we do not anticipate that the lack of liquidity associated with our ARS will adversely affect our ability to conduct business during 2009. We believe we have the ability to hold these ARS until a recovery of the auction process, a buyer is found outside the auction process, the securities are called or refinanced by the issuer, or until maturity. During the year ended December 31, 2008, our effective income tax rate was 38.1%. While we expect our annual effective income tax rate to remain relatively consistent during 2009, we do not expect to make significant cash tax payments due to the continued utilization of our deferred tax assets. In November 2008, we announced a workforce reduction affecting 110 employees across all functional areas. We recorded $2.0 million as a restructuring charge for the amount of one-time benefits provided to affected employees. Included in these costs is a net reduction in non-cash stock-based compensation of $0.8 million, reflecting a modification to certain stock-based awards previously granted to affected employees. Additionally, in December 2008, in connection with excess and vacated facilities under long-term non-cancelable leases, we recorded $0.5 million as a restructuring charge for the estimated future lease payments, less estimated sublease income, for these vacated facilities. We expect that $1.7 million of these liabilities will be paid in 2009. Based on our analysis of, among other things, the aforementioned trends and events, as of the date of this annual report on Form 10-K, we expect to continue to generate net income on a quarterly and annual basis during 2009; however, our future results are likely to be affected by many factors identified in the section captioned Risk Factors and elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K, including our ability to: increase our revenue by adding customers through long-term contracts and limiting customer cancellations and terminations; offset unit price declines for our services with higher volumes of traffic delivered on our network as well as increased sales of our value-added solutions; prevent disruptions to our services and network due to accidents or intentional attacks; and maintain our network bandwidth costs and other operating expenses consistent with our revenues. As a result, there is no assurance that we will achieve our expected financial objectives, including generating positive net income, in any future period. Application of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Overview Our MD&A is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. These principles require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, cash flow and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Our estimates include those related to revenue recognition, accounts receivable and related reserves, valuation and impairment of investments and marketable securities, capitalized internal-use software costs, goodwill and other intangible assets, tax reserves, impairment 26 Table of Contents and useful lives of long-lived assets, loss contingencies and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time such estimates are made. Actual results may differ from these estimates. For a complete description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. Definitions We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. Our estimates are based upon assumptions and judgments about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the accounting estimate is made and applied and require us to assess a range of potential outcomes. Review of Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Revenue Recognition: We recognize service revenue in accordance with the Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, Revenue Recognition, and the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Emerging Issues Task Force, or EITF, Issue No. 00-21, Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables. Revenue is recognized only when the price is fixed or determinable, persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, the service is performed and collectability of the resulting receivable is reasonably assured. We primarily derive revenues from the sale of services to customers executing contracts with terms of one year or longer. These contracts generally commit the customer to a minimum monthly, quarterly or annual level of usage and specify the rate at which the customer must pay for actual usage above the monthly, quarterly or annual minimum. For these services, we recognize the monthly minimum as revenue each month provided that an enforceable contract has been signed by both parties, the service has been delivered to the customer, the fee for the service is fixed or determinable and collection is reasonably assured. Should a customer usage of our service exceed the monthly minimum, we recognize revenue for such excess usage in the period of the usage. For annual or other non-monthly period revenue commitments, we recognize revenue monthly based upon the customer actual usage each month of the commitment period and only recognize any remaining committed amount for the applicable period in the last month thereof. We typically charge customers an installation fee when the services are first activated. The installation fees are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized as revenue ratably over the estimated life of the customer arrangement. We also derive income from services sold as discrete, non-recurring events or based solely on usage. For these services, we recognize revenue when the event or usage has occurred. When more than one element is contained in a single arrangement, we allocate revenue between the elements based on each element relative fair value, provided that each element meets the criteria as a separate unit of accounting. An item is considered a separate unit of accounting if it has value to the customer on a standalone basis and there is objective and verifiable evidence of the fair value of the separate elements. Fair value is generally determined based upon the price charged when the element is sold separately. If the fair value of each element cannot be objectively determined, the total value of the arrangement is recognized ratably over the entire service period commencing when all services have begun to be provided. For most multi-element service arrangements we have entered into to date, the fair value of each element has not been objectively determinable. Therefore, all revenue under these arrangements has been recognized ratably over the related service period commencing when we have begun to provide all services ordered. 27 Table of Contents At the inception of a customer contract for service, we make an estimate as to that customer ability to pay for the services provided. We base our estimate on a combination of factors, including the successful completion of a credit check or financial review, our collection experience with the customer and other forms of payment assurance. Upon the completion of these steps, we recognize revenue monthly in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. If we subsequently determine that collection from the customer is not reasonably assured, we record an allowance for doubtful accounts and bad debt expense for all of that customer unpaid invoices and cease recognizing revenue for continued services provided until cash is received. Changes in our estimates and judgments about whether collection is reasonably assured would change the timing of revenue or amount of bad debt expense that we recognize. We also sell our services through a reseller channel. Assuming all other revenue recognition criteria are met, we recognize revenue from reseller arrangements based on the reseller contracted non-refundable minimum purchase commitments over the term of the contract, plus amounts sold by the reseller to its customers in excess of the minimum commitments. These excess commitments are recognized as revenue in the period in which the service is provided. From time to time, we enter into contracts to sell our services or license our technology to unrelated companies at or about the same time we enter into contracts to purchase products or services from the same companies. If we conclude that these contracts were negotiated concurrently, we record as revenue only the net cash received from the vendor, unless the product or service received has a separate and identifiable benefit and the fair value to us of the vendor product or service can be objectively established. We may from time to time resell licenses or services of third parties. We record revenue for these transactions on a gross basis when we have risk of loss related to the amounts purchased from the third party and we add value to the license or service, such as by providing maintenance or support for such license or service. If these conditions are present, we recognize revenue when all other revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. Deferred revenue represents amounts billed to customers for which revenue has not been recognized. Deferred revenue primarily consists of the unearned portion of monthly billed service fees; prepayments made by customers for future periods; deferred installation and activation set-up fees; and amounts billed under customer arrangements with extended payment terms. Accounts Receivable and Related Reserves: Trade accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amounts and do not bear interest. In addition to trade accounts receivable, our accounts receivable balance includes unbilled accounts that represent revenue recorded for customers that is typically billed within one month. We record reserves against our accounts receivable balance. These reserves consist of allowances for doubtful accounts and revenue from certain customers on a cash basis. Increases and decreases in the allowance for doubtful accounts are included as a component of general and administrative expenses. Increases in the reserve for cash basis customers are recorded as reduction of revenue. The reserve for cash basis customers increases as services are provided to customers for which collection is no longer assured. The reserve decreases and revenue is recognized when and if cash payments are received. Estimates are used in determining these reserves and are based upon our review of outstanding balances on a customer-specific, account-by-account basis. The allowance for doubtful accounts is based upon a review of customer receivables from prior sales with collection issues where we no longer believe that the customer has the ability to pay for prior services provided. We perform on-going credit evaluations of our customers. If such an evaluation indicates that payment is no longer reasonably assured for services provided, any future services provided to that customer will result in creation of a cash basis reserve until we receive consistent payments. 28 Table of Contents Valuation and Impairment of Investments and Marketable Securities: Effective January 1, 2008, we implemented SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurement, or SFAS No. 157, for our financial assets and liabilities that are re-measured and reported at fair value at each reporting period, and non-financial assets and liabilities that are re-measured and reported at fair value at least annually. SFAS No. 157 defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. We have certain financial assets and liabilities recorded at fair value (principally cash equivalents and short- and long-term marketable securities) that have been classified as Level 1, 2 or 3 within the fair value hierarchy as described in SFAS No. 157. Fair values determined by Level 1 inputs utilize quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that we have the ability to access. Fair values determined by Level 2 inputs utilize data points that are observable such as quoted prices, interest rates and yield curves. Fair values determined by Level 3 inputs utilize unobservable data points for the asset or liability. Investments and marketable securities are considered to be impaired when a decline in fair value below cost basis is determined to be other-than-temporary. We periodically evaluate whether a decline in fair value below cost basis is other-than-temporary by considering available evidence regarding these investments including, among other factors, the duration of the period that, and extent to which, the fair value is less than cost basis; the financial health of and business outlook for the issuer, including industry and sector performance and operational and financing cash flow factors; overall market conditions and trends; and our intent and ability to retain our investment in the security for a period of time sufficient to allow for an anticipated recovery in market value. Once a decline in fair value is determined to be other-than-temporary, a write-down is recorded and a new cost basis in the security is established. Assessing the above factors involves inherent uncertainty. Write-downs, if recorded, could be materially different from the actual market performance of investments and marketable securities in our portfolio, if, among other things, relevant information related to our investments and marketable securities was not publicly available or other factors not considered by us would have been relevant to the determination of impairment. Included in our short- and long-term marketable securities at December 31, 2008 and 2007 are ARS that are primarily AAA-rated bonds, most of which are collateralized by federally guaranteed student loans. ARS are long-term variable rate bonds tied to short-term interest rates that may reset through a Dutch auction process that is designed to occur every seven to 35 days. Historically, the carrying value (par value) of ARS approximated fair market value due to the resetting of variable interest rates. Beginning in mid-February 2008 and continuing throughout the period ended December 31, 2008, however, the auctions for ARS then held by us were unsuccessful. As a result, the interest rates on ARS reset to the maximum rate per the applicable investment offering statements. We will not be able to liquidate affected ARS until a future auction on these investments is successful, a buyer is found outside the auction process, the securities are called or refinanced by the issuer, or the securities mature. Due to the long-term nature of the underlying student loan bonds and the failure of the auction process to provide a current market, we classified these investments as long-term on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2008. In light of these liquidity issues, we performed a discounted cash flow analysis to determine the estimated fair value of these ARS investments. The discounted cash flow analysis we performed considered the timing of expected future successful auctions, the impact of extended periods of maximum interest rates, collateralization of underlying security investments and the creditworthiness of the issuer. The discounted cash flow analysis performed as of December 31, 2008 assumes a weighted average discount rate of 6.275% and expected term of five years. The discount rate was determined using a proxy based upon the current market rates for similar debt offerings within the AAA-rated ARS market. The expected term was based on management estimate of future liquidity. As a result, as of December 31, 2008, we have estimated an aggregate loss of $50.1 million, of which $37.2 million was related to the impairment of ARS deemed to be temporary and included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) within stockholders equity and of which $12.9 million was related to the 29 Table of Contents impairment of ARS deemed other-than-temporary and included in gain (loss) on investments, net in the consolidated statement of operations. Despite the failed auctions, we continue to receive cash flows in the form of specified interest payments from the issuers of ARS. In addition, except for ARS with respect to which we have entered into an agreement allowing us to sell such ARS in June 2010, we have the intent and ability to hold our ARS until a recovery of the impairment because we believe we have sufficient cash and other marketable securities on-hand and from projected cash flows from operations such that we do not anticipate a need to sell our ARS prior to a recovery to par value. See Liquidity and Capital Resources below. Impairment and Useful Lives of Long-Lived Assets: We review our long-lived assets, such as fixed assets and intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events that would trigger an impairment review include a change in the use of the asset or forecasted negative cash flows related to the asset. When such events occur, we compare the carrying amount of the asset to the undiscounted expected future cash flows related to the asset. If this comparison indicates that impairment is present, the amount of the impairment is calculated as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset. If a readily determinable market price does not exist, fair value is estimated using discounted expected cash flows attributable to the asset. The estimates required to apply this accounting policy include forecasted usage of the long-lived assets, the useful lives of these assets and expected future cash flows. Changes in these estimates could materially impact results from operations. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets: We test goodwill for impairments on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. We concluded that we had one reporting unit and assigned the entire balance of goodwill to this reporting unit as of December 31, 2008 and 2007. The fair value of the reporting unit was determined using our market capitalization as of December 31, 2008 and 2007. We performed an impairment test of goodwill as of each of December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007. These tests did not result in an impairment of goodwill. Other intangible assets consist of completed technologies, customer relationships, trademarks and non-compete agreements arising from acquisitions of businesses and acquired license rights. Purchased intangible assets, other than goodwill, are amortized over their estimated useful lives based upon the economic value derived from the related intangible assets. Goodwill is carried at its historical cost. Loss Contingencies: We define a loss contingency as a condition involving uncertainty as to a possible loss related to a previous event that will not be resolved until one or more future events occur or fail to occur. Our primary loss contingencies relate to pending or threatened litigation. We record a liability for a loss contingency when we believe that it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. When we believe the likelihood of a loss is less than probable and more than remote, we do not record a liability. Material loss contingencies are disclosed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Tax Reserves: Our provision for income taxes is comprised of a current and a deferred portion. The current income tax provision is calculated as the estimated taxes payable or refundable on tax returns for the current year. The deferred income tax provision is calculated for the estimated future tax effects attributable to temporary differences and carryforwards using expected tax rates in effect in the years during which the differences are expected to reverse or the carryforwards are expected to be realized. 30 Table of Contents We currently have significant deferred tax assets, comprised of net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards and deductible temporary differences. Our management periodically weighs the positive and negative evidence to determine if it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our income tax and sales and use tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of our tax reserves contains assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the costs of the ultimate tax liability or benefit from these matters may be materially more or less than the amount that we estimated. In June 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation, or FIN, No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109. FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with FASB Statement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. FIN 48 prescribes a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We adopted the provisions of FIN 48 on January 1, 2007. As of the date of adoption, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $2.1 million, including accrued interest and penalties, and did not record any cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings as a result of adopting FIN 48. As of December 31, 2008, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $6.1 million, including accrued interest and penalties. Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation: We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with SFAS No. 123R. Under the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS No. 123R, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the vesting period. We have selected the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine fair value of stock option awards. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires judgment, including estimating the expected life of the stock awards and the volatility of the underlying common stock. Our assumptions may differ from those used in prior periods because of adjustments to the calculation of such assumptions based upon the guidance of SFAS No. 123R and Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment. Changes to the assumptions may have a significant impact on the fair value of stock options, which could have a material impact on our financial statements. In addition, judgment is also required in estimating the amount of stock-based awards that are expected to be forfeited. Should our actual forfeiture rates differ significantly from our estimates, our stock-based compensation expense and results of operations could be materially impacted. For stock options, restricted stock, restricted stock units and deferred stock units, we recognize compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the awards vesting periods for those awards that contain only a service vesting feature. For awards with a performance condition vesting feature, we recognize compensation cost on a graded-vesting basis over the awards expected vesting periods. Capitalized Internal-Use Software Costs: We capitalize the salaries and payroll-related costs of employees and consultants who devote time to the development of internal-use software projects. If a project constitutes an enhancement to previously developed software, we assess whether the enhancement is significant and creates additional functionality to the software, thus qualifying the work incurred for capitalization. Once the project is complete, we estimate the useful life of the internal-use software, and we periodically assess whether the software is impaired. Changes in our estimates related to internal-use software would increase or decrease operating expenses or amortization recorded during the period. 31 Table of Contents Results of Operations Revenues. Total revenues increased 24%, or $154.5 million, to $790.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $636.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Total revenues increased 48%, or $207.7 million, to $636.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $428.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The increases in revenue during the years presented were primarily attributable to an increase in the number of customers under recurring revenue contracts, as well as increases in traffic and additional services sold to new and existing customers. Increased sales to existing customers contributed to increases in the average revenue per customer during each year, partially offset by reduced unit prices offered to new and renewing customers. We believe that the continued growth in use of the Internet by businesses and consumers was the principal factor driving increased purchases of our services. We expect this trend to continue in 2009 but at lower rates of growth due to general economic conditions and a leveling off of the rate of increased growth in use of the Internet. Also contributing to the increase in revenues for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007 were revenues generated through our acquisitions of acerno, which added $6.9 million of revenue during the fourth quarter of 2008, Netli, Nine Systems and Red Swoosh. As of December 31, 2008, we had 2,858 customers under recurring revenue contracts as compared to 2,645 at December 31, 2007 and 2,347 at December 31, 2006. For 2008 and 2007, 25% and 23%, respectively, of our total revenues was derived from our operations located outside of the United States, of which 18% and 17% of total revenues, respectively, was derived from operations in Europe. For 2006, 22% of our total revenues was derived from our operations located outside of the United States, of which 18% of total revenues was derived from operations in Europe. Other than the United States, no single country accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues during these periods. We expect international sales to increase slightly as a percentage of our total sales in 2009 as compared to prior years. Resellers accounted for 16% of revenues in 2008, 18% in 2007 and 20% in 2006. For 2008, 2007 and 2006, no single customer accounted for 10% or more of total revenues. Cost of Revenues. Cost of revenues includes fees paid to network providers for bandwidth and co-location of our network equipment. Cost of revenues also includes payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation expense for network operations personnel, cost of software licenses, depreciation of network equipment used to deliver our services and amortization of internal-use software. Cost of revenues was comprised of the following (in millions): For the Years Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 Bandwidth, co-location and storage fees $ 136.8 $ 103.2 $ 59.2 Payroll and related costs of network operations personnel 10.8 8.8 5.8 Stock-based compensation 2.4 3.3 2.0 Depreciation and impairment of network equipment 55.2 41.1 19.4 Amortization of internal-use software 17.4 11.0 7.7 Total cost of revenues $ 222.6 $ 167.4 $ 94.1 Cost of revenues increased 33%, or $55.2 million, to $222.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $167.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Cost of revenues increased 78%, or $73.3 million, to $167.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $94.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. These increases were primarily due to an increase in the amounts paid to network providers due to higher traffic levels, partially offset by reduced bandwidth costs per unit, and increases in depreciation expense of network equipment and amortization of internal-use software as we continued to invest in our infrastructure. Additionally, in 2008, 2007 and 2006, cost of revenues included stock-based compensation expense; such expense decreased by $0.9 million in 2008 as compared to 2007 and increased by $1.4 million in 2007 as compared to 2006. Cost of revenues during 2008, 2007 and 2006 also included credits received of approximately $3.3 million, $3.4 million and $1.5 million, respectively, from settlements and renegotiations entered into in connection with billing disputes related to bandwidth contracts. Credits of this nature may occur in the future; however, the timing and amount of future credits, if any, will vary. 32 Table of Contents We have long-term purchase commitments for bandwidth usage and co-location with various networks and Internet service providers. For the years ending December 31, 2009 and 2010, the minimum commitments related to bandwidth usage and co-location services are approximately $42.4 million and $8.0 million, respectively. We believe cost of revenues will increase in 2009. We expect to deliver more traffic on our network, which would result in higher expenses associated with the increased traffic; however, such costs are likely to be partially offset by lower bandwidth costs per unit. Additionally, for 2009, we anticipate increases in depreciation expense related to our network equipment and amortization of internal-use software development costs, along with increased payroll and related costs, as we continue to make investments in our network with the expectation that our customer base will continue to expand. Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation expense for research and development personnel who design, develop, test, deploy and enhance our services and our network. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred, except for certain internal-use software development costs eligible for capitalization. During the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, we capitalized software development costs of $23.9 million, $17.8 million and $11.7 million, respectively, net of impairments. These development costs consisted of external consulting, payroll and payroll-related costs for personnel involved in the development of internal-use software used to deliver our services and operate our network. Additionally, for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, we capitalized as internal-use software $7.4 million, $6.4 million and $4.3 million, respectively, of non-cash stock-based compensation. These capitalized internal-use software costs are amortized to cost of revenues over their estimated useful lives of two years. Research and development expenses decreased 11%, or $4.9 million, to $39.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $44.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Research and development expenses increased 33%, or $11.0 million, to $44.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007, as compared to $33.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The research and development expense decrease in 2008 as compared to 2007 was due to decreases in stock-based compensation expense and travel costs as well as an increase in amount of costs capitalized as internal-use software, partially offset by an increase in payroll and related costs resulting from higher headcount. The research and development expense increase in 2007 as compared to the prior year was due to increases in payroll and related costs resulting from higher headcount, as well as additional stock-based compensation expense. The following table quantifies the net changes in the various components of our research and development expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in Research and Development Expenses 2008 to 2007 2007 to 2006 Payroll and related costs $ 6.2 $ 12.5 Stock-based compensation (4.6 ) 4.2 Capitalized salaries and other (6.5 ) (5.7 ) Total net (decrease) increase $ (4.9 ) $ 11.0 We believe that research and development expenses will increase in 2009 because we expect to continue to hire additional development personnel in order to make improvements in our core technology, develop new services and make refinements to our other service offerings. Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs, stock-based compensation expense and commissions for personnel engaged in marketing, sales and support functions, as well as advertising and promotional expenses. 33 Table of Contents Sales and marketing expenses increased 11%, or $16.8 million, to $164.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $147.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Sales and marketing expenses increased 23%, or $27.9 million, to $147.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $119.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in sales and marketing expenses during these periods was primarily due to higher payroll and related costs, particularly commissions for sales and marketing personnel, attributable to revenue growth and as a result of higher marketing-related costs, particularly for the year ended December 31, 2008, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2007. The following table quantifies the net increase in the various components of our sales and marketing expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in Sales and Marketing Expenses 2008 to 2007 2007 to 2006 Payroll and related costs $ 8.8 $ 12.6 Stock-based compensation 7.8 Marketing and related costs 4.5 2.9 Other expense 3.5 4.6 Total net increase $ 16.8 $ 27.9 We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase in 2009 due to an expected increase in commissions on higher forecasted sales of our services, offset by a reduction in payroll and related costs due to a decrease in our sales and marketing personnel and other marketing costs such as advertising. General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the following components: payroll, stock-based compensation expense and other related costs, including expenses for executive, finance, business applications, network management, human resources and other administrative personnel; depreciation of property and equipment we use internally; fees for professional services; rent and other facility-related expenditures for leased properties; the provision for doubtful accounts; insurance costs; and non-income related taxes. General and administrative expenses increased 12%, or $14.9 million, to $136.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $121.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. General and administrative expenses increased 34% or $30.9 million, to $121.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $90.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The increase in general and administrative expenses during both periods was primarily due to an increase in payroll and related costs as a result of headcount growth. Additionally, facilities-related costs increased due to office expansions, and we incurred increased expenditures for professional services, particularly legal and consulting fees. This increase was offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation expense during 2008 in comparison to 2007. 34 Table of Contents The following table quantifies the net increase in various components of our general and administrative expenses for the periods presented (in millions): Increase (Decrease) in General and Administrative Expenses 2008 to 2007 2007 to 2006 Payroll and related costs $ 4.7 $ 7.8 Stock-based compensation (3.2 ) 3.5 Non-income taxes 2.0 (0.5 ) Facilities-related costs 3.6 5.2 Depreciation and amortization 3.2 3.4 Provision for doubtful accounts (0.1 ) 1.2 Legal fees 0.4 6.9 Consulting and advisory services 1.1 0.8 Other expenses 3.2 2.6 Total net increase $ 14.9 $ 30.9 We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in 2009 due to increased payroll and related costs attributable to increased hiring and an increase in rent and facilities costs, offset by an expected reduction in litigation-related expenses. Amortization of Other Intangible Assets. Amortization of other intangible assets consists of the amortization of intangible assets acquired in business combinations and amortization of acquired license rights. Amortization of other intangible assets increased 22%, or $2.5 million, to $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Amortization of other intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2007 increased by $2.9 million, or 35%, over amortization of other intangible assets in the year ended December 31, 2006 of $8.5 million. The increase in amortization of other intangible assets in 2008 as compared to 2007 was due to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisitions of acerno in November 2008 and a full year of amortization of intangible assets from the Red Swoosh acquisition in April 2007. The increase in amortization of intangible assets in 2007 as compared to 2006 was due to the amortization of intangible assets from the acquisition of Netli in March 2007 and a full year of amortization of intangible assets from the Nine Systems acquisition in December 2006. Based on our currently-owned intangible assets, we expect amortization of other intangible assets to be approximately $16.7 million, $16.4 million, $16.4 million, $15.4 million and $12.6 million for the years ending December 31, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013, respectively. Interest Income. Interest income includes interest earned on invested cash balances and marketable securities. Interest income decreased 4%, or $1.0 million, to $24.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Interest income increased 46%, or $8.1 million, to $25.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. The decrease in 2008 as compared to 2007 was primarily due to a decrease in the interest rates, offsetting higher cash and marketable securities balances driven by an increase in our cash from operations. The increase in 2007 as compared to 2006 was primarily due to an increase in our total invested marketable securities as a result of an increase in our cash from operations. Interest Expense. Interest expense includes interest paid on our debt obligations as well as amortization of deferred financing costs. Interest expense decreased 8%, or $0.3 million, to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Interest expense decreased 3%, or $85,000, to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to $3.2 million for the year 35 Table of Contents ended December 31, 2006. Interest expense during these periods was primarily attributable to interest payable on the outstanding amount of our 1% convertible senior notes. Based upon our outstanding indebtedness at December 31, 2008, we believe that interest expense on our debt obligations, including deferred financing amortization, will not exceed $3.1 million in 2009. Other Income (Expense), net. Other income (expense), net primarily represents net foreign exchange gains and losses incurred during the periods presented as well as gains on legal settlements. Other income, net decreased 13%, or $66,000, to other income, net of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to other income, net of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Other income, net was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2008 consisted of $0.5 million of foreign exchange gains and $4,000 of net gains on legal settlements. Other income, net of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 consisted of approximately $35,000 of foreign exchange gains and $0.5 million of net gains on legal settlements. For the year ended December 31, 2006, other income, net of $0.6 million consisted of approximately $90,000 of foreign exchange losses, offset by $0.5 million of net gains on legal settlements. Other income (expense), net may fluctuate in the future based upon movements in foreign exchange rates, the outcome of legal proceedings and other events. Gain (Loss) on Investments, net. During the year ended December 31, 2008, we recorded a net loss on investments of $0.2 million, which reflects a loss of $12.9 million due to other-than-temporary impairments on marketable securities; a gain of $12.5 million realized on a put option received from one of our investment advisors in November 2008; and a gain of $0.2 million on the sale of marketable securities. During the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, we recorded a net gain on investments of $24,000 and $0.3 million, respectively, from the sale of marketable securities. We do not expect significant gains or losses on investments in 2009. Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt. During 2007, we recorded a loss on early extinguishment of debt in the amount of $3,000, as a result of conversions to common stock of $0.1 million in principal amount of our 1% convertible notes in August 2007 and $40,000 in principal amount of such notes in January 2007. We did not record any loss on the early extinguishment of debt in the 2006 or 2008. Provision for Income Taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2008, our effective tax rate of 38.1% was higher than the 35% statutory federal income tax rate applicable to corporations due primarily to state income taxes and the effect of non-deductible stock-based compensation, partially offset by the benefit recorded for research and development tax credits. For the years ended December 31, 2007 and December 31, 2006, our effective tax rates of 40.0% and 41.5% respectively, were higher than the 35% statutory federal income tax rate due primarily to state income taxes and the effect of non-deductible stock-based compensation, partially offset by the benefit recorded for research and development tax credits. Provision for income taxes increased by 33%, or $22.2 million, to $89.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 as compared to $67.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2007. Provision for income taxes increased by 64%, or $26.2 million, to $67.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 as compared to $41.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2006. These increases were primarily due to increases in our operating income. While we expect our consolidated annualized effective tax rate in 2009 to remain relatively consistent with 2008, this expectation does not take into consideration the effect of discrete items recorded as a result of our compliance with SFAS No. 123R or any potential tax planning strategies. Our effective tax rate could be materially different depending on the nature and timing of the disposition of incentive and other employee stock options. Further, our effective tax rate may fluctuate within a fiscal year and from quarter to quarter, due to items arising from discrete events, including settlements of tax audits and assessments, the resolution or identification of tax position uncertainties and acquisitions of other companies. 36 Table of Contents Because of the availability of NOLs, a significant portion of our future provision for income taxes is expected to be a non-cash expense; consequently, the amount of cash paid with respect to income taxes is expected to be a relatively small portion of the total annualized tax expense during periods in which the NOLs are utilized. In determining our net deferred tax assets and valuation allowances, annualized effective tax rates, and cash paid for income taxes, management is required to make judgments and estimates about domestic and foreign profitability, the timing and extent of the utilization of NOL carryforwards, applicable tax rates, transfer pricing methodologies and tax planning strategies. Judgments and estimates related to our projections and assumptions are inherently uncertain; therefore, actual results could differ materially from our projections. We have recorded certain tax reserves to address potential exposures involving our income tax and sales and use tax positions. These potential tax liabilities result from the varying application of statutes, rules, regulations and interpretations by different taxing jurisdictions. Our estimate of the value of these tax reserves reflects assumptions based on past experiences and judgments about the interpretation of statutes, rules and regulations by taxing jurisdictions. It is possible that the ultimate tax liability or benefit from of these matters may be materially greater or less than the amount that we have estimated. Liquidity and Capital Resources To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the following transactions: private sales of capital stock and subordinated notes, which notes were repaid in 1999; an initial public offering of our common stock in October 1999, which generated net proceeds of $217.6 million; the sale in June 2000 of an aggregate of $300 million in principal amount of our 5 1/2% convertible subordinated notes, which generated net proceeds of $290.2 million and were repaid or redeemed in full between December 2003 and September 2005; the sale in December 2003 and January 2004 of an aggregate of $200 million in principal amount of our 1% convertible senior notes, which generated net proceeds of $194.1 million; the public offering of 12.0 million shares of our common stock in November 2005, which generated net proceeds of $202.1 million; proceeds from the exercise of stock awards; and cash generated by operations. As of December 31, 2008, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, which consisted of corporate debt securities, U.S. treasury and government agency securities, commercial paper, corporate debt securities and student loan-backed ARS, totaled $771.6 million. We place our cash investments in instruments that meet high credit quality standards, as specified in our investment policy. Our investment policy also limits the amount of our credit exposure to any one issue or issuer and seeks to manage these assets to achieve our goals of preserving principal, maintaining adequate liquidity at all times, and maximizing returns subject to our investment policy. We held approximately $287.1 million and $280.0 million in par value of ARS at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The ARS are primarily AAA-rated bonds, most of which are guaranteed by the U.S. government as part of the Federal Family Education Loan Program through the U.S. Department of Education. None of the auction rate securities in our portfolio are mortgage-backed or collateralized debt obligations. In mid-February 2008, all of our ARS experienced failed auctions, which failures continued throughout the rest of 2008. As a result, we have been unable to liquidate most of our holdings of ARS. Based on our ability to access our cash and other short-term investments, our expected operating cash flows, and our other sources of cash, we do not anticipate the current lack of liquidity on these investments to have a material impact on our financial 37 Table of Contents condition or results of operations in 2009. In November 2008, we entered into an agreement with one of our investment advisors that provides for the repurchase in June 2010 of $76.5 million of the ARS we hold if we have been unable to achieve liquidity with respect to such securities before that time. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $106.5 million to $343.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to $237.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Cash provided by operating activities increased $104.2 million to $237.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to $132.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. We expect that cash provided by operating activities will continue to increase as a result of an expected increase in cash collections related to higher revenues, partially offset by an expected increase in operating expenses that require cash outlays such as salaries and higher commissions. Current economic conditions could negatively impact our cash provided by operating activities if we are unable to manage our days sales outstanding or our business otherwise deteriorates. Net cash used in investing activities was $364.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2008, compared to $226.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Net cash used in investing activities was $205.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Cash used in investing activities for 2008 reflects the purchase of acerno in November 2008 for $83.7 million, net purchases of short- and long-term marketable securities of $533.1 million and purchases of property and equipment of $115.4 million, including the capitalization of internal-use software development costs. Amounts attributable to these purchases and investments were offset, in part, by the proceeds from the sales and maturities of short- and long-term marketable securities of $367.7 million. Net cash used in investing activities for 2007 reflects net purchases of short- and long-term marketable securities of $550.6 million and purchases of property and equipment of $100.5 million, including the capitalization of internal-use software development costs. Amounts attributable to these purchases and investments were offset, in part, by the proceeds from the sales and maturities of short- and long-term marketable securities of $415.8 million and $7.9 million of net cash acquired through our acquisitions of Netli in March 2007 and Red Swoosh in April 2007. Additionally, net cash used in investing activities during 2007 included a decrease of $0.7 million in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. Net cash used in investing activities for 2006 reflects net purchases of short- and long-term investments of $395.9 million and purchases of property and equipment of $69.3 million, including the capitalization of internal-use software development costs. In addition, approximately $5.1 million of cash, including transaction costs, was used to acquire Nine Systems in December 2006. These purchases and investments were offset by the proceeds from the sales and maturities of short- and long-term securities of $264.3 million and a decrease of $0.4 million in restricted investments previously held for security deposits. For 2009, we expect total capital expenditures, a component of cash used in investing activities, to be approximately 15% of total revenue for the year. We expect to fund such capital expenditures through cash generated from operations. Cash provided by financing activities was $33.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2008, compared to $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Cash provided by financing activities was $60.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2008 included proceeds of $22.0 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and the sale of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2008 also included $11.2 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from the exercise of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities was $52.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2007, compared to $60.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2007 included proceeds of $31.6 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and the sale of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2007 also included $20.9 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from the exercise of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2006 included proceeds of $27.9 million from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and the sale of shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2006 also included $32.5 million related to excess tax benefits resulting from the exercise of stock options. 38 Table of Contents Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities are dependent upon changes in, among other things, working capital items such as deferred revenue, accounts payable, accounts receivable and various accrued expenses, as well as changes in our capital and financial structure, including debt repurchases and issuances, stock option exercises, sales of equity investments and similar events. The following table represents the net inflows and outflows of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities for the periods presented (in millions): For the Years Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively $ 633.5 $ 434.5 $ 314.1 Changes in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities: Receipts from customers 786.6 627.8 412.3 Payments to vendors (366.4 ) (319.0 ) (197.5 ) Payments for employee payroll (184.2 ) (179.6 ) (134.6 ) Realized loss on investments and other investment-related assets (0.2 ) Debt interest and premium payments (2.0 ) (2.0 ) (2.0 ) Stock option exercises and employee stock purchase plan issuances 22.0 31.6 27.9 Cash (used) acquired in business acquisitions (83.7 ) 8.8 (4.5 ) Unrealized loss on marketable securities, net of unrealized gains (38.1 ) Interest income 24.8 25.8 17.7 Taxes paid (11.9 ) (3.1 ) (3.5 ) Other (8.8 ) 8.7 4.6 Net increase 138.1 199.0 120.4 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively $ 771.6 $ 633.5 $ 434.5 As part of an agreement entered into with one of our investment advisors under which it agreed to repurchase $76.5 million of our ARS in June 2010, we were also offered the ability to enter into a line of credit that would be collateralized by the underlying ARS investments. In January 2009, the line of credit for $76.5 million was approved by the investment advisor. We have not yet used the line of credit. We believe, based on our present business plan, that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and forecasted cash flows from operations will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 24 months. If the assumptions underlying our business plan regarding future revenue and expenses change or if unexpected opportunities or needs arise, we may seek to raise additional cash by selling equity or debt securities. We may not, however, be able to sell equity or debt securities on terms we consider reasonable or at all. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of equity or debt securities, these securities could have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those accruing to holders of common stock, and the terms of such debt could impose restrictions on our operations. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities would also result in additional dilution to our existing stockholders. See Risk Factors elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for a discussion of additional factors that could affect our liquidity. 39 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations, Contingent Liabilities and Commercial Commitments The following table presents our contractual obligations and commercial commitments, as of December 31, 2008, for the next five years and thereafter (in millions): Payments Due by Period Contractual Obligations Total Less than 12 Months 12 to 36 Months 36 to 60 Months More than 60 Months 1% convertible senior notes assuming no early redemption or repurchases $ 199.9 $ $ $ $ 199.9 Interest on convertible notes outstanding assuming no early redemption or repurchases 50.0 2.0 4.0 4.0 40.0 Real estate operating leases 167.8 18.1 38.8 31.0 79.9 Bandwidth and co-location agreements 50.4 42.4 8.0 Open vendor purchase orders 15.0 15.0 Total contractual obligations $ 483.1 $ 77.5 $ 50.8 $ 35.0 $ 319.8 In accordance with FIN No. 48, as of December 31, 2008, we had unrecognized tax benefits of $6.1 million, which included approximately $1.3 million of accrued interest and penalties. We do not expect to recognize any of these tax benefits in 2009. We are not, however, able to provide a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of future payments relating to these obligations. Letters of Credit As of December 31, 2008, we had outstanding $8.6 million in irrevocable letters of credit issued by us in favor of third-party beneficiaries, primarily related to facility leases. Approximately $3.6 million of these letters of credit are collateralized by restricted marketable securities, of which $3.4 million are classified as short-term marketable securities and $0.2 million are classified as long-term marketable securities on our consolidated balance sheet at December 31, 2008. The restrictions on these marketable securities lapse as we fulfill our obligations or as such obligations expire under the terms of the letters of credit. These restrictions are expected to lapse at various times through May 2011. The remaining $5.0 million of irrevocable letters of credit are unsecured and are expected to remain in effect until December 2019. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We have entered into various indemnification arrangements with third parties, including vendors, customers, landlords, our officers and directors, shareholders of acquired companies, joint venture partners and third party licensees of our technology. Generally, these indemnification agreements require us to reimburse losses suffered by third parties due to various events, such as lawsuits arising from patent or copyright infringement or our negligence. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with FASB Interpretation 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. To date, we have not encountered material costs as a result of such obligations and have not accrued any significant liabilities related to such indemnification obligations in our financial statements. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion of these indemnification agreements. The conversion features of our 1% convertible senior notes due December 15, 2033 are equity-linked derivatives. As such, we recognize these instruments as off-balance sheet arrangements. The conversion features associated with these notes would be accounted for as derivative instruments, except that they are indexed to our common stock and classified in stockholders equity. Therefore, these instruments meet the scope exception of paragraph 11(a) of SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, and are 40 Table of Contents accordingly not accounted for as derivatives for purposes of SFAS No. 133. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information. Litigation We are party to litigation that we consider routine and incidental to our business. Management does not currently expect the results of any of these litigation matters to have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations or financial condition. See Legal Proceedings elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K for further discussion on litigation. Recent Accounting Pronouncements We adopted SFAS No. 157 on January 1, 2008. SFAS No. 157 defines fair value, establishes a methodology for measuring fair value and expands the required disclosure for fair value measurements. During 2008, the FASB issued the following amendments to SFAS No. 157: FASB Staff Position No. 157-1, Application of FASB Statement No. 157 to FASB Statement No. 13 and Other Accounting Pronouncements That Address Fair Value Measurements for Purposes of Lease Classification or Measurement under Statement 13, or FSP FAS No. 157-1, which amends SFAS No. 157 to remove certain leasing transactions from its scope. The adoption of FSP FAS No. 157-1 did not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations in 2008. FASB Staff Position No. FAS 157-2, Effective Date of FASB Statement No. 157, which delays the effective date of SFAS No. 157 from 2008 to 2009 for non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities, except for items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). We are currently evaluating the potential impact of SFAS No. 157 for non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities on our financial position and results of operations. FASB Staff Position No. 157-3, Determining the Fair Value of a Financial Asset When the Market for That Asset Is Not Active, or FSP FAS No. 157-3, which clarifies the application of SFAS No. 157 in a market that is not active and provides an example to illustrate key considerations in determining the fair value of a financial asset when the market for that financial asset is not active. FSP FAS No. 157-3 became effective in October 2008. The adoption of FSP FAS No. 157-3 did not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations in 2008. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141 (revised 2007), Business Combinations, or SFAS No. 141R. SFAS No. 141R establishes principles and requirements for how the acquirer in a business combination (i) recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree, (ii) recognizes and measures the goodwill acquired in the business combination or a gain from a bargain purchase and (iii) determines what information to disclose to enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial effects of the business combination. SFAS No. 141R became effective for us on January 1, 2009. The impact of the standard on our financial position and results of operations will be dependent upon the number of and magnitude of the acquisitions that are consummated once the standard is effective. In December 2007, the FASB released SFAS No. 160, Non-controlling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements an amendment of ARB No. 51. This statement will change the accounting and reporting for minority interests, which will be re-characterized as non-controlling interests and classified as a component of equity. This new consolidation method will significantly change the accounting for transactions with minority interest holders. This statement is effective for us on January 1, 2009. As of December 31, 2008, we did not have any minority interests. In April 2008, the FASB issued an FASB Staff Position on SFAS No. 142-3, Determination of the Useful Life of Intangible Assets, or FSP FAS No. 142-3. FSP FAS No. 142-3 amends the factors that should be 41 Table of Contents considered in developing renewal or extension assumptions used to determine the useful life of a recognized intangible asset under SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, or SFAS No. 142. FSP FAS No. 142-3 is intended to improve the consistency between the useful life of a recognized intangible asset under SFAS No. 142 and the period of expected cash flows used to measure the fair value of the asset under SFAS No. 141R and other generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. FSP FAS No. 142-3 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008. We do not expect FSP FAS No. 142-3 will have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations. In June 2008, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position, or FSP, EITF 03-6-1, Determining Whether Instruments Granted in Share-Based Payment Transactions Are Participating Securities. This FSP provides that unvested share-based payment awards that contain non-forfeitable rights to dividends or dividend equivalents (whether paid or unpaid) are participating securities and shall be included in the computation of earnings per share pursuant to the two-class method. Upon adoption, we are required to retrospectively adjust our earnings per share data (including any amounts related to interim periods, summaries of earnings and selected financial data) to conform with the provisions in this FSP. This FSP became effective for us on January 1, 2009. We have not yet determined the impact, if any, of this FSP on our consolidated financial statements. 42 Table of Contents 
