CIK: 1087423
Company Name: RED HAT INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-05-16


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Forward-looking statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Investors are cautioned that statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K that are not strictly historical statements, including, without limitation, statements regarding current or future financial performance, management plans and objectives for future operations, product plans and performance, management assessment of market factors, and statements regarding the strategy and plans of Red Hat and its strategic partners, constitute forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are not guarantees of Red Hat future performance and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause Red Hat actual results in the future to differ materially from the forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, without limitation, the risks detailed below and in Red Hat other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, copies of which may be accessed through the SEC web site at http://www.sec.gov . OVERVIEW We are the global leader in providing an enterprise operating system and related software and services based on open source technology for large enterprises. Open source software is an alternative to proprietary software. There are no licensing fees associated with open source software. Therefore, we do not recognize revenue from the licensing of the code itself. We provide value to our customers through the integration and testing of Red Hat enterprise technologies, the levels of performance of Red Hat enterprise technologies and rapid innovation of Red Hat enterprise technologies in a method that allows this innovation to be consumed by our customers. In addition, we provide certain managed services for each of our technologies through RHN, as a standard component of our subscriptions. We sell our enterprise technologies, such as RHEL, through subscriptions, and we recognize revenue over the period of the enterprise technology services subscription agreements with our customers. Our products and services are offered primarily to large enterprises, government organizations, and small and medium size businesses. We have focused on introducing and gaining acceptance for our enterprise technologies: RHEL AS, ES and WS and RHN for the past three fiscal years. In 2002, we introduced our initial RHEL offering, RHEL AS, formerly called Advanced Server. Since its initial introduction, RHEL has gained widespread ISV and IHV support. We have continued to focus on our enterprise line of technologies by expanding our enterprise operating platform offerings and introducing new systems management services. As discussed in our critical accounting policies below, these offerings typically have revenue recognition periods which match the subscription periods. We derive our revenues and generate cash from customers from two sources: (i) subscription revenue, which includes retail, enterprise subscriptions and embedded subscription revenue, and (ii) services revenue which includes enterprise services and embedded services described under Critical Accounting Policies below. For fiscal 2005 and 2004, our total revenues were $196.5 million and $124.7 million, respectively. The arrangements with our customers that create enterprise subscription revenues are explained in further detail under Critical Accounting Policies below and in NOTE 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. These agreements typically involve the sale of subscriptions to RHEL and in certain cases will include the sales of subscriptions to other Red Hat subscription offerings or Red Hat services. Our revenues are also affected by corporate, government and consumer spending levels. In evaluating the performance of our business, we consider a number of factors. These factors include total revenues, operating income, operating margin and cash flows. In addition, we also consider the following factors in our evaluation process: Subscriptions. Our enterprise technologies are sold under subscription agreements. These agreements typically have a one or three year subscription period. The base subscription entitles the end user to maintenance, which entitles the end user to configuration support and updates and upgrades to the technology, when and if available, during the term of the subscription through RHN. Our customers have the ability to purchase higher levels of subscriptions that increase the level of support the customer is 20 entitled to receive. Subscription revenue increased each quarter during fiscal 2004 and 2005 and is being driven primarily by the market acceptance of using the Linux operating system in enterprise data centers and our expansion of sales channels during the year. Sales by geography. We operate our business in three geographic regions: The Americas (U.S., Latin America and Canada); EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa); and Asia Pacific (Singapore, Japan, India, Australia, Korea and China). In fiscal 2005, $64.3 million or 33% of our revenue was generated outside North America compared to $39.0 million or 31% in fiscal 2004. The percentage of our revenues generated from our international operations is expected to increase as our international sales force and channels become more mature and as we enter new locations or expand our presence in existing locations. The increase in our international revenues reflects the increasing adoption of the Linux operating system in both Europe and Asia. As noted in the Segment Reporting section of NOTE 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, our revenue in both EMEA and Asia Pacific increased at higher percentages than in North America. We have offices in more than 25 locations throughout the world. Deferred revenue balances. Our deferred revenue balance at February 28, 2005 was $137.3 million. Because of our subscription model and revenue recognition policies, deferred revenues improve predictability of future revenues. Deferred revenues at February 28, 2005, have increased by more than 86% as compared to the balance on February 29, 2004. Cash, cash equivalents and investments in debt securities. Cash, cash equivalents and investments in debt securities balances at February 28, 2005 totaled $928.8 million. During fiscal 2005, we generated $122.2 million in cash flow from operations primarily related to the increase in sales of subscriptions to RHEL during the fiscal year. Our significant cash balance gives us the ability to take advantage of acquisition opportunities, increase investment in international areas and purchase our own common stock and debt securities. In fiscal 2005, we focused on, among other things, (i) continuing to build on the global market momentum behind the adoption of Linux as an operating system by enterprise customers; (ii) continuing our market penetration through channel partners and internationally; (iii) driving high renewal rates of subscriptions sold in prior periods and (iv) increasing the contribution to our subscription sales by Intel hardware vendors. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES Our critical accounting policies include the following: Revenue recognition; Impairment of long-lived assets; and Deferred taxes. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue in accordance with Statement of Position No. 97-2, Software Revenue Recognition , ( SOP 97-2 ) as amended by SOP 98-4 and SOP 98-9, and Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 101 ( SAB 101 ), as amended by Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104. Revenue recognition in accordance with these pronouncements can be complex due to the nature and variability of our sales transactions. Subscription Revenue Subscription revenue is comprised of enterprise, retail and embedded revenues. Accounts receivable and deferred revenue are recorded at the time a customer enters into a binding agreement for the purchase of a subscription, subscription services are made available to the customer and the customer is billed. The deferred revenue amount is amortized to income as discussed below. 21 Enterprise subscription revenue is comprised primarily of revenue from sales of RHEL technology solutions, however, through April 2004, we also generated enterprise subscription revenue from sales of Red Hat Linux and related software development tools. During fiscal 2003, we released the first version of our RHEL offerings, RHEL AS. In March 2003, two additional versions of RHEL were released, RHEL ES and RHEL WS. Red Hat enterprise technologies are offered with either one or three year base subscription periods; the majority of our subscriptions have one-year terms. Under these subscription agreements, renewal rates are generally specified for one or three year renewal terms. The base subscription entitles the end user to the technology itself and post contract customer support ( PCS ) consisting of security errata, updates to the technology, upgrades to new versions of RHEL, on a when and if available basis, during the term of the subscription. We sell RHEL through four channels: distribution, direct sales, original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ) and the web. We recognize revenue from the sale of RHEL offerings ratably over the period of the subscription beginning on the commencement date of the subscription agreement. We do not sell the RHEL technology or the components of the PCS that are included in the subscription on a stand alone basis. Subscription arrangements with large enterprise customers often have contracts with multiple elements (e.g., software technology, maintenance, training, consulting and other services). We allocate revenue to each element of the arrangement based on vendor-specific objective evidence of its fair value when we can demonstrate sufficient evidence of the fair value of at least those elements that are undelivered. The fair value of each element in multiple element arrangements is created by either (i) providing the customer with the ability during the term of the arrangement to renew that element at the same rate paid for the element included in the initial term of the agreement or (ii) selling the services on a stand-alone basis. Enterprise subscription revenue also includes revenue from large Unix to Linux migration arrangements that were sold prior to the release of RHEL in fiscal 2003. Revenue from these pre- RHEL arrangements has generally been recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement as no pattern of performance is sufficiently discernible to allow for other than ratable recognition. These arrangements lapsed in or prior to the second quarter of fiscal 2004. In addition, our enterprise subscription revenue is partially derived from sales of our RHN offerings. RHN is a Company-hosted, internet-based set of services to help assure the security, availability and reliability of all of our Red Hat technology solutions that we offer. RHN may be subscribed to at the time of, and in addition to, one of our RHEL offerings or on a stand alone basis. Revenues are recognized ratably over the term of the subscription beginning on the commencement date of the subscription. Through our retail distributors, we sold Red Hat Linux consumer products. The retail product was offered in one version during fiscal 2005: Red Hat Professional Workstation. During fiscal 2004, we sold two different versions of Red Hat Linux (9 and Professional Workstation). In accordance with SOP 97-2, the revenue associated with products whose subscription period is 30 days or less is recognized immediately because the cost to us associated with such subscriptions is de minimis. For retail products whose subscription period for support services is greater than 30 days, we recognize the revenue ratably over the period that the subscription services are provided beginning on the estimated date of purchase by the end user. A reserve for sales returns is recognized for sales of retail software products to distributors, who have a right of return, based on our historical experience of sell-through to the end user by the distributor. The predominant portion of our retail distribution agreements provide that distributors only have 90 days from date of original shipment to return unsold product. We recognize revenues from sales of retail products with subscription periods less than 30 days upon shipment to the distributor because we are able to estimate returns with a reasonable degree of accuracy, the fee is fixed and determinable, and collection of the resulting receivable is probable. Our retail customers do not receive the right to future upgrades or new versions of the technology. Embedded subscription consists of revenue for technical support and maintenance services provided pursuant to software compiling, debugging, and optimization agreements. Revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the agreement, which is typically 12 months. 22 Services Revenue Services revenue is comprised of enterprise technology services and embedded development. Enterprise technology services are comprised of revenue for enterprise consulting and engineering services, and customer training and education. Enterprise technology consulting services are provided under agreements in which customers pay us on a fixed fee or hourly basis to assist in the deployment of enterprise technologies. Enterprise technology engineering services represent revenues earned under fixed fee or hourly arrangements principally with our OEM partners to add functionality to our RHEL line of technologies. Revenues under hourly arrangements are recognized as work is performed. Revenues under fixed fee arrangements are recognized either on a proportional performance basis (i.e., if the arrangement involves the delivery of software that includes significant production, customization and modification) or upon passage of time dependent upon the terms of each individual engagement. Revenue from customer training and education is recognized as the services are performed. Embedded development services are contracts for software compiling, debugging, and optimization. Revenue is recognized on the proportional performance method, provided that the Company has the ability to make reliable estimates of future performance requirements, the fee for such services is fixed and determinable and collection of the resulting receivable is probable. Impairment of Long-Lived Assets We evaluate the recoverability of our property and equipment and other assets in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets, ( SFAS 144 ). SFAS 144 requires that one accounting model be used for long-lived assets to be disposed of by sale, whether previously held and used or newly acquired, and broadens the presentation of discontinued operations to include more disposal transactions. An impairment loss is recognized when the net book value of such assets exceeds the estimated future undiscounted cash flows attributable to the assets or the business to which the assets relate. We perform this assessment on an annual basis, typically during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year. Impairment losses are measured as the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the assets. Deferred Taxes We account for income taxes using the liability method that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets or liabilities for the temporary differences between financial reporting and tax bases of our assets and liabilities and for tax carryforwards at enacted statutory tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. Historically, we have recorded a valuation allowance to fully reserve for the benefit of its deferred tax assets due to uncertainty of realization of these deferred tax assets. During the year ended February 28, 2005, we reversed $3.1 million of our valuation allowance pertaining to certain foreign deferred tax assets that became more likely than not to be realized. We will continue to assess the realizability of other deferred tax assets which primarily consist of net operating losses and stock option expense deductions in the United States. In assessing the realizability of these deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. In making this assessment, management considers historical trend of taxable losses, projected future taxable income and the reversal of deferred tax liabilities. As of February 28, 2005, we continue to provide a full valuation allowance against the majority of its deferred tax assets arising from tax losses in the United States due primarily to (i) cumulative losses in recent periods, (ii) uncertainty related to stock option exercises and related tax deductions generated, and (iii) inherent difficulties in forecasting future taxable income as a result of rapidly changing technology and our competitive environment. However, if our positive trend of earnings continues, it is likely the valuation allowance will be reversed at some point in the future although we cannot predict which quarter this will occur. We anticipate that reversal will occur no later than the quarter in which our analysis of cumulative losses, adjusted for the impact of permanent items (primarily stock option exercise deductions), becomes positive. After the date on which the valuation allowance is fully reversed, we will begin to recognize a tax provision, with respect to U.S. Federal taxes, on a quarterly basis. 23 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Years Ended February 28, 2005 and February 29, 2004 Subscription revenue Subscription revenue is comprised of revenue from enterprise technologies, retail product and embedded customers. Subscription revenue increased 83.4% to $151.1 million for the year ended February 28, 2005 from $82.4 million for the year ended February 29, 2004. Enterprise technologies subscription Enterprise technologies subscription revenue primarily relates to both direct and indirect sales of Red Hat enterprise technologies. Enterprise technologies subscription revenue increased 120.1% to $147.4 million for the year ended February 28, 2005 from $67.0 million for the year ended February 29, 2004. The increase in subscription revenue sales is being driven by broad market acceptance and the increasing use of the Linux operating system in mission critical areas of computing by the large enterprise, as well as increasing revenue through OEM and distributor relationships that we have developed over the past three years. Our sales force has also increased to better address the growing market opportunity. Retail technologies Retail revenue, which consists of sales of Red Hat Linux and Professional Workstation (both of which we discontinued by February 2005) to consumers through either value added resellers or distributors, decreased 85.6% to $1.9 million for the year ended February 28, 2005 from $13.5 million for the year ended February 29, 2004. This decrease is due to our focus on the sale of subscriptions to our enterprise technologies to large enterprises rather than on the consumer market. This market is no longer a strategic source of revenue for us. We do not anticipate promoting new products through this channel. Retail revenues are not currently a significant component of our revenues. Embedded subscription Embedded subscription revenue decreased 7.7% to $1.8 million for the year ended February 28, 2005 from $1.9 million for the year ended February 29, 2004. Despite the year over year decrease in revenues, we see interest in the use of RHEL as an operating system for certain devices such as network routing equipment and accordingly, we believe there may be an opportunity to increase our participation in the embedded market. Services revenue Enterprise technologies services Enterprise technologies services revenues include fees for services received from enterprise customers for deployment of Red Hat enterprise technologies, customer training and education fees and fees received for adding certain functionality to RHEL for our major hardware OEM partners. Enterprise technology services revenue increased 12.0% to $42.3 million in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $37.8 million in the year ended February 29, 2004. The increase in enterprise technologies services revenue is primarily due to an increase in the revenues earned from customer training and education of $5.9 million. We continue to view our customer training and education business as an indicator of demand for the use of our RHEL technologies by enterprise customers. The adoption of Linux as a primary computing platform increases the need to train system administrators and developers. This increase was offset by a decrease in consulting fees received from enterprise customers for deployment of Red Hat Enterprise technologies of approximately $0.6 million and a decrease in the services revenues earned from agreements with our OEM partners for adding functionality of $0.6 million. 24 Embedded services Embedded services revenue decreased 33.5% to $3.0 million for the year ended February 28, 2005 from $4.6 million for the year ended February 29, 2004. The reduction primarily relates to our reduced focus and personnel on this business to a small core team which maintains a strategic presence in this marketplace, though we see continued interest in integrating the Linux operating system in certain devices and systems. Cost of revenue Cost of subscription revenue The cost of enterprise technologies and retail subscription revenue primarily consists of expenses we incur to manufacture, package, distribute and support our solutions. These costs include expenses for physical media, literature and packaging, fulfillment and shipping, labor related costs to provide technical support and maintenance (of which the largest component is labor cost). Cost of subscription revenue increased 33.2% to $12.9 million in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $9.7 million in the year ended February 29, 2004. The increase is the result of additions to our technical support staff at each of our three call center locations to meet the demands of our growing subscriber base due to the increased number of subscriptions to RHEL that we sold during fiscal 2005. As the number of subscriptions for RHEL continues to increase, our cost of subscription revenues will also increase, although we anticipate this will occur at a slower rate than revenues. Cost of services revenue Cost of services revenue is primarily comprised of salaries and related costs incurred for our personnel to deliver custom development, open source consulting engineering, training and education, and hardware certification services. Cost of services revenue increased 3.0% to $25.0 million in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $24.3 million in the year ended February 29, 2004. The increase is directly related to the increase in our Enterprise technologies services revenue. The cost of our customer training and education services increased $2.5 million, which is consistent with the increase in revenue of these services. This increase was partially offset by a $1.4 million decrease in our professional consulting costs related to headcount reductions to our consulting staff during fiscal 2004 and 2005 as we have revised our consulting strategy to focus on strategic relationships with key customers with larger Linux deployments. In addition, the cost of our Embedded segment has decreased $0.5 million due to a reduction in this workforce. Gross profit Gross profit increased 74.7% to $158.6 million (80.7% of total revenue) in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $90.8 million (72.8% of total revenue) in the year ended February 29, 2004. This increase was primarily due to the increase in revenue and profitability related to our RHEL offerings. The growth and profitability of our Enterprise subscription business was offset by a decline in the Embedded segment, which had gross profit of $1.5 million in fiscal 2005 as compared to $2.6 million in fiscal 2004. Operating expenses Sales and marketing Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries and other related costs for sales and marketing personnel, sales commissions, travel, public relations and marketing materials and tradeshows. Sales and marketing expense increased 52.0% to $62.0 million (31.5% of total revenue) in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $40.8 million (32.7% of total revenue) in the year ended February 29, 2004. This increase was primarily due to a $18.4 million increase in enterprise sales costs as we increased the size of each of our sales teams including, inside sales, direct outside sales and channel sales as well as a $3.9 million increase in our marketing costs. 25 Research and development Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel and related costs for development of software technologies and systems management offerings. Research and development expense increased to $32.5 million (16.5% of total revenue) in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $26.5 million (21.2% of total revenue) in the year ended February 29, 2004. The increase in research and development expense resulted from an increase in engineering headcount to support the development and integration of our RHEL operating platforms as well as our Desktop and Storage products. We acquired Sistina, Inc. in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2004 and added approximately $0.6 million per quarter in cost related to Sistina file storage development team. We have also been adding resources to our Desktop team and the cost associated with this team has increased by $1.7 million in fiscal 2005 compared to the prior year. Finally, as part of the Netscape Security Solutions acquisition from AOL, we added engineering costs of approximately $0.6 in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. General and administrative General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel and related costs for general corporate functions, including finance, accounting, legal, human resources, facilities and information systems expenses. General and administrative expense increased 74.2% to $35.6 million (18.1% of total revenue) in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $20.5 million (16.4% of total revenue) in the year ended February 29, 2004. The largest portion of the increase relates to professional fees of $6.1 million incurred in connection with the restatement of certain of our previously filed financial statements in the summer of 2004 and related litigation, Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 compliance and other consulting services related to our long-term compensation plans. Payroll costs increased by $1.7 million which is due to higher compensation and benefits associated with increased headcount. Facility costs and depreciation increased by $2.7 million during the year primarily related to additional office space and additional system costs associated with increased staffing. Other administrative costs such as bank fees, property and franchise taxes and travel costs comprise the remainder of the increase. Amortization of intangibles Amortization of intangibles expense increased to $1.6 million in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $0.2 million in the year ended February 29, 2004. Costs incurred for acquiring trademarks, copyrights and patents are capitalized as intangibles and amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, which range from three to ten years. The increase is due to additional amortization of intangibles associated with acquired intangibles related to the acquisition of Sistina Software, Inc. and certain assets from Netscape Security Solutions. Other income Other income consists of interest income earned on cash deposited in money market accounts and invested in short- and long-term fixed income instruments and gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and investments, net. Other income increased to $24.4 million in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $11.9 million in the year ended February 29, 2004. The increase is primarily due to increased interest income associated with the increase in our cash and investment balances as a result of our convertible debenture offering in January 2004. Interest expense Interest expense consists of interest expense incurred on short term debt, capital leases and the convertible debentures. Interest expense increased to $6.4 million in the year ended February 28, 2005 from $1.1 million in the year ended February 29, 2004. The increase is principally related to interest expense associated with the convertible debentures, including amortization of debt issuance costs. Income tax benefit During the year ended February 28, 2005, we recorded a net tax benefit of approximately $0.5 million. We recorded $3.1 million of income tax expense and recognized a $3.6 million deferred tax benefit, primarily related 26 to the reversal of the valuation allowance pertaining to certain foreign deferred tax assets as it was determined to be more likely than not that the deferred tax assets in these foreign jurisdictions would be realized. There was no provision or benefit recorded during the year ended February 29, 2004. Years Ended February 29, 2004 and February 28, 2003 Subscription revenue Subscription revenue is comprised of revenue from enterprise technologies, retail product and embedded customers. Subscription revenue increased 71.9% to $82.4 million for the year ended February 29, 2004 from $47.9 million for the year ended February 28, 2003. Enterprise technologies subscription Enterprise technologies subscription revenue primarily relates to both direct and indirect sales of RHEL and other related software subscriptions such as Red Hat Cluster Suite and systems management services provided by Red Hat Network. Enterprise technologies subscription revenue increased 123.7% to $67.0 million for the year ended February 29, 2004 from $29.9 million for the year ended February 28, 2003. The increase in revenue was driven by the market acceptance of using the Linux operating system in mission critical areas of computing by the large enterprise, as well as the strategic relationships we entered into with leading technology companies that provide for the distribution of RHEL by these companies. Retail technologies Retail revenue, which consists of sales of Red Hat Linux and Professional Workstation to consumers through either value added resellers or distributors, decreased 7.9% to $13.5 million for the year ending February 29, 2004 from $14.7 million for the year ended February 28, 2003. This decrease is due to our focus on the sale of subscriptions to our enterprise technologies to large enterprises rather than on the consumer market. This market is no longer a strategic source of revenue for us. Embedded subscription Embedded subscription revenue decreased 42.5% to $1.9 million for the year ended February 29, 2004 from $3.3 million for the year ended February 28, 2003. The decrease in embedded subscription revenue is related to the expiration of support arrangements for semiconductor and telecommunication customers due to the weak performance of these industries in previous years that affected research and development spending. Services revenue Enterprise technologies services Enterprise technologies services revenues include fees for services received from enterprise customers for deployment of Red Hat enterprise technologies, customer training and education fees and fees received for adding certain functionality to RHEL for our major hardware OEM partners. Enterprise technology services revenue decreased 2.0% to $37.8 million in the year ended February 29, 2004 from $38.5 million in the year ended February 28, 2003. The decrease in enterprise technologies services revenue is primarily due to a decrease in the revenues earned from agreements with our OEM partners of approximately $4.6 million and a $1.2 million decrease in consulting services related to services performed for large Enterprise customers for the deployment of RHEL. These decreases were primarily offset by customer training and education services revenue which increased 41.1% to $23.7 million in year ended February 29, 2004 from $16.8 million in the year ended February 28, 2003. The increase is the direct result of the continued migration of larger enterprises to our RHEL platform from a proprietary Unix platform, increasing the need to train system administrators and developers. 27 Embedded services Embedded services revenue increased 19.8% to $4.6 million for the year ended February 29, 2004 from $3.8 million for the year ended February 28, 2003. The increase in embedded markets is due to the improvement in the semiconductor and telecommunications industries which has positively impacted research and development spending. Cost of revenue Cost of subscription revenue The cost of enterprise technologies and retail subscription revenue primarily consists of expenses we incur to manufacture, package, distribute and support our solutions. These costs include expenses for physical media, literature and packaging, fulfillment and shipping, labor related costs to provide technical support and maintenance (of which the largest component is labor cost). Cost of subscription revenue increased 13.8% to $9.3 million in the year ended February 29, 2004 from $8.2 million in the year ended February 28, 2003. This increase was primarily related to an increase in the cost of providing technical support and maintenance of our enterprise products which includes email or telephone support to end users. The increase in support costs was due to the increased number of subscriptions to RHEL that we sold during fiscal 2004. As the number of subscriptions for RHEL continues to increase, our cost of subscription revenues will also increase. Cost of services revenue Cost of services revenue is primarily comprised of salaries and related costs including non-cash, stock-based compensation charges incurred for our personnel to deliver custom development, open source consulting engineering, training and education, and hardware certification services. Cost of services revenue increased 8.6% to $24.3 million in the year ended February 29, 2004 from $22.3 million in the year ended February 28, 2003. The increase is directly related to the increase in our Enterprise technologies services revenue. The cost of our customer training and education services increased $3.8 million, which is consistent with the increase in revenue of these services. This increase was partially offset by a $1.5 million decrease in our professional consulting costs related to headcount reductions to our consulting staff during fiscal 2004 as we revised our consulting strategy to focus on strategic consulting and entered into agreements to provide people-intensive development consulting. Gross profit Gross profit increased 53.2% to $90.8 million (72.8% of total revenue) in the year ended February 29, 2004 from $59.3 million (65.6% of total revenue) in the year ended February 28, 2003. This increase was primarily due to the increase in revenue and profitability related to our higher margin RHEL offerings. The growth and profitability of our Enterprise business was offset by a slight decline in the Embedded segment, which had gross profit of $2.6 million in fiscal 2004 as compared to $2.9 million in fiscal 2003. Operating expenses Sales and marketing Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of salaries and other related costs for sales and marketing personnel, sales commissions, travel, public relations and marketing materials and tradeshows. Sales and marketing expense increased 22.0% to $40.8 million (32.7% of total revenue) in the year ended February 29, 2004 from $33.4 million (37.0% of total revenue) in the year ended February 28, 2003. This increase was primarily due to a $3.7 million increase in North America and $4.9 million increase related to our international operations. We have increased our sales force in all geographies in the past twelve months. These increases were partially offset by lower spending on marketing. 28 Research and development Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel and related costs for development of software technologies and systems management offerings. Research and development expense increased 18.0% to $26.5 million (21.2% of total revenue) in the year ended February 29, 2004 from $22.4 million (24.9% of total revenue) in the year ended February 28, 2003. The increase in research and development expense resulted from increased spending related to adding enterprise engineers to support the development and integration of our RHEL operating systems and Red Hat Network and costs of research and development personnel from the acquisition of Sistina, Inc. in late December 2003. General and administrative General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel and related costs for general corporate functions, including finance, accounting, legal, human resources, facilities and information systems expenses. General and administrative expense increased 14.2% to $20.5 million (16.4% of total revenue) in the year ended February 29, 2004 from $17.9 million (19.8% of total revenue) in the year ended February 28, 2003. This increase relates primarily to increased administrative costs of approximately $800,000 as a result of international expansion activities and increased legal costs related to our various legal proceedings of approximately $300,000. Amortization of intangibles Amortization of intangibles expense decreased to $0.2 million in the year ended February 29, 2004 from $1.1 million in the year ended February 28, 2003. Costs incurred for acquiring trademarks, copyrights and patents are capitalized as intangibles and amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, which range from three to ten years. The decrease in amortization of intangibles expense was due to previously capitalized costs being fully amortized. Subsequent Event On March 31, 2005, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized the expansion of our September 2004 Stock Repurchase Program. Under the expanded program, we are authorized to repurchase up to an aggregate of $250 million, or an additional $150 million from the previously authorized September 2004 Stock Repurchase Program, of our common stock, par value $.0001 per share, and up to $50 million of our 0.5% Convertible Senior Debentures due 2024 from time to time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions, as applicable. This expanded program will expire on the earlier of (i) March 31, 2006, or (ii) a determination by the Board of Directors, the Chief Executive Officer or Chief Financial Officer to discontinue the program. ACQUISITIONS Acquisition of Netscape Security Solutions On December 7, 2004, we completed the purchase of the Netscape Security Solutions unit from Netscape Communications Corporation and America Online, Inc for a purchase price of $21.1 million in cash. An additional $2.5 million was payable by Red Hat contingent on certain future customer orders being placed on or before April 30, 2005. This payout is expected to occur and will increase the amount of goodwill recorded. The assets acquired include a directory server and certificate management system. Acquisition of Sistina Software, Inc. In December 2003, we completed the acquisition of all of the outstanding common stock of Sistina Software, Inc. ( Sistina ) in exchange for the issuance of 1,979,874 shares of our common stock and the 29 assumption of all of the outstanding Sistina stock options valued, in the aggregate, at $30.7 million. The fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired in the transaction were $2.0 million and $3.0 million, respectively. The excess of purchase price over the fair values of the net assets acquired of $25.7 million has been recorded as goodwill. In addition, the transaction includes $12.0 million of contingent consideration based on an earn-out structured in three tranches. The earn-out is based on the achievement of certain bookings targets for the technologies and services previously sold by Sistina over the period beginning on December 23, 2003 and ending March 31, 2005. No contingent consideration was earned during the earn-out period. One of the keys to our business strategy is to receive increasing annual subscription revenues on a per-system basis by providing additional value to our customers in the form of layers of technology that will be provided on top of our RHEL operating system and through providing additional systems management services. The products we acquired in these transactions provide us with complimentary technologies to our existing storage management offerings. We completed these acquisitions in the last 18 months and it is too early to assess the results of these acquisitions. Liquidity and Capital Resources We have historically derived a significant portion of our liquidity and operating capital from the sale of securities, including private sales of preferred stock and the sale of common stock in our initial and secondary public offerings, and from cash flows from operations. At February 28, 2005, we had total cash and investments of $928.8 million, which is comprised of $140.2 million in cash and cash equivalents, $181.0 million of short-term, fixed-income investments and $607.6 million of long-term, fixed-income investments. At February 29, 2004, we had total cash and investments of $941.4 million, which is comprised of $461.3 million in cash and cash equivalents, $147.3 million of short-term, fixed-income investments and $332.8 million of long-term, fixed-income investments. At February 28, 2005, cash and cash equivalents totaled $140.2 million, a decrease of $321.1 million as compared to February 29, 2004. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents during fiscal 2005 resulted primarily from cash provided by operations of $122.2 million and a total of $17.8 million in cash received from the exercise of common stock options and sale of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan, offset by the purchase of investments in debt securities, net of sales of debt securities, of $324.7 million, purchase of treasury stock of $100.0 million, acquisition of business of $21.1 million, purchases of property and equipment of $14.9 million, and $1.0 million of cash used to pay down capital lease obligations. Cash provided by operations of $122.2 million in the year ended February 28, 2005, includes net income of $45.4 million, adjusted to exclude the impact of non-cash items totaling $17.3 million and changes in working capital. Changes in working capital items were a net source of cash of $59.5 million primarily resulting from an increase in deferred revenue of $61.2 million. The increase in deferred revenue is due to bookings growth and related billings to our customers for subscriptions to our technologies. In the fiscal year ended February 29, 2004, cash provided by operations was $61.6 million. The significant improvement in our cash flow from operations in fiscal 2005 is a result of increased sales of subscriptions to RHEL, which resulted in the $61.2 million increase in deferred revenues, as well as from the $31.7 million increase in net income. We do not believe that there are collectibility or billing problems with our customers that have not been appropriately reserved at each balance sheet date. In the fiscal year ended February 28, 2005, cash used in investing activities of $360.6 million was comprised of the purchases of fixed-income investments of $854.5 million, proceeds from the sales and maturities of investment securities of $529.8 million, purchases of property and equipment mainly computer software, hardware and computer networking equipment totaling $14.9 million, and acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired of $21.1 million the acquisition of the assets of the former Netscape Security Solutions unit from America Online, Inc. (See NOTE 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). 30 Cash used in financing activities of $83.4 million for the year ended February 28, 2005 was primarily comprised of $100.0 million in purchases of treasury shares pursuant to our previously announced share repurchase program, and $1.0 million in payments under capital lease obligations and debt financing costs, partially offset by a total of $17.8 million in proceeds received from the exercise of common stock options and sale of common stock under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan. In January 2004, we issued $600 million in convertible senior debentures to the initial purchaser, a sophisticated, accredited investor with a pre-existing relationship with us, in a private placement pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the Securities Act ), and the debentures were resold by the initial purchaser to qualified institutional buyers under Rule 144A of the Securities Act. The debentures mature on January 15, 2024 and bear interest at a rate of 0.5% per annum, payable semiannually on January 15 and July 15 of each year. The debentures are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other existing and future unsecured and unsubordinated debt. The debentures are convertible into shares of our common stock under certain circumstances prior to maturity at a conversion rate of 39.0753 shares per $1,000 principal amount of debentures (which represents a conversion price of approximately $25.59 per share) subject to adjustment under certain conditions. We may redeem the debentures, in whole or in part, in cash at any time on or after January 15, 2009. Holders of the debentures may require us to redeem the debentures, in whole or in part, in cash on January 15 of 2009, 2014 and 2019. As of February 28, 2005, no debentures were redeemed. Accrued interest to the redemption date will be paid by us in any such redemption. Interest payments totaling $3.0 million were made during the year ended February 28, 2005. Accrued interest at February 28, 2005 was $0.4 million. See NOTE 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. At February 29, 2004, cash and cash equivalents totaled $461.3 million, an increase of $421.7 million as compared to February 28, 2003. The increase in cash and cash equivalents during fiscal 2004 resulted primarily from: the issuance of the convertible debentures in January 2004, net of issuance of costs, of $584.7 million, cash provided by operations of $61.6 million, a total of $28.8 million in cash received from the exercise of common stock options and sale of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan, net cash acquired in the acquisition of Sistina of $3.4 million, and $4.1 million in employee income taxes withheld from the exercise of common stock options in February 2004 which were disbursed in March 2004. These sources of cash were offset by the purchase of investments in debt securities, net of sales of debt securities, of $228.6 million, purchases of property and equipment of $13.2 million, primarily related to the re-implemenation of our Oracle instance, $15.0 million of cash, net, used to pay down our line of credit and $1.2 million of cash used to pay down capital lease obligations. Cash provided by operations of $61.6 million in the year ended February 29, 2004, represented the net income of $13.7 million, an increase in deferred revenue of $53.3 million, an increase in accounts payable of $1.5 million, an increase in accrued expenses of $2.0 million and net non-cash charges of $12.4 million. These sources of cash were partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $18.5 million and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, including intangibles, of $2.9 million. The increase in accounts receivable and deferred revenue primarily resulted from an increase in the number of subscriptions sold of RHEL technologies. In the fiscal year ended February 28, 2003, cash used in operations was $758,000. The significant improvement in our cash flow from operations in fiscal 2004 is a result of increased sales of subscriptions to RHEL, which resulted in the $53.3 million increase in deferred revenues, as well as management continued focus on improved operating profits and preserving our cash balance. We do not believe that there are any collectibility or billing problems with our customers that have not been appropriately reserved at each balance sheet date. Cash used in investing activities of $238.4 million was comprised of the purchase of investments in debt securities, net of maturities, of $228.5 million, purchases of property and equipment mainly computer software, hardware and computer networking equipment totaling $13.2 million, offset by $3.4 million, net, of cash acquired in the acquisition of Sistina in late December 2003. The significant majority of the purchases of 31 investments occurred as a result of the investment of a portion of the approximately $585 million in net proceeds received from the completion of the convertible debenture offering in January 2004. Cash provided by financing activities of $597.3 million for the year ended February 29, 2004 was comprised of $584.7 million in net proceeds from the issuance of convertible senior debentures in January 2004, $4.1 million in employee income taxes withheld from the exercise of common stock options in February 2004 which were remitted to taxing authorities in March 2004 and $24.7 million, combined, in proceeds received from the exercise of common stock options by employees and the sale of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan. These sources of cash were partially offset by $15.0 million of repayments, net of borrowings, made against our line of credit and $1.2 million in payments under capital lease obligations. We have experienced a substantial increase in our operating expenses since our inception in connection with the growth of our operations, the development of our RHEL technologies, the expansion of our services operations and our acquisition activity. Our capital requirements during the year ending February 28, 2006 will depend on numerous factors including the amount of resources we devote to: funding the development of our RHEL products accelerating the development of our systems management services; improving and extending our services and the technologies used to deliver these services to our customers; pursuing strategic acquisitions and alliances; and making possible investments in businesses, products and technologies. We have made substantial progress in improving cash flow from operations. In fiscal 2003, we used $0.8 million, to fund our operations. In fiscal 2005, we generated $122.2 million in cash from our operations, more than in any other fiscal year of our operating history. Our cash flow provided by operations for fiscal 2005, increased by $60.6 million compared to fiscal 2004 due to the continued increased demand for our products and services, which also affords us leverage in negotiating up front payments for subscriptions from customers, and the increase in the number of subscriptions sold for RHEL in fiscal 2005 as compared to fiscal 2004. Given the significant improvement in operating cash flow and the $928.8 million of cash and investments held at February 28, 2005, we do not anticipate the need to raise cash to fund our operations either through the sale of additional equity or through the issuance of debt for the foreseeable future. However, we may take advantage of favorable capital market situations that may arise from time to time to raise additional capital. We believe that cash flow from operations will continue to improve; however, there can be no assurances that we will maintain or improve our cash flow from operations from the current rate or that such cash flows will be adequate to fund other investments or acquisitions that we may choose to make. We may choose to accelerate the expansion of our business from our current plans, which may require us to raise additional funds through the sale of equity or debt securities or through other financing means. There can be no assurances that any such financing would occur in amounts or on terms favorable to us, if at all. We have no off balance sheet financing arrangements and do not utilize any structured debt , special purpose or similar unconsolidated entities for liquidity or financing purposes. 32 Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our principal contractual obligations at February 28, 2005 (in thousands): Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years Capital lease obligations $ 395 $ 271 $ 124 $ $ Operating lease obligations 46,505 5,994 14,256 3,967 22,288 Convertible debentures 657,000 3,000 6,000 6,000 642,000 Total $ 703,900 $ 9,265 $ 20,380 $ 9,967 $ 664,288 RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS See discussion in NOTE 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 33 RISK FACTORS RISKS RELATED TO OUR BUSINESS If open source software programmers, most of whom we do not employ, do not continue to develop and enhance open source technologies, we may be unable to develop new products or adequately enhance our existing products. We rely to a significant degree on several largely informal communities of independent open source software programmers to develop and enhance our products. For example, Linus Torvalds, a prominent open source software developer, and a relatively small group of software engineers, many of whom are not employed by us, are primarily responsible for the development and evolution of the Linux kernel, which is the heart of the RHEL operating system. If these groups of programmers fail to adequately further develop and enhance open source technologies, we would have to rely on other parties to develop and enhance our products or we would need to develop and enhance our products with our own resources. We cannot predict whether further developments and enhancements to these technologies would be available from reliable alternative sources. In either event, our development expenses could be increased and our product release and upgrade schedules could be delayed. Moreover, if third party software programmers fail to adequately further develop and enhance open source technologies, the development and adoption of these technologies could be stifled and our products could become less competitive. If we fail to continue to establish and maintain strategic distribution and other collaborative relationships with industry-leading companies, we may not be able to attract and retain a larger customer base. Our success depends in part on our ability to continue to establish and maintain strategic distribution and other collaborative relationships with industry-leading hardware manufacturers (such as Hewlett-Packard, Dell, IBM, Fujitsu and others), distributors, software vendors (such as Oracle) and enterprise solutions providers. These relationships allow us to offer our products and services to a much larger customer base than we would otherwise be able to through our direct sales and marketing efforts. We may not be able to maintain these relationships or replace them on attractive terms. In addition, our existing strategic relationships do not, and any future strategic relationships may not, afford us any exclusive marketing or distribution rights. As a result, many of the companies with which we have strategic alliances pursue alternative technologies and develop alternative products and services in addition to or in lieu of our products and services, either on their own or in collaboration with others, including our competitors. Moreover, we cannot guarantee that the companies with which we have strategic relationships will market our products effectively or continue to devote the resources necessary to provide us with effective sales, marketing, and technical support. If third-party enterprise software application providers do not continue to make their applications compatible with our Linux-based operating system offerings, our software will cease to be competitive. Our products will not be competitive unless enterprise software applications are compatible with our Linux-based operating system offerings. We intend to encourage the development of additional applications that operate on both current and new versions of our Linux-based operating systems by, among other means, attracting third-party developers to the Linux platform, providing open source tools to create these applications and maintaining our existing developer relationships through marketing and technical support. If we are not successful in achieving these goals, however, our products will not be competitive and our sales growth will be adversely affected. We may be unable to predict the future course of open source technology development, which could reduce the market appeal of our products and damage our reputation. We do not exercise control over many aspects of the development of open source technology. Different groups of open source software programmers compete with one another to develop new technology. Typically, 34 the technology developed by one group will become more widely used than that developed by others. If we acquire or adopt new technology and incorporate it into our products but competing technology becomes more widely used or accepted, the market appeal of our products may be reduced and that could harm our reputation, diminish the Red Hat brand and result in decreased revenue. Because of characteristics of open source software, there are few technology barriers to entry in the open source market by new competitors and it may be relatively easy for new competitors with greater resources than us to enter our markets and compete with us. One of the characteristics of open source software is that anyone can modify the existing software or develop new software that competes with existing open source software. Such competition can develop without the degree of overhead and lead time required by traditional proprietary software companies. It is possible for a new competitor with greater resources than ours to develop its own open source solutions, potentially reducing the demand for our solutions. We have entered into and may continue to enter into or seek to enter into business combinations and acquisitions, which may be difficult to complete, integrate, disrupt our business, dilute stockholder value or divert management attention. As part of our business strategy, we have in the past and, in the future, may enter into business combinations and acquisitions. For example, on December 7, 2004, we acquired certain assets from America Online, Inc. Netscape Security Solutions unit. We have limited experience in making acquisitions, and acquisitions present significant challenges and risks, including: The difficulty of integrating the operations and personnel of the acquired companies; The maintenance of acceptable standards, controls, procedures and policies; The potential disruption of our ongoing business and distraction of management; The impairment of relationships with employees and customers as a result of any integration of new management and other personnel; The inability to maintain a relationship with customers of the acquired business; The difficulty of incorporating acquired technology and rights into our products and services; The potential failure to achieve the expected benefits of the combination or acquisition; Expenses related to the acquisition; Potential unknown liabilities associated with the acquired businesses; and Unanticipated expenses related to acquired technology and its integration into existing technology. There can be no assurance that we will manage these challenges and risks successfully. Moreover, if we are not successful in completing acquisitions that we have or may pursue, our business strategy may be adversely affected, and we may incur substantial expenses and divert significant management time and resources. In addition, in pursuing such acquisitions, we could use substantial portions of our available cash as all or a portion of the purchase price. We could also issue additional securities as consideration for these acquisitions, which could cause our stockholders to suffer significant dilution, or incur substantial debt. Any acquisition may not generate additional revenue or profit for us. If we fail to effectively manage our growth, our operations and financial results could be adversely affected. We have expanded our operations rapidly in recent years. For example, our total revenues increased from approximately $124.7 million for the year ended February 29, 2004 to approximately $196.5 million for the year 35 ended February 28, 2005. Moreover, the total number of our employees has been steadily increasing over at least the last four quarters. In addition, we continue to explore ways to extend our product and service offerings, and geographic reach. Our growth has placed and may continue to place a strain on our management systems, information systems, resources and internal controls. Our ability to successfully offer products and services and implement our business plan requires adequate information systems and resources and oversight from our senior management. We have, with our audit committee, undertaken to review and improve our financial and managerial controls, reporting systems and procedures. We will need to continue to modify and improve these controls, systems and procedures and other internal controls and compliance procedures as we continue to grow and expand our business. As we grow, we must also continue to hire, train, supervise and manage new employees. We may not be able to hire, or adequately train, supervise and manage sufficient personnel or develop management and operating systems to adequately manage our expansion effectively. If we are unable to adequately manage our growth and improve our controls, systems and procedures, our operations and financial results could be adversely affected. We rely, to a significant degree, on an indirect sales channel for distribution of our products and services, and disruption of any part of this channel could adversely affect the sales of our products. We use a variety of different distribution methods to sell our products and services, including indirect channel partners, such as third party OEMs, resellers and distributors. A number of these partners in turn distribute via their own networks of channel partners (e.g., distributors and resellers), with whom we have no direct relationship. We rely, to a significant degree, on our channel partners. Our indirect distribution channel could be affected by disruptions in the relationships of and with our channel partners and their networks, including with their customers or suppliers. We cannot guarantee that our channel partners will market our products effectively. Disruptions in our distribution channel or poor marketing support by channel partners could lead to decreased sales or slower than expected growth. Security and privacy breaches may expose us to liability and cause us to lose clients Our security measures may not prevent security breaches that could harm our business. Currently, a significant number of our users provide us with credit card and other confidential information and authorize us to bill their credit card accounts directly for our products and services. We rely on encryption and authentication technology licensed from third parties to effect secure transmission of this confidential information. Advances in computer capabilities, new discoveries in the field of cryptography or other developments may result in a compromise or breach of the technology used by us to protect customer data. Any compromise of our security could harm our reputation or financial condition and, therefore, our business. In addition, a party who is able to circumvent our security measures could, among other effects, misappropriate proprietary information, cause interruptions in our operations or expose customers to computer viruses. We are vulnerable to system failures, which could harm our business. We rely on our technology infrastructure to sell our products and services and to fulfill orders. Our systems are vulnerable to damage or interruption from natural disasters, power loss, telecommunication failures, terrorist attacks, computer viruses, computer denial-of-service attacks, and similar events. The majority of our systems are not redundant, and our disaster recovery planning is not sufficient for all eventualities. Our systems are also subject to break-ins, sabotage and intentional acts of vandalism. Despite any precautions we may take, such problems could result in interruptions in our services, which could harm our reputation and financial condition. We do not carry business interruption insurance sufficient to compensate us for losses that may result from interruptions in our service as a result of system failures. Any interruption in the availability of our websites would create a large volume of user questions and complaints that would need to be addressed by our customer support personnel rather than by self-help Additionally, any unscheduled interruption in our services would likely result in a loss of revenues and could cause some users to switch to our competitors. 36 RISKS RELATED TO LEGAL UNCERTAINTY We could be prevented from selling or developing our software if the GNU General Public License and similar licenses under which our products are developed and licensed are not enforceable. A number of our offerings, including RHEL, have been developed and licensed under the GNU General Public License and similar open source licenses. These licenses state that any program licensed under them may be liberally copied, modified and distributed. The GNU General Public License is a subject of litigation in the case of The SCO Group, Inc. v. International Business Machines Corp., pending in the United States District Court for the District of Utah. It is possible that a court would hold these licenses to be unenforceable in that litigation or that someone could assert a claim for proprietary rights in a program developed and distributed under them. Any ruling by a court that these licenses are not enforceable, or that Linux-based operating systems, or significant portions of them, may not be liberally copied, modified or distributed, would have the effect of preventing us from selling or developing all or a portion of our products. Our subscription-based contract model may encounter customer resistance. The subscription agreement used for many of our products, including RHEL, requires customers to agree to a subscription for our services for each machine on which they deploy our subscription based products. At the same time, the subscription agreement places no restriction on the customer right to redistribute the products. While we believe this practice complies with the requirements of the GNU General Public License, and while we have reviewed this practice with the Free Software Foundation, the organization that maintains and provides interpretations of the GNU General Public License, we may still encounter customer resistance to this distribution model. To the extent we are unsuccessful in promoting or defending this distribution model, our business and operating results could be materially and adversely affected. If our products are found to infringe third-party intellectual property rights, we could be required to redesign our products, replace components of our products or enter into license agreements with third parties. We have committed to our customers with valid, registered Enterprise subscriptions that if any portion of our Enterprise products are found to infringe any third party intellectual property rights we will, at our expense and option: (i) obtain the right for the customer to continue to use the product consistent with their subscription agreement with us; (ii) modify the product so that it is non-infringing; or (iii) replace the infringing component with a non-infringing component. Although we cannot predict whether we will need to satisfy this commitment, satisfying the commitment could be costly and time consuming and could materially and adversely affect our financial results. In addition, our insurance policies may not adequately cover our exposure to this type of claim. We are vulnerable to claims that our products infringe third-party intellectual property rights because our products are comprised of software components, many of which are developed by numerous independent parties, and an adverse legal decision affecting our intellectual property could materially harm our business. We are vulnerable to claims that our products infringe third-party intellectual property rights including trade secrets because our products are comprised of software components, many of which are developed by numerous independent parties. Claims for infringement of intellectual property rights may be filed and may seek damages and injunctive relief. The risk of infringement claims is exacerbated by the fact that much of the code in our products is developed by numerous independent parties over whom we exercise no supervision or control. It is further exacerbated by our lack of access to unpublished software patent applications. Claims of infringement could require us to seek to obtain licenses from third parties in order to continue offering our products, reengineer our products, or discontinue the sale of our products in the event that obtaining licenses and reengineering could not be accomplished on a timely and cost effective basis. SCO Group, Inc., or SCO, has publicly alleged that certain Linux kernels contain unauthorized UNIX code or derivative works. On November 4, 2003, we filed a complaint against SCO in the United States District Court 37 for the District of Delaware seeking, among other things, a declaratory judgment that we are not infringing any of SCO intellectual property rights. SCO, to date, has not asserted a claim of infringement against us. Uncertainty concerning SCO allegations, regardless of their merit, could adversely affect sales of our products. If SCO were to prevail in this or other actions related to their claims regarding Linux, our business could be materially and adversely affected. Defending patent infringement, copyright infringement and/or trade secret claims, even claims without significant merit, can be expensive. An adverse legal decision regarding the intellectual property in and to our technology and other offerings could harm our business and may do so materially. Our products may contain defects that may be costly to correct, delay market acceptance of our products and expose us to litigation. Despite testing by ourselves and our customers, errors have been and will likely continue to be found in our products after commencement of commercial shipments. This risk is exacerbated by the fact that much of the code in our products is developed by independent parties over whom we exercise no supervision or control. If errors are discovered, we may have to make significant expenditures of capital to eliminate them and may not be able to successfully correct them in a timely manner or at all. Errors and failures in our products could result in a loss of, or delay in, market acceptance of our products and could damage our reputation and our ability to convince commercial users of the benefits of Linux-based operating systems and other open source software products. In addition, failures in our products could cause system or other failures for our customers who may assert warranty and other claims for substantial damages against us. Although our license agreements with our customers typically contain provisions designed to limit our exposure to potential product liability claims, it is possible that these provisions may not be effective or enforceable under the laws of some jurisdictions. In addition, our insurance policies may not adequately limit our exposure to this type of claim. These claims, even if unsuccessful, could be costly and time consuming to defend. Our efforts to protect our trademarks may not be adequate to prevent third parties from misappropriating our intellectual property rights. Our most valuable intellectual property is our collection of trademarks. The protective steps we have taken in the past have been, and may in the future continue to be, inadequate to protect, and deter misappropriation of, our trademark rights. Although we do not believe that we have suffered any material harm from misappropriation to date, we may be unable to detect the unauthorized use of, or take appropriate steps to enforce, our trademark rights in a timely manner. We have registered some of our trademarks in the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia and have other trademark applications pending in each of those regions. Effective trademark protection may not be available in every country in which we offer or intend to offer our products and services. Failure to adequately protect our trademark rights could damage or even destroy the Red Hat brand and impair our ability to compete effectively. Furthermore, defending or enforcing our trademark rights could result in the expenditure of significant financial and managerial resources. In connection with our restatement of historical financial statements, class action lawsuits have been filed against us and additional lawsuits may be filed. Following our announcement in July 2004 of our intention to restate historical financial statements, 14 class action lawsuits and three derivative lawsuits were commenced against us and certain of our current and former directors and officers, by or on behalf of persons claiming to be our stockholders and persons claiming to have purchased or otherwise acquired our securities at specified dates beginning as early as June 19, 2001 and continuing through July 13, 2004. The 14 class action lawsuits have since been consolidated into a single lawsuit. In addition, two of the three derivative suits have been consolidated into a single lawsuit as well. Additional lawsuits may be filed against us. Regardless of the outcome of any of these actions, it is likely that we will incur 38 substantial defense costs and that such actions will cause a diversion of our management time and attention. If we do not prevail in these cases we could be required to pay substantial damages or settlement costs, which could have a material adverse affect on our financial condition or results of operations. We are unable at this time to assess the validity of the claims or estimate the possible range of damages that might be incurred as a result of the lawsuits. We have not yet established any financial reserves relating to any of these lawsuits. We may suffer material adverse consequences if we are deemed to be an investment company and may incur significant costs to avoid investment company status. We may be deemed to be an investment company under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (the 1940 Act ), if we own investment securities with a value exceeding 40% of our total assets, unless a particular exclusion or safe harbor provision applies. A large portion of our assets has been invested in investment grade interest-bearing securities, many of which constitute investment securities under the 1940 Act. As of February 28, 2005, our investment securities exceeded 40% of our total assets. We believe that we are excluded from the definition of investment company and the registration requirements of the 1940 Act, but absent further interpretation by the courts or the SEC of the relevant exclusions, this result cannot be assured. Investment companies are subject to registration under the 1940 Act and compliance with a variety of restrictions and requirements imposed under the 1940 Act. If we were to be deemed an investment company, we would become subject to these restrictions and requirements of the 1940 Act and the consequences of having been an investment company without registering thereunder, could have a material adverse impact on our business. In addition, we may incur significant costs to avoid investment company status if an exclusion from the 1940 Act were to be considered unavailable to us at a time when the value of our investments that constitute investment securities exceeds 40% of our total assets. If we were required to change the allocation of our assets to reduce our ownership of securities that constitute investment securities, and acquire non-investment security assets, this could result in transaction costs and a reduction in the rate of return on our liquid assets. RISKS RELATED TO OUR FINANCIAL RESULTS AND CONDITION You should not rely on our quarterly results of operations as an indication of our future results. Due to the unpredictability of the technology spending environment, our revenue and operating results have fluctuated and may continue to fluctuate from quarter to quarter. We base our current and projected future expense levels in part on our estimates of future revenue. Our expenses are, to a large extent, fixed in the short term. We may not be able to adjust our spending quickly enough to protect our projected operating results for a quarter if our revenue in that quarter falls short of our expectations. If among other considerations our future operating results fall below expectations of securities analysts or investors or we are unable to increase or maintain profitability, the market price of our common stock may decline. We may not be able to effectively attract additional enterprise customers and preserve relationships with current enterprise customers, which could adversely affect revenue. In late fiscal 2002, we began to focus the predominant portion of our sales and marketing efforts on expanding our enterprise customer base. To this end, we have invested extensively to attract enterprise customers. While we have had certain success to date in acquiring large enterprise customers, if we are unsuccessful in gaining additional large enterprise customers in the future or in securing subscription renewals from existing enterprise customers, it will adversely affect our future financial performance. In addition, while our subscription agreements generally provide for renewals at prices that are the same as those in effect during the initial term or at then current list prices, there can be no assurance that customers will renew their subscription agreements at the end of the initial or any renewal term or that customers will not seek to condition any renewal on reduced prices. Any failure to obtain customer renewals, or reduction in prices upon renewal, could reduce future revenues. 39 We may not be able to continue to attract capable management personnel. Our ability to retain key management personnel or hire capable new management personnel as we grow may be challenged to the extent the technology sector performs well and/or if companies with more generous compensation packages or greater perceived growth opportunities compete for the same personnel. In addition, historically we have used stock options as a key component of our compensation packages. Changes in the accounting for equity compensation, including stock options, could adversely affect our earnings or force us to use more cash compensation to attract and retain capable personnel. Volatility in the stock market may reduce the value of our equity awards to the recipient. Such events may affect our ability to successfully attract and retain key management personnel. We depend on our key personnel that we employ. Our future success depends on the continued services of a number of key officers and employees. The loss of the technical knowledge and industry expertise of any these individuals could seriously impede our success. Moreover, the loss of these individuals, particularly to a competitor, and any resulting loss of customers could reduce our market share and diminish the Red Hat brand and adversely affect our business or stock price. We may lack the financial and operational resources needed to increase our market share and compete effectively. In the market for operating systems and applications, we face significant competition from larger companies with greater financial resources and name recognition than we have. Competitors, which offer hardware-independent multi-user operating systems for Intel platforms and/or Linux and UNIX-based operating systems, include Microsoft, Novell, IBM, Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard and Unisys. We may lack the financial and operational resources needed to compete successfully with our current competitors as well as potential new competitors. Competitive pressures could affect prices or demand for our products and services, resulting in reduced profit margins and loss of market opportunity. We may have to lower the prices of our products and services to stay competitive, which could affect our margins and financial condition. In addition, if our pricing and other factors are not sufficiently competitive, we may lose market share. Industry consolidation may, also effect competition by creating larger and potentially stronger competitors in the markets in which we compete, which may have an adverse effect on our business. In the market for services offerings, we face significant competition from larger companies, including those that currently provide service and training related to the Linux operating system as well as other operating systems, particularly UNIX-based operating systems, due to the fact that Linux-and UNIX-based operating systems share many common features. These larger companies, including IBM, Novell and Hewlett-Packard, may be able to leverage their existing service organizations and provide higher levels of consulting and training on a more cost-effective basis than we can. We may not be able to compete successfully with our current or potential competitors. We may not be able to meet the operational and financial challenges that we will encounter as our international operations, which represented approximately 33% of our total revenue for the year ended February 28, 2005, continue to expand. Our international operations accounted for approximately 33% of total revenue for the year ended February 28, 2005. As we expand our international operations, we will face a number of additional challenges associated with the conduct of business overseas. For example: We may have difficulty managing and administering a globally-dispersed business and we may need to reorganize our sales and technical support services forces, staff key management positions and successfully localize software products for a significant number of international markets; Fluctuations in exchange rates may negatively affect our operating results; 40 We have to comply with a wide variety of foreign laws; We may not be able to adequately protect our intellectual property rights overseas due among other reasons to the uncertainty of laws and enforcement in certain countries relating to the protection of intellectual property rights; Export controls and times of crisis could prevent us from shipping our products into and out of certain markets; Changes in import/export duties and quotas could affect the competitive pricing of our products and services and reduce our market share in some countries; and Economic or political instability or terrorist acts in some international markets could result in the forfeiture of some foreign assets and the loss of sums spent developing and marketing those assets. Any failure by us to effectively manage the challenges associated with the international expansion of our operations could adversely affect our business, operating results and financial condition. Our sales cycle makes financial planning and future financial results less predictable and our financial performance may not meet expectations if we are unable to accurately predict the effect of the sales cycle. Our quarterly sales have reflected a pattern in which a disproportionate percentage of such quarters total sales occur toward the end of such quarter and this trend has had more of an impact on our financial results in recent periods. This makes predicting our revenue, earnings and cash flows for each financial period more difficult and increases the risk of unanticipated variations in results of operations and financial condition. In addition, we experience some seasonal trends. For example, European sales are often weaker during the summer months. Many of the factors that create and affect seasonal trends are beyond our control and negatively impact our ability to accurately predict our sales cycle. We may be exposed to potential risks if we do not have an effective system of disclosure controls or internal controls or fail on an on-going basis to properly address and implement Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley. We must comply, on an on-going basis, with the requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 ( SOX ), including those provisions that establish the requirements for both management and auditors of public companies with respect to reporting on internal control over financial reporting. These requirements first became applicable to the Company on February 28, 2005. The requirements and processes associated with Section 404 are relatively new and untested, and we cannot be certain that the measures we have taken, and will take, will be sufficient or timely completed to meet the Section 404 requirements on an on-going basis, or that we will be able to implement and maintain adequate disclosure controls and controls over our financial processes and reporting in the future, particularly in light of our rapid growth and international expansion, which is expected to result in on-going changes to our control systems and areas of potential risk. If we fail to maintain an effective system of disclosure controls or internal control over financial reporting, including satisfaction of the requirements of Section 404 of SOX, we may not be able to accurately or timely report on our financial results or adequately identify and reduce fraud. As a result, the financial position of our business could be harmed; current and potential future shareholders could lose confidence in the Company and/or our reported financial results, which may cause a negative effect on our trading price; and we could be exposed to litigation or regulatory proceedings, which may be costly or divert management attention. 41 
