CIK: 1090872
Company Name: AGILENT TECHNOLOGIES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-12-19


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This report contains forward-looking statements including, without limitation, statements regarding trends, seasonality, cyclicality and growth in, and drivers of, the markets we sell into, our strategic direction, our future effective tax rate and tax valuation allowance, earnings from our foreign subsidiaries, remediation activities, new product and service introductions, the ability of our products to meet market needs, changes to our manufacturing processes, the use of contract manufacturers, the impact of local government regulations on our ability to pay vendors or conduct operations, our liquidity position, our ability to generate cash from operations, growth in our businesses, our investments, the potential impact of adopting new accounting pronouncements, our financial results, our purchase commitments, our contributions to our pension plans, the selection of discount rates and recognition of any gains or losses for our benefit plans, our cost-control activities, savings and headcount reduction recognized from our restructuring programs and other cost saving initiatives, uncertainties relating to Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") and other regulatory approvals, the integration of our acquisitions and other transactions, the separation of the electronic measurement business, our stock repurchase program, our declared dividends, our transition to lower-cost regions, and the existence of economic instability, that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to various factors, including those discussed in Item 1A and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Overview and Executive Summary Agilent Technologies, Inc. ( we , Agilent or the company ), incorporated in Delaware in May 1999, is the world's premier measurement company providing core bio-analytical and electronic measurement solutions to the life sciences, diagnostics and genomics, chemical analysis, communications and electronics industries. Our fiscal year end is October 31. Unless otherwise stated, all years and dates refer to our fiscal year. On September 19, 2013, Agilent announced plans to separate into two publicly traded companies, one comprising of the life sciences, diagnostics and chemical analysis businesses that will retain the Agilent name and the other that will be comprised of the electronic measurement business ("EM"). The separation is expected to occur through a tax-free pro rata spin off of the EM company to Agilent shareholders and is expected to be completed early in November 2014. We expect to incur pre-separation expenses of $100 million in fiscal 2014. In addition to the announcement to separate into two companies, we formed a new operating segment in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2013. The new life sciences and diagnostics segment was formed by the combination of the life sciences business plus the diagnostics and genomics business. Following this reorganization, Agilent has three business segments comprised of the life sciences and diagnostics business, the chemical analysis business and the electronic measurement business. The historical segment financial information for the life sciences and diagnostics segment has been recast to conform to this new reporting structure in our financial statements. On June 21, 2012, we completed our acquisition of Dako A/S through the acquisition of 100% of the share capital of Dako A/S, a limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Denmark ( Dako ), under the share purchase agreement, dated May 16, 2012. Dako provides antibodies, reagents, scientific instruments and software primarily to customers in pathology laboratories. As a result of the acquisition, Dako became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Agilent. The consideration paid was approximately $2,143 million, of which $1,400 million was paid directly to the seller and $743 million was paid to satisfy the outstanding debt of Dako. Agilent funded the acquisition using existing cash. The acquisition has been accounted for in accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance and the results of Dako are included in Agilent's consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition. The acquisition of Dako and its portfolio is another step to increase our growth in several rapidly expanding areas of diagnostics, including anatomic pathology and molecular diagnostics, as well as strengthen our existing offerings with a focus on product development to help in the fight against cancer. For additional details related to the acquisition of Dako, see Note 3, "Acquisitions". Agilent's total orders in 2013 were $6,827 million, a decrease of 1 percent when compared to 2012. Foreign currency movements had an unfavorable impact of approximately 2 percentage points for the year ended October 31, 2013 when compared to 2012. The increase in orders associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for approximately 3 percentage points of total order growth for the year ended October 31, 2013 when compared to 2012. Within our life sciences and diagnostics business orders increased 16 percent in 2013 compared to 2012 with 13 percentage points of order increase attributable to the Dako acquisition. Chemical analysis orders increased 2 percent in 2013 when compared to 2012 and electronic measurement businesses orders decreased 13 percent when compared to 2012. Agilent's total orders in 2012 increased 2 percent when compared to 2011. The 31 Table of Contents increase in orders associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for 2 percentage points of order growth for the year ended October 31, 2012 when compared to 2011. Agilent's net revenue of $6,782 million decreased 1 percent when compared to 2012. Foreign currency movements for 2013 had an unfavorable impact of approximately 1 percentage point compared to 2012. Revenue associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for approximately 4 percentage points of the revenue growth for the year ended October 31, 2013 when compared to 2012. Within our life sciences and diagnostics business revenue increased 16 percent in 2013 compared to 2012 with 13 percentage points of revenue increase attributable to the Dako acquisition. Excluding the effects of the Dako acquisition, there was growth in demand for life sciences and diagnostics products and services led by pharmaceutical and biotechnology and clinical markets. There was a decrease in demand from the academic and government market for the year ended October 31, 2013, when compared to the prior year. Within our chemical analysis business revenue grew 2 percent in 2013 compared with the prior year. There were modest increases in revenue from the food safety and petrochemical markets, but environmental and forensics markets were down when compared to the prior year. Within electronic measurement, total revenue decreased when compared to the prior year by 13 percent. General purpose markets decreased with aerospace and defense flat and computer and semi-conductor markets down when compared to 2012. Also within electronic measurement, the communications test business decreased for the year ended October 31, 2013 when compared to the prior year with wireless R&D down moderately but wireless manufacturing showing a significant shortfall compared to the prior year mostly driven by the loss of business from a large customer with whom we could not agree on contractual terms. Agilent's total net revenue in 2012 increased 4 percent when compared to 2011. The revenue increase associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for approximately 2 percentage points of revenue increase for the year ended October 31, 2012 when compared to 2011. Foreign currency movements for 2012 had an unfavorable impact of approximately 1 percentage point compared to 2011. Net income was $724 million in 2013 compared to net income of $1,153 million and $1,012 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. In 2013, 2012 and 2011 we generated operating cash flows of $1,152 million, $1,228 million and $1,260 million, respectively. As of October 31, 2013 and 2012 we had cash and cash equivalents balances of $2,675 million and $2,351 million, respectively. Looking forward, in the near term we are in a slow-growth environment within electronic measurement which remains challenging. There are indications that our electronic measurement business will return to a growth position next year. We expect positive trends to continue in our other businesses. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable. Although these estimates are based on management's best knowledge of current events and actions that may impact the company in the future, actual results may be different from the estimates. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used or changes in the accounting estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could materially change the financial statements. Our critical accounting policies are those that affect our financial statements materially and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. Those policies are revenue recognition, inventory valuation, share-based compensation, retirement and post-retirement plan assumptions, valuation of goodwill and purchased intangible assets, restructuring and accounting for income taxes. Revenue recognition. We enter into agreements to sell products (hardware or software), services, and other arrangements (multiple element arrangements) that include combinations of products and services. Revenue from product sales, net of trade discounts and allowances, is recognized provided that persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the price is fixed or determinable, and collectability is reasonably assured. Delivery is considered to have occurred when title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer. Revenue is reduced for estimated product returns, when appropriate. For sales that include customer-specified acceptance criteria, revenue is recognized after the acceptance criteria have been met. For products that include installation, if the installation meets the criteria to be considered a separate element, product revenue is recognized upon delivery, and recognition of installation revenue occurs when the installation is complete. Otherwise, neither the product nor the installation revenue is recognized until the installation is complete. Revenue from services is deferred and recognized over the contractual period or as services are rendered and accepted by the customer. We allocate revenue to each element in our multiple-element arrangements based upon their relative selling prices. We determine the selling price for each deliverable based on a selling price hierarchy. The selling price for a deliverable is based on our vendor specific objective evidence (VSOE) if available, third-party evidence (TPE) if VSOE is not available, or estimated selling price (ESP) if neither VSOE nor TPE is available. Revenue from the sale of software products that are not required to deliver the tangible product's essential functionality are accounted for under 32 Table of Contents software revenue recognition rules. Revenue allocated to each element is then recognized when the basic revenue recognition criteria for that element have been met. The amount of product revenue recognized is affected by our judgments as to whether an arrangement includes multiple elements. We use VSOE of selling price in the selling price allocation in all instances where it exists. VSOE of selling price for products and services is determined when a substantial majority of the selling prices fall within a reasonable range when sold separately. TPE of selling price can be established by evaluating largely interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone sales to similarly situated customers. As our products contain a significant element of proprietary technology and the solution offered differs substantially from that of competitors, it is difficult to obtain the reliable standalone competitive pricing necessary to establish TPE. ESP represents the best estimate of the price at which we would transact a sale if the product or service were sold on a standalone basis. We determine ESP for a product or service by using historical selling prices which reflect multiple factors including, but not limited to customer type, geography, market conditions, competitive landscape, gross margin objectives and pricing practices. The determination of ESP is made through consultation with and approval by management. We may modify or develop new pricing practices and strategies in the future. As these pricing strategies evolve changes may occur in ESP. The aforementioned factors may result in a different allocation of revenue to the deliverables in multiple element arrangements, which may change the pattern and timing of revenue recognition for these elements but will not change the total revenue recognized for the arrangement. Inventory valuation. We assess the valuation of our inventory on a periodic basis and make adjustments to the value for estimated excess and obsolete inventory based upon estimates about future demand and actual usage. Such estimates are difficult to make under most economic conditions. The excess balance determined by this analysis becomes the basis for our excess inventory charge. Our excess inventory review process includes analysis of sales forecasts, managing product rollovers and working with manufacturing to maximize recovery of excess inventory. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional write-downs may be required. If actual market conditions are more favorable than anticipated, inventory previously written down may be sold to customers, resulting in lower cost of sales and higher income from operations than expected in that period. Share-based compensation. We account for share-based awards in accordance with the authoritative guidance. Under the authoritative guidance, share-based compensation expense is primarily based on estimated grant date fair value and is recognized on a straight line basis. The fair value of share-based awards for employee stock option awards was estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Shares granted under the Long-Term Performance Program ("LTPP") were valued using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The estimated fair value of restricted stock unit awards is determined based on the market price of Agilent's common stock on the date of grant adjusted for expected dividend yield. On January 17, 2012, the company's Board of Directors approved the initiation of quarterly cash dividends to the company's shareholders. The fair value of all the awards granted prior to the declaration of quarterly cash dividend was measured based on an expected dividend yield of 0%. The Employee Stock Purchase Plan ("ESPP") allows eligible employees to purchase shares of our common stock at 85 percent of the fair market value at the purchase date. Both the Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo simulation fair value models require the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the option's expected life and the price volatility of the underlying stock. The expected stock price volatility assumption was determined using the historical volatility of Agilent's stock option over the most recent historical period equivalent to the expected life. A 10 percent increase in our estimated volatility from 39 percent to 49 percent for our most recent employee stock option grant would generally increase the value of an award and the associated compensation cost by approximately 23 percent if no other factors were changed. For the grants awarded under the 2009 stock plan after November 1, 2010, we increased the period available to retirement eligible employees to exercise their options from three years at retirement date to the full contractual term of ten years. In developing our estimated life of our employee stock options of 5.8 years for 2011 to 2013, we considered the historical option exercise behavior of our executive employees who were granted the majority of the options in the annual grants, which we believe is representative of future behavior. See Note 4, "Share-based Compensation," to the consolidated financial statements for more information. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, changes in assumptions could materially impact our reported financial results. Retirement and post-retirement benefit plan assumptions. Retirement and post-retirement benefit plan costs are a significant cost of doing business. They represent obligations that will ultimately be settled sometime in the future and therefore are subject to estimation. Pension accounting is intended to reflect the recognition of future benefit costs over the employees' average expected future service to Agilent based on the terms of the plans and investment and funding decisions. To estimate the 33 Table of Contents impact of these future payments and our decisions concerning funding of these obligations, we are required to make assumptions using actuarial concepts within the framework of accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Two critical assumptions are the discount rate and the expected long-term return on plan assets. Other important assumptions include, expected future salary increases, expected future increases to benefit payments, expected retirement dates, employee turnover, retiree mortality rates, and portfolio composition. We evaluate these assumptions at least annually. The discount rate is used to determine the present value of future benefit payments at the measurement date - October 31 for both U.S. and non-U.S. plans. For 2013 and 2012, the U.S. discount rates were based on the results of matching expected plan benefit payments with cash flows from a hypothetically constructed bond portfolio and increased in 2013 from the previous year. For 2013 and 2012, the discount rate for non-U.S. plans was generally based on published rates for high quality corporate bonds and remained largely unchanged. If we changed our discount rate by 1 percent, the impact would be $8 million on U.S. pension expense and $23 million on non-U.S. pension expense. Lower discount rates increase present values and subsequent year pension expense; higher discount rates decrease present values and subsequent year pension expense. The company uses alternate methods of amortization as allowed by the authoritative guidance which amortizes the actuarial gains and losses on a consistent basis for the years presented. For U.S. Plans, gains and losses are amortized over the average future working lifetime. For most Non-U.S. Plans and U.S. Post-Retirement Benefit Plans, gains and losses are amortized using a separate layer for each year's gains and losses. The expected long-term return on plan assets is estimated using current and expected asset allocations as well as historical and expected returns. Plan assets are valued at fair value. If we changed our estimated return on assets by 1 percent, the impact would be $8 million on U.S. pension expense and $17 million on non-U.S. pension expense. For 2013, actual return on assets was above expectations which, along with contributions during the year, reduced next year pension cost as well as improved the funded status at year end. The net periodic pension and post-retirement benefit costs recorded in operations excluding curtailments and settlements were $58 million in 2013, $52 million in 2012, and $58 million in 2011. Goodwill and purchased intangible assets. Agilent reviews goodwill for impairment annually during our fourth fiscal quarter and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. As defined in the authoritative guidance, a reporting unit is an operating segment, or one level below an operating segment. We aggregated components of an operating segment that have similar economic characteristics into our reporting units. At the time of an acquisition, we assign goodwill to the reporting unit that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination. In the fourth quarter of 2013, we combined the life sciences and diagnostics and genomics segments to form the life sciences and diagnostics segment. As a result, Agilent now has three segments, life sciences and diagnostics, chemical analysis, and electronic measurement segments. In September 2011, the FASB approved changes to the goodwill impairment guidance which are intended to reduce the cost and complexity of the annual impairment test. The changes provide entities an option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. The revised standard gives an entity the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether performing the current two-step test is necessary. If an entity believes, as a result of its qualitative assessment, that it is more-likely-than-not (i.e. > 50% chance) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test will be required. Otherwise, no further testing will be required. The revised guidance includes examples of events and circumstances that might indicate that a reporting unit's fair value is less than its carrying amount. These include macro-economic conditions such as deterioration in the entity's operating environment or industry or market considerations; entity-specific events such as increasing costs, declining financial performance, or loss of key personnel; or other events such as an expectation that a reporting unit will be sold or a sustained decrease in the stock price on either an absolute basis or relative to peers. The qualitative indicators replace those previously used to determine whether an interim goodwill impairment test is required. Agilent opted to early adopt this guidance for the year ended October 31, 2011. If it is determined, as a result of the qualitative assessment, that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the provisions of authoritative guidance require that we perform a two-step impairment test on goodwill. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. The second step (if necessary) measures the amount of impairment by applying fair-value-based tests to the individual assets and liabilities within each reporting unit. In fiscal year 2013, we assessed goodwill impairment for our four reporting units which consisted of two segments: chemical analysis and electronic measurement; and two reporting units under the life sciences and diagnostics segment. The first of these two reporting units related to our life sciences business and the second related to our diagnostics business. We performed a qualitative test for goodwill impairment of the following three reporting units, as of September 30, 2013: the chemical analysis 34 Table of Contents segment, the electronic measurement segment, and the reporting unit relating to life sciences. Based on the results of our qualitative testing, we believe that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of these reporting units are greater than their respective carrying values. We performed a quantitative test for goodwill impairment of the reporting unit related to our diagnostics business as of September 30, 2013. Based on the results of our quantitative testing, the fair value was significantly in excess of the carrying value. There was no impairment of goodwill during the years ended October 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011. Each quarter we review the events and circumstances to determine if goodwill impairment is indicated. Purchased intangible assets consist primarily of acquired developed technologies, proprietary know-how, trademarks, and customer relationships and are amortized using the straight-line method over estimated useful lives ranging from 6 months to 15 years. In-process research and development (IPR&D) is initially capitalized at fair value as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter. When the IPR&D project is complete, it is reclassified as an amortizable purchased intangible asset and is amortized over its estimated useful life. If an IPR&D project is abandoned, Agilent will record a charge for the value of the related intangible asset to Agilent's consolidated statement of operations in the period it is abandoned. In July 2012, the FASB simplified the guidance for testing for impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets other than goodwill. The changes are intended to reduce compliance costs. Agilent's indefinite-lived intangible assets are IPR&D intangible assets. The revised guidance allows a qualitative approach for testing indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, similar to the impairment testing guidance for goodwill. It allows the option to first assess qualitative factors (events and circumstances) that could affect the significant inputs used in determining the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset. The qualitative factors assist in determining whether it is more likely than not (meaning a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that the indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. An organization may choose to bypass the qualitative assessment for any indefinite-lived intangible asset in any period and proceed directly to calculating its fair value. The amendments are effective for annual and interim impairment tests performed for fiscal years beginning after September 15, 2012. Early adoption was permitted. Agilent adopted this guidance for the year ended October 31, 2012. Based on the quantitative test, we recorded an impairment of $1 million in 2013 and an impairment of $1 million in 2012, both relating to IPR&D projects that were abandoned. In all other instances we used the qualitative test and concluded that it was more likely than not that all other indefinite-lived intangible assets were not impaired. No impairments were recorded in 2011. We continually monitor events and changes in circumstances that could indicate carrying amounts of long-lived assets, including purchased intangible assets, may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we assess the recoverability of long-lived assets by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the total of the undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of those assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. In 2013, we recorded $1 million of impairments of other intangibles related to cancellation of an in-process research and development project. We also recorded $3 million of impairments related to other long-lived assets in 2013. In 2012, we recorded $1 million of impairments of other intangibles related to the cancellation of an in-process research and development project. We also recorded $1 of impairments related to other long-lived assets in 2012. We performed impairment analyses of purchased intangible assets in 2011 and recorded $3 million of impairment charges primarily related to a business where we ceased operations. We also recorded $8 million of impairments related to other long-lived assets in 2011. Restructuring. The main component of our restructuring plan is related to workforce reductions. Workforce reduction charges are accrued when payment of benefits becomes probable that the employees are entitled to the severance and the amounts can be estimated. If the amounts and timing of cash flows from restructuring activities are significantly different from what we have estimated, the actual amount of restructuring and other related charges could be materially different, either higher or lower, than those we have recorded. Accounting for income taxes. We must make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of tax credits, benefits and deductions, and in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes, as well as interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to our tax provision in a subsequent period. Significant management judgment is also required in determining whether deferred tax assets will be realized in full or in part. When it is more-likely-than-not that all or some portion of specific deferred tax assets such as net operating losses or foreign tax credit carryforwards will not be realized, a valuation allowance must be established for the amount of the deferred tax assets that cannot be realized. We consider all available positive and negative evidence on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis when assessing whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. We consider evidence such as our past operating results, the existence of losses in recent years and our forecast of future taxable income. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 we released the valuation allowance for the majority of our U.S. deferred tax assets. At October 31, 2013, we continue to recognize 35 Table of Contents a valuation allowance for certain U.S. state and foreign deferred tax assets. We intend to maintain a valuation allowance in these jurisdictions until sufficient positive evidence exists to support its reversal. We have not provided for all U.S. federal income and foreign withholding taxes on the undistributed earnings of some of our foreign subsidiaries because we intend to reinvest such earnings indefinitely. Should we decide to remit this income to the U.S. in a future period, our provision for income taxes will increase materially in that period. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax law and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions. Although the guidance on the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes the use of a recognition and measurement model, the determination of whether an uncertain tax position has met those thresholds will continue to require significant judgment by management. In accordance with the guidance on the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, for all U.S. and other tax jurisdictions, we recognize potential liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes and interest will be due. The ultimate resolution of tax uncertainties may differ from what is currently estimated, which could result in a material impact on income tax expense. If our estimate of income tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, a further charge to expense would be required. If events occur and the payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be unnecessary, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary. We include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for income taxes on the consolidated statements of operations. As a part of our accounting for business combinations, intangible assets are recognized at fair values and goodwill is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net estimated fair values of assets acquired. Impairment charges associated with goodwill are generally not tax deductible and will result in an increased effective income tax rate in the period that any impairment is recorded. Amortization expenses associated with acquired intangible assets are generally not tax deductible and therefore deferred tax liabilities have been recorded for non-deductible amortization expenses as a part of the accounting for business combinations. Adoption of New Pronouncements See Note 2, "New Accounting Pronouncements," to the consolidated financial statements for a description of new accounting pronouncements. Restructuring In the second quarter of 2013, we accrued for a targeted restructuring program that is expected to reduce Agilent's total headcount by approximately 450 regular employees, representing approximately 2 percent of our global workforce. The timing and scope of workforce reductions will vary based on local legal requirements. When completed, the restructuring program is expected to result in an approximately $50 million reduction in annual cost of sales and operating expenses. In addition we have been streamlining our manufacturing operations. As part of this action, we anticipate the reduction of approximately 250 positions to reduce our annual cost of sales. For the year ended October 31, 2013 we accrued $53 million associated with the headcount reductions. Within the U.S, we have substantially completed these restructuring activities. Internationally, we expect to complete the majority of these restructuring activities by the end of the second half of fiscal 2014. As of October 31, 2013, approximately 250 employees were terminated and $29 million was paid under the targeted restructuring program and 100 employees were terminated under the streamlining of manufacturing. Foreign Currency Our revenues, costs and expenses, and monetary assets and liabilities are exposed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates as a result of our global operating and financing activities. We hedge revenues, expenses and balance sheet exposures that are not denominated in the functional currencies of our subsidiaries on a short term and anticipated basis. We do experience some fluctuations within individual lines of the consolidated statement of operations and balance sheet because our hedging program is not designed to offset the currency movements in each category of revenues, expenses, monetary assets and liabilities. Our hedging program is designed to hedge currency movements on a relatively short-term basis (up to a rolling twelve month period). Therefore, we are exposed to currency fluctuations over the longer term. To the extent that we are required to pay for all, or portions, of an acquisition price in foreign currencies, Agilent may enter into foreign exchange contracts to reduce the risk that currency movements will impact the U.S. dollar cost of the transaction. 36 Table of Contents Results from Operations Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 % Change 2012 over 2011 % Change 2013 2012 2011 (in millions) Orders $ 6,827 $ 6,877 $ 6,769 (1)% 2% Net revenue: Products $ 5,534 $ 5,659 $ 5,482 (2)% 3% Services and other $ 1,248 $ 1,199 $ 1,133 4% 6% Total net revenue $ 6,782 $ 6,858 $ 6,615 (1)% 4% Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 Ppts Change 2012 over 2011 Ppts Change 2013 2012 2011 % of total net revenue: Products 82 % 83 % 83 % (1) ppt Services and other 18 % 17 % 17 % 1 ppt Total 100 % 100 % 100 % In general, recorded orders represent firm purchase commitments from our customers with established terms and conditions for products and services that will be delivered within six months. Agilent's total orders in 2013 were $6,827 million, a decrease of 1 percent when compared to 2012. Foreign currency movements had an unfavorable impact of approximately 2 percentage points for the year ended October 31, 2013 when compared to 2012. The increase in orders associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for approximately 3 percentage points of total order growth for the year ended October 31, 2013 when compared to 2012. Within our life sciences and diagnostics business orders increased 16 percent in 2013 compared to 2012 with 13 percentage points of order increase attributable to the Dako acquisition. Chemical analysis orders increased 2 percent in 2013 when compared to 2012 and electronic measurement businesses orders decreased 13 percent when compared to 2012. Agilent's total orders in 2012 increased 2 percent when compared to 2011. The increase in orders associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for 2 percentage points of order growth for the year ended October 31, 2012 when compared to 2011. Within our life sciences and diagnostics business orders increased due to the Dako acquisition and were flat in chemical analysis and electronic measurement when compared to 2011. Agilent's net revenue of $6,782 million decreased 1 percent when compared to 2012. Foreign currency movements for 2013 had an unfavorable impact of approximately 1 percentage point compared to 2012. Revenue associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for approximately 4 percentage points of the revenue growth for the year ended October 31, 2013 when compared to 2012. Within our life sciences and diagnostics business revenue increased 16 percent in 2013 compared to 2012 with 13 percentage points of revenue increase attributable to the Dako acquisition. Excluding the effects of the Dako acquisition, there was growth in demand for life sciences and diagnostics products and services led by pharmaceutical and biotechnology and clinical markets. There was a decrease in demand from the academic and government market for the year ended October 31, 2013, when compared to the prior year. Within our chemical analysis business revenue grew 2 percent in 2013 compared with the prior year. There were modest increases in revenue from the food safety and petrochemical markets, but environmental and forensics markets were down when compared to the prior year. Within electronic measurement, total revenue decreased when compared to the prior year by 13 percent. General purposes markets decreased with aerospace and defense flat and computer and semi-conductor markets down when compared to 2012. Also within electronic measurement, the communications test business decreased for the year ended October 31, 2013 when compared to the prior year with wireless R&D down moderately but wireless manufacturing showing a significant shortfall compared to the prior year mostly driven by the loss of business from a large customer with whom we could not agree on contractual terms. Agilent's total net revenue in 2012 increased 4 percent when compared to 2011. The revenue increase associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for approximately 2 percentage points of revenue increase for the year ended October 31, 2012 when compared to 2011. Foreign currency movements for 2012 had an unfavorable impact of approximately 1 percentage point compared to 2011. Note 21, "Segment Information" shows a reconciliation between segment revenue and net revenue. 37 Table of Contents Services and other revenue include revenue generated from servicing our installed base of products, warranty extensions and consulting. Services and other revenue increased 4 percent in 2013 as compared to 2012 . The service and other revenue growth is higher than product revenue growth due to a portion of the revenue being driven more by the previously installed base than current period product sales. Services and other revenue increased 6 percent in 2012 as compared to 2011 . Backlog Backlog represents the amount of revenue expected from orders that have already been booked, including orders for goods and services that have not been delivered to customers, orders invoiced but not yet recognized as revenue, and orders for goods that were shipped but not invoiced, awaiting acceptance by customers. On October 31, 2013 , our unfilled backlog for the electronic measurement business was approximately $760 million, as compared to approximately $800 million at October 31, 2012 . On October 31, 2013 , our unfilled backlog for the chemical analysis business was approximately $380 million, as compared to approximately $360 million at October 31, 2012 . Within our life sciences and diagnostics business, our unfilled backlog was approximately $520 million on October 31, 2013 as compared to approximately $530 million at October 31, 2012 . We expect that a majority of the unfilled backlog for all three businesses will be delivered to customers within six months. On average, our unfilled backlog represents approximately three months' worth of revenues. We believe backlog on any particular date, while indicative of short-term revenue performance, is not necessarily a reliable indicator of medium or long-term revenue performance. Costs and Expenses Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 Change 2012 over 2011 Change 2013 2012 2011 Gross margin on products 53.5 % 53.9 % 54.9 % (1) ppt Gross margin on services and other 46.2 % 46.1 % 45.9 % Total gross margin 52.1 % 52.6 % 53.3 % (1) ppt Operating margin 14.0 % 16.3 % 16.2 % (2) ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 704 $ 668 $ 649 5% 3% Selling, general and administrative $ 1,880 $ 1,817 $ 1,809 3% % In 2013, total gross margin was flat in comparison to 2012. Increased costs, in particular, intangible amortization from the acquisition of Dako, restructuring expenses and inventory charges were offset by a decrease in variable and incentive pay. In 2012, total gross margin decreased 1 percentage point in comparison to 2011. The unfavorable impact of product mix, increased intangible amortization related to the Dako acquisition were offset by lower variable and incentive pay. Operating margins in 2013 decreased 2 percentage points compared to 2012 as a result of increased operating expenses associated with the Dako acquisition, including increased intangible asset amortization, restructuring costs, higher wages and increased inventory charges offset by lower variable and incentive pay. Operating margins in 2012 were flat when compared to 2011. This was the result of maintaining cost control through a decrease in variable and incentive pay while absorbing increases in expenditure from Dako and wage increases. Gross inventory charges were $48 million in 2013 and $30 million in 2012 and 2011. Sales of previously written down inventory were $7 million in 2013 and $5 million in 2012 and 2011. Our research and development efforts focus on potential new products and product improvements covering a wide variety of technologies, none of which is individually significant to our operations. We conduct five types of research and development: basic research, foundation technologies, communications, life sciences and measurement. Our research seeks to improve on various technical competencies in electronics, software, systems and solutions, life sciences and photonics. In each of these research fields, we conduct research that is focused on specific product development for release in the short-term as well as other research that is intended to be the foundation for future products over a longer time-horizon. Some of our product development research is designed to improve on the more than 20,000 products already in production, focus on major new product releases, and develop new product segments for the future. Due to the breadth of research and development projects across all of our businesses, there are a number of drivers of this expense. We remain committed to invest significantly in research and development and have focused our development efforts on key strategic opportunities to align our business with available markets and position ourselves to capture market share. 38 Table of Contents Research and development expenditures increased 5 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Increased expenditure was due to our continued investment in new product development and technologies, increased costs due to Dako, restructuring costs and wage increases, partially offset by lower variable and incentive pay. Research and development expenditures increased 3 percent in 2012 compared to 2011. Increased expenditure was due to increased costs due to Dako offset by lower variable and incentive pay. We remain committed to invest approximately 10 percent of revenues in research and development and have focused our development efforts on key strategic opportunities in order to align our business with available markets and position ourselves to capture market share. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 3 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Increases were due to the acquisition of Dako, including amortization of intangible assets, wage increases and investments in sales channel coverage in emerging geographies and restructuring costs offset by decreases in variable and incentive pay. Selling, general and administrative expenses were flat in 2012 when compared to 2011. Increases were due to the acquisition of Dako, wage increases and investments in sales channel coverage offset by decreases in variable and incentive pay and lower commissions. Interest expense for the years ended October 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 was $107 million, $101 million and $86 million, respectively, and relates to the interest charged on our senior notes offset by the amortization of deferred gains recorded upon termination of interest rate swap contracts. At October 31, 2013, our headcount was approximately 20,600 compared to 20,500 in 2012 and 18,700 in 2011. A significant proportion of the increase in headcount in 2012 compared with 2011 was due to the Dako acquisition. Income Taxes Years Ended October 31, 2013 2012 2011 (in millions) Provision (benefit) for income taxes $ 135 $ (110 ) $ 20 For 2013, the effective tax rate was 16 percent. The 16 percent effective tax rate is lower than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the mix of earnings in non-U.S. jurisdictions taxed at lower statutory rates; in particular Singapore where we enjoy tax holidays. The effective tax rate also included a $12 million out-of-period adjustment to increase tax expense, recognized in the second quarter of 2013, associated with the write off of deferred tax assets related to foreign tax credits incorrectly claimed in prior years. For 2012, the effective tax rate was a benefit of 11 percent. The 11 percent effective tax rate benefit reflected tax on earnings in jurisdictions that had low effective tax rates and included a $280 million tax benefit due to the reversal of a valuation allowance for most U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets. Valuation allowances require an assessment of both positive and negative evidence when determining whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. Such assessment is required on a jurisdiction by jurisdiction basis. In the fourth quarter of 2012, management concluded that the valuation allowance for most of Agilent's U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets is no longer needed primarily due to the emergence from cumulative losses in recent years, the return to sustainable U.S. operating profits and the expectation of sustainable profitability in future periods. As of October 31, 2012, the cumulative positive evidence outweighed the negative evidence regarding the likelihood that most of the deferred tax asset for Agilent's U.S. consolidated income tax group will be realized. Accordingly, we recognized a non-recurring tax benefit of $280 million relating to the valuation allowance reversal. The effective tax rate also included a non-recurring tax expense of $88 million relating to an increase in the overall residual U.S. tax expected to be imposed upon the repatriation of unremitted foreign earnings previously considered permanently reinvested. During the fourth quarter of 2012, we assessed the forecasted cash needs and overall financial position of our foreign subsidiaries and determined that a portion of previously permanently reinvested earnings would no longer be reinvested overseas. The effective tax rate was also reduced by a $68 million tax benefit primarily associated with the recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits and the reversal of the related interest accruals due to the reassessment of certain uncertain tax positions relating to foreign jurisdictions. For 2011, the effective tax rate was 2 percent. The 2 percent effective tax rate reflects tax on earnings in jurisdictions that had low effective tax rates and includes a $97 million net tax benefit primarily associated with a refund in Canada and the recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits and the reversal of the related interest accruals due to the reassessment of certain uncertain tax positions. The income tax provision also included a $26 million out of period adjustment to reduce the carrying value of certain U.K. deferred tax assets for which the majority was recorded in the quarter ended April 30, 2011. The overstatement of these deferred tax assets resulted in an overstatement of the U.K. valuation allowance release in the fourth quarter of 2010. For the full 39 Table of Contents year, this out of period adjustment was substantially offset by other out of period adjustments. The net impact of all out of period adjustments on the effective tax rate was immaterial. Without considering interest and penalties, the effective rate reflected taxes in all jurisdictions except the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions in which income tax expense or benefit continued to be offset by adjustments to valuation allowances. Agilent enjoys tax holidays in several different jurisdictions, most significantly in Singapore. The tax holidays provide lower rates of taxation on certain classes of income and require various thresholds of investments and employment or specific types of income in those jurisdictions. The tax holidays are due for renewal between 2015 and 2023. As a result of the incentives, the impact of the tax holidays decreased income taxes by $127 million, $122 million, and $127 million in 2013, 2012, and 2011, respectively. The benefit of the tax holidays on net income per share (diluted) was approximately $0.37, $0.35, and $0.36 in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. In accordance with the guidance on the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, for all U.S. and other tax jurisdictions, we recognize potential liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes and interest will be due. If our estimate of income tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, a further charge to expense would be required. If events occur and the payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be unnecessary, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary. We include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for income taxes on the consolidated statements of operations. In the U.S., tax years remain open back to the year 2006 for federal income tax purposes and the year 2000 for significant states. Agilent's U.S. federal income tax returns for 2006 through 2007 are currently under audit by the IRS. During the three months ended July 31, 2012, the company received a Revenue Agents Report ( RAR ) for these years and filed a protest to dispute certain adjustments, the most significant of which pertains to the amount of a gain from the disposition of a business that was allocated to the U.S. for income tax purposes. There can be no assurance that the outcome of this dispute will not have a material effect on our operating results or financial condition. In other major jurisdictions where the company conducts business, the tax years generally remain open back to the year 2003. With these jurisdictions and the U.S., it is reasonably possible that there could be significant changes to our unrecognized tax benefits in the next twelve months due to either the expiration of a statute of limitation or a tax audit settlement. Given the number of years and numerous matters that remain subject to examination in various tax jurisdictions, management is unable to estimate the range of possible changes to the balance of our unrecognized tax benefits. Segment Overview We formed a new operating segment in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2013. The new life sciences and diagnostics segment was formed by the combination of the life sciences business plus the diagnostics and genomics business. Following this reorganization, we have three business segments comprised of the life sciences and diagnostics business, the chemical analysis business and the electronic measurement business. The historical segment financial information for the life sciences and diagnostics segment has been recast to conform to this new reporting structure in our financial statements. Life Sciences and Diagnostics Our life sciences and diagnostics business provides application-focused solutions that include reagents, instruments, software, consumables, and services that enable customers to identify, quantify and analyze the physical and biological properties of substances and products, as well as enable customers in the clinical and life sciences research areas to interrogate samples at the molecular level. Key product categories include: liquid chromatography ("LC") systems, columns and components; liquid chromatography mass spectrometry ("LCMS") systems; laboratory software and informatics systems; laboratory automation and robotic systems; dissolution testing; nucleic acid solutions; Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Magnetic Resonance Imaging, and X-Ray Diffraction systems; services and support for the aforementioned products; immunohistochemistry; In Situ Hybridization; Hematoxylin and Eosin staining; special staining, DNA mutation detection; genotyping; gene copy number determination; identification of gene rearrangements; DNA methylation profiling; gene expression profiling; next generation sequencing target enrichment; and automated gel electrophoresis-based sample analysis systems. We also collaborate with a number of major pharmaceutical companies to develop new potential pharmacodiagnostics, also called companion diagnostics, with the potential of identifying patients most likely to benefit from a specific targeted therapy. 40 Table of Contents Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 Change 2012 over 2011 Change 2013 2012 2011 (in millions) Orders $ 2,319 $ 1,993 $ 1,875 16% 6% Net revenue from products $ 1,868 $ 1,578 $ 1,424 18% 11% Net revenue from services and other 432 406 368 6% 10% Total net revenue $ 2,300 $ 1,984 $ 1,792 16% 11% Life sciences and diagnostics orders in 2013 grew 16 percent compared to 2012. Foreign currency movements had an unfavorable impact of 2 percentage point on order growth when compared to the prior year. Incremental orders associated with the Dako acquisition in 2013 accounted for 13 percentage points of the order growth. Excluding the impact of the Dako acquisition, order results were led by demand in the LC, genomics, services and consumables portfolios. Geographically, orders grew 16 percent in the Americas, grew 27 percent in Europe, declined 2 percent in Japan, and grew 9 percent in other Asia Pacific during 2013 when compared to 2012. Life sciences and diagnostics orders in 2012 increased 6 percent compared to 2011. Foreign currency movements had an unfavorable impact of 1 percentage point on order growth when compared to the prior year. Excluding the impact of the Dako acquisition, order growth was driven by strength in informatics, microfluidics, nucleic acid, and services. Budget constraints and cautious spending weighed on the results in 2012. Life sciences and diagnostics net revenue in 2013 increased 16 percent compared to 2012. Revenue associated with the Dako acquisition accounted for 17 percent of our life sciences and diagnostics business and 13 percentage points of the revenue growth in 2013. Foreign currency movements for 2013 had an unfavorable impact of 1 percentage point compared to 2012. Excluding the impact of the Dako acquisition, revenue growth was led by strength in LC, consumables and services portfolios. Geographically, revenue grew 13 percent in the Americas, grew 26 percent in Europe, declined 2 percent in Japan, and grew 12 percent in other Asia Pacific during 2013 when compared to 2012. Though European countries continue to focus on addressing the financial downturn and continued austerity measures, Europe had the strongest performance with particular demand in the diagnostics and pharma markets. Life sciences and diagnostics revenue in 2012 increased 11 percent compared to 2011. Foreign currency movements for 2012 had an unfavorable impact of 2 percentage points compared to 2011. Excluding the impact of the Dako acquisition, revenue strength was led by LCMS, informatics, automation and services. End market performance reflected slow growth across most markets in 2013. Pharmaceutical and biotech market was soft overall as budgets continued to be tightened. Customers are investing to upgrade technology, such as advanced LCMS applications, to stay ahead of the curve in biologic drugs yet still maintain an edge in chemical drugs, particularly in generic drugs and emerging markets. The academia and government market continued to see the dampening effects of the U.S. sequestration and weak macroeconomic environment in Europe, though we saw some signs of stabilization in Europe in the latter part of the 2013. The diagnostics market experienced solid growth in pathology, reagent partnerships and companion diagnostics and the clinical market remained robust during the year reflecting record volumes in the latter part of 2013 for our genomics products. Applied markets were flat as growth in food and petrochemical saw good demand from China and other emerging markets, but was largely offset by declines in environmental and forensics markets as tight government budgets continued to constrain demand in the U.S. and Europe. Looking forward, we are optimistic about our growth opportunities in the life sciences and diagnostics markets as our broad portfolio of products and solutions are well suited to address customer needs. We continue to invest in expanding and improving our applications and solutions portfolio. We expect low spending levels to continue in academic and government markets given the U.S. budget sequestration and continued austerity in most developed countries, but we expect businesses such as consumables and services and the continued need to refresh aging instrumentation to partially offset this effect. We remain positive about our growth in our clinical and clinical research markets, as adoption of our SureSelect and HaloPlex sequencing target enrichment solutions continue. The fourth quarter of 2013 marked the commercial launch of the new Dako Omnis autostainer. First installations of this platform have taken place, and we are seeing good acceptance of orders in both the U.S. and Europe. 41 Table of Contents Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the life sciences and diagnostics business' margins, expenses and income from operations for 2013 versus 2012 , and 2012 versus 2011 . Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 Change 2012 over 2011 Change 2013 2012 2011 Total gross margin 54.3 % 53.3 % 52.0 % 1 ppt 1 ppt Operating margin 16.4 % 14.8 % 13.2 % 2 ppts 2 ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 228 $ 195 $ 174 17% 12% Selling, general and administrative $ 645 $ 567 $ 522 14% 9% Income from operations $ 377 $ 295 $ 237 28% 24% Gross margins in 2013 increased 1 percentage point compared to 2012. The increase in gross margins was mainly due to the impact of the Dako acquisition, along with favorable volume, lower infrastructure expenses, lower variable pay, partially offset by unfavorable product mix and unfavorable standard cost. Gross margins increased 1 percentage point in 2012 compared to 2011 mainly due to the impact of the Dako acquisition, favorable volume and lower material costs, which were offset by higher infrastructure costs and unfavorable product mix. Research and development expenses increased 17 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. The increase was due to the impact of the Dako acquisition. Research and development expenses increased 12 percent in 2012 compared to 2011, mostly due to the impact of the Dako acquisition and investments in new product development. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 14 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 9 percent in 2012 compared to 2011. The increase was due to the impact of the Dako acquisition in both periods. Operating margins increased by 2 percentage points in 2013 compared to 2012. The increases were mainly due to the impact of the Dako acquisition and favorable gross profit from higher revenue. Operating margins increased 2 percentage points in 2012 compared to 2011.The increase was due to the impact of the Dako acquisition, favorable gross profit from higher revenue outpacing operating expense growth. Income from Operations Income from operations in 2013 increased by $82 million or 28 percent on a revenue increase of $316 million, a 26 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental. Income from operations in 2012 increased $58 million or 24 percent on a revenue increase of $192 million. Operating margin incremental is measured by the increase in income from operations compared to the prior period divided by the increase in revenue compared to the prior period. Chemical Analysis Our chemical analysis business provides application-focused solutions that include instruments, software, consumables, and services that enable customers to identify, quantify and analyze the physical and biological properties of substances and products. Key product categories in chemical analysis include: gas chromatography (GC) systems, columns and components; gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) systems; inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) instruments; atomic absorption (AA) instruments; inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) instruments; molecular spectroscopy instruments; software and data systems; vacuum pumps and measurement technologies; services and support for our products. 42 Table of Contents Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 Change 2012 over 2011 Change 2013 2012 2011 (in millions) Orders $ 1,642 $ 1,604 $ 1,589 2% 1% Net revenue from products $ 1,232 $ 1,219 $ 1,194 1% 3% Net revenue from services and other 362 340 324 6% 5% Total net revenue $ 1,594 $ 1,559 $ 1,518 2% 3% Chemical analysis orders in 2013 increased 2 percent compared to 2012. Foreign currency movements for 2013 had an unfavorable impact of 2 percentage point compared to 2012. Order results were led by solid performance in services, consumables, and ICP-MS instruments. Strength in these areas was offset by declines in GC-MS systems and flat orders in vacuum pump products. Geographically, orders were flat in the Americas, increased 5 percent in Europe, declined 14 percent in Japan (includes unfavorable currency impact of 16 percentage points), and grew 6 percent in other Asia Pacific during 2013 when compared to 2012. In the Americas the overall government spending remains weak. Total Asia Pacific orders reflected continued weakness in unfavorable currency impacts in Japan orders offset by continued growth in both China and South Asia Pacific and Korea. Chemical analysis orders in 2012 increased 1 percent compared to 2011 due to strength in services and consumables, along with GC-MS and ICP-MS instruments. Chemical analysis net revenue in 2013 increased 2 percent compared to 2012. Foreign currency movements for 2013 had an unfavorable impact of 2 percentage point compared to 2012. Revenue growth was led by services and consumables. GC and GC-MS weaknesses were offset by strength in ICP-MS and AA and ICP-OES instruments. Geographically, revenue grew 3 percent in the Americas, grew 1 percent in Europe, declined 17 percent in Japan (including a 15 percentage point unfavorable currency impact), and grew 8 percent in other Asia Pacific. Brazil, China, and India in particular had strong revenue growth in 2013, each having double digit growth. Chemical analysis revenue grew 3 percent in 2012 compared to 2011, led by services and consumables, along with strength in ICP-MS Chemical analysis saw mixed growth in the core end markets. The demand to export safe and high quality food in emerging markets remains strong, and their government funding continues to drive strength for purchases of GC and GC-MS instruments. Chemical and energy end markets saw modest increases in 2013 compared to 2012, driven primarily by stronger demand in China and a bright outlook for petrochemicals in North America. In forensics, the spread of designer drugs continues to drive the need for GC-MS systems, particularly in Europe. Environmental demand in mature markets is tempered by continued government budget constraints. In emerging economies, testing to ensure the quality and safety of drinking water is a factor in economic growth and has led to the demand for GC-MS and ICP-MS instruments. Other applied markets showed mid-single digit growth, with growth in pharmaceutical and bio tech markets being offset by a decline in academic and government markets. Strength in 2013 and our fourth quarter results reflect a positive outlook for the chemical analysis core end markets. We will continue to invest in research and development, and seek to expand our position in developing countries and emerging markets. New instrument launches over the next twelve months, as well as continued market acceptance of our new products released in 2013, will help with our product differentiation and competitive position. 43 Table of Contents Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the chemical analysis business's margins, expenses and income from operations for 2013 versus 2012 , and 2012 versus 2011 . Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 Change 2012 over 2011 Change 2013 2012 2011 Total gross margin 51.7 % 51.4 % 51.1 % Operating margin 22.3 % 21.7 % 20.6 % 1 ppt 1 ppt (in millions) Research and development $ 94 $ 93 $ 92 2% Selling, general and administrative $ 374 $ 371 $ 371 1% Income from operations $ 355 $ 338 $ 313 5% 8% Gross margins in 2013 remained flat compared to 2012. Higher product discounts and unfavorable foreign currency movements were offset by favorable manufacturing overhead costs and favorable revenue volume. Gross margin also remained flat in 2012 compared to 2011, driven by higher product discounts offsetting favorable revenue volume and lower material costs. Research and development expenses increased 2 percent in 2013 compared to 2012, driven mainly by our continued investment in instrument products. Research and development expenses remained flat in 2012 compared to 2011. Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased 1 percent in 2013 compared to 2012 mainly due to higher infrastructure expenses and commissions partially offset by reduced discretionary expenses including marketing programs and travel. Selling, general, and administrative expenses remained flat in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily driven by investments in sales channel coverage with a focus on emerging markets being offset by lower commissions and discretionary spending Operating margins increased by 1 percentage point in 2013 compared to 2012. The increase was mainly due to favorable gross profit from higher revenue while holding expenses fairly flat. Operating margins increased 1 percentage point from 2012 compared to 2011, mainly due to favorable gross profit from higher revenue while holding expenses flat. Income from Operations Income from operations in 2013 increased by $17 million or 5 percent on a revenue increase of $35 million, a 49 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental. Income from operations in 2012 increased by $25 million or 8 percent compared to 2011 on a revenue increase of $41 million, or 60 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental. Electronic Measurement Our electronic measurement business provides electronic measurement instruments and systems, software design tools and related services that are used in the design, development, manufacture, installation, deployment and operation of electronics equipment, and microscopy products. Related services include start-up assistance, instrument productivity and application services and instrument calibration and repair. We also offer customization, consulting and optimization services throughout the customer's product lifecycle. 44 Table of Contents Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 Change 2012 over 2011 Change 2013 2012 2011 (in millions) Orders $ 2,866 $ 3,280 $ 3,305 (13)% (1)% Net revenue from products $ 2,434 $ 2,862 $ 2,875 (15)% Net revenue from services and other 454 453 441 3% Total net revenue $ 2,888 $ 3,315 $ 3,316 (13)% Electronic measurement orders declined 13 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Foreign currency movements had an unfavorable impact of 2 percentage points on the year-over-year compare. Orders were lower for all market segments, including aerospace and defense; industrial, computer, and semiconductor test; and communications test, which decreased year-over-year primarily due to lower wireless manufacturing demand relating to the loss of business from a large customer with whom we could not agree on contractual terms. On a geographic basis, orders declined 20 percent in the Americas, 12 percent in Japan, 7 percent in Asia Pacific excluding Japan, and 4 percent in Europe. The decline in orders in the Americas was driven by weak communications test and soft aerospace and defense demand. Japan orders were lower due to the unfavorable impact of currency movements, improving by 1 percent year-over-year in local currency. Electronic measurement orders declined 1 percent in 2012 compared to 2011; weak industrial and slightly lower aerospace and defense orders were mostly offset by growth in computer and semiconductor and communications test business. Electronic measurement revenue declined 13 percent in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily on lower wireless manufacturing and industrial, computer and semiconductor test demand. The unfavorable impact of foreign currency movements contributed to 2 percentage points of the year-over-year decline. Revenue from the Americas decreased 19 percent on significantly lower wireless manufacturing demand and soft general purpose test business. Japan revenue was 14 percent lower year-over-year but declined only 3 percent in local currency. Asia Pacific excluding Japan decreased 7 percent, and Europe declined 6 percent when compared to last year. Revenue from products was 15 percent lower compared to 2012 while service related revenue was flat. Electronic measurement revenue was flat in 2012 compared to 2011 on flat demand in both general purpose and communications test. Within communications test, strong wireless manufacturing test revenue was offset by lower wireless R&D and broadband communications test business. General purpose test revenue, representing approximately 66 percent of electronic measurement business, declined year-over-year on weak industrial, computer, and semiconductor test demand. Our aerospace and defense business was flat year-over-year on lower demand in the Americas offset by stronger spending in Europe. Semiconductor test revenue declined on moderating investments in new process technology and weak manufacturing demand. The shift from personal computers to lower priced, more highly integrated tablets has resulted in a reduction in test equipment demand. Uncertain global economic conditions contributed to lower industrial test business. In 2012, general purpose test represented approximately 63 percent of electronic measurement revenue with slight growth in computers and semiconductor business, flat industrial test demand, and a slight decline in aerospace and defense compared to 2011. Communications test revenue, representing approximately 34 percent of total electronic measurement, declined year-over-year primarily due to significantly lower wireless manufacturing demand driven by the loss of business from a large customer with whom we could not agree on contractual terms. Wireless R&D spending remained soft reflecting a cautious spending environment though long-term industry fundamentals remain intact, with continued interest in high data rate applications such as long-term evolution (LTE). In 2012, communications test represented approximately 37 percent of total electronic measurement revenue; strong wireless manufacturing test demand was offset by lower wireless R&D and broadband communications business. The outlook across market segments remains mixed. There continues to be downward pressure on aerospace and defense demand with near-term uncertainty relating to the budget for the United States. We expect to see improvement in semiconductor test considering the order strength in the last quarter of fiscal year 2013. Communications test is expected to improve in the near term on investment in wireless R&D for next generation formats and more stable wireless manufacturing demand. Longer term growth drivers such as mobility and transformational initiatives, including modular and hand-held instrumentation, support our ongoing investments. 45 Table of Contents Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the electronic measurement business's margins, expenses and income from operations for 2013 versus 2012 and 2012 versus 2011 . Years Ended October 31, 2013 over 2012 Change 2012 over 2011 Change 2013 2012 2011 Total gross margin 56.9 % 56.9 % 58.4 % (2) ppts Operating margin 18.9 % 22.7 % 22.9 % (4) ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 365 $ 375 $ 379 (3)% (1)% Selling, general and administrative $ 733 $ 761 $ 798 (4)% (5)% Income from operations $ 544 $ 751 $ 760 (28)% (1)% Gross margins were flat in 2013 compared to 2012 on lower revenue. On a volume-adjusted basis, gross margins were higher year-over-year primarily due to the lower proportion of wireless manufacturing business. A decline in variable and incentive pay and reduced infrastructure spending were offset by higher inventory charges and wage increases. In 2012, gross margins declined 2 percentage points compared to 2011 on flat revenue primarily driven by the unfavorable impact of a higher proportion of lower gross margin wireless manufacturing business. Research and development expenses declined 3 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Reductions in development spending, variable and incentive pay, and infrastructure related expenses, and the favorable impact of currency movements were partially offset by investments in acquisitions and wage increases. Research and development expenses declined 1 percent in 2012 compared to 2011 on lower variable and incentive pay and infrastructure costs partially offset by incremental spending on acquisitions and wage increases. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 4 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Reductions in discretionary spending, lower variable and incentive pay, and the favorable impact of currency movements were partially offset by wage increases. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 5 percent in 2012 compared to 2011 on lower variable and incentive pay, infrastructure costs and commissions partially offset by wage increases. Operating margins declined by 4 percentage points in 2013 compared to 2012 on lower revenue partially offset by reduced operating expenses. Operating margins were approximately the same in 2012 compared to 2011 on flat revenue with the net impact of lower gross margins mostly offset by reductions in operating expenses. Income from Operations Income from operations in 2013 declined by $207 million or 28 percent compared to 2012 on a revenue decrease of $427 million, a 48 percent year-over-year operating margin decrement, reflecting the net impact of lower revenue partially offset by expense reductions. Income from operations in 2012 decreased by $9 million or 1 percent compared to 2011 on flat revenue, with the impact of lower gross margins mostly offset by reductions in expenses. Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources Our financial position as of October 31, 2013 consisted of cash and cash equivalents of $2,675 million as compared to $2,351 million as of October 31, 2012. As of October 31, 2013, approximately $2,552 million of our cash and cash equivalents is held outside of the U.S. in our foreign subsidiaries. Most of the amounts held outside of the U.S. could be repatriated to the U.S. but, under current law, would be subject to U.S. federal and state income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Agilent has accrued for U.S. federal and state tax liabilities on the earnings of its foreign subsidiaries except when the earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the U.S. Repatriation could result in additional material U.S. federal and state income tax payments in future years. We utilize a variety of funding strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. 46 Table of Contents On June 21, 2012, we completed the acquisition of Dako A/S through the acquisition of 100% of the share capital of Dako A/S, a limited liability company incorporated under the laws of Denmark ( Dako ), under the share purchase agreement, dated May 16, 2012. As a result of the acquisition, Dako has become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Agilent. The consideration paid was approximately $2,143 million, $1,400 million was paid directly to the seller and $743 million was paid to satisfy the outstanding debt of Dako. Agilent funded the acquisition using existing cash. The acquisition has been accounted for in accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance and the results of Dako are included in Agilent's consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition. We believe our cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, and ability to access capital markets and credit lines will satisfy, for the foreseeable future, our liquidity requirements, both globally and domestically, including the following: working capital needs, capital expenditures, business acquisitions, stock repurchases, cash dividends, contractual obligations, commitments, principal and interest payments on debt, and other liquidity requirements associated with our operations. Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,152 million in 2013 as compared to $1,228 million provided in 2012 and $1,260 million provided in 2011. We received $65 million in interest rate swap proceeds and $61 million in respect of a tax sharing settlement with Hewlett Packard Company during the year ended October 31, 2011. We paid approximately net taxes of $110 million in 2013, as compared to net $86 million in taxes in 2012 and net $22 million in 2011. In 2013, accounts receivable provided cash of $14 million, provided cash of $19 million in 2012 and provided cash of $11 million in 2011. Days' sales outstanding were 47 days in 2013, 47 days in 2012 and 45 days in 2011. Accounts payable used cash of $27 million in 2013, used cash of $31 million in 2012 and used cash of $35 million in 2011. Cash used in inventory was $100 million in 2013, $52 million in 2012 and $208 million in 2011. Inventory days on-hand increased to 118 days in 2013 compared to 108 days in 2012 and 100 days in 2011. The increase in days on-hand was due to the reduced shipment volume within our electronic measurement business. We contributed $30 million, $30 million and $33 million to our U.S. defined benefit plans in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. We contributed $89 million, $54 million and $59 million to our non-U.S. defined benefit plans in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. We contributed $1 million to our U.S. post-retirement benefit plans in 2013 and did not contribute to our U.S. post-retirement benefit plans in 2012 or 2011. Our non-U.S. defined benefit plans are generally funded ratably throughout the year. Total contributions in 2013 were $120 million or 43 percent more than 2012. Total contributions in 2012 were $84 million or 9 percent less than 2011. Our annual contributions are highly dependent on the relative performance of our assets versus our projected liabilities, among other factors. We expect to contribute approximately $101 million to our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit plans and $2 million to our U.S. post-retirement benefit plans during 2014. Net Cash Provided by/Used in Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities in 2013 was $248 million as compared to net cash used of $2,366 million in 2012 primarily due to the acquisition of Dako. In 2011, net cash provided by investing activities was $1,294 million. Investments in property, plant and equipment were $195 million in 2013, $194 million in 2012 and $188 million in 2011. Proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment were $2 million in 2013, zero in 2012 and $18 million in 2011. In 2013, we invested $21 million in acquisitions of businesses and intangible assets compared to $2,257 million in 2012 and $98 million in 2011. Proceeds from the sale of investment securities in 2013 were $12 million, $5 million in 2012 and $16 million in 2011. The amounts of and changes in restricted cash were not material for the fiscal year ended 2012. In 2011 restricted cash decreased $1,545 million mostly due to the reclassification of restricted cash to cash and cash equivalents following the settlement of the World Trade repurchase obligation. Net Cash Provided by/Used in Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities in 2013 was $554 million compared to $37 million in 2012 and $1,693 million in 2011, respectively. Treasury stock repurchases On November 19, 2009 our board of directors approved a share-repurchase program to reduce or eliminate dilution of basic outstanding shares in connection with issuances of stock under the company's equity incentive plans (the "2009 repurchase 47 Table of Contents program"). The 2009 repurchase program did not require the company to acquire a specific number of shares and could be suspended or discontinued at any time. There was no fixed termination date for the 2009 repurchase program. On January 16, 2013 , our board of directors terminated the 2009 repurchase program and approved a new share-repurchase program (the "2013 repurchase program"). The 2013 repurchase program authorized the use of up to $500 million to repurchase shares of the company's common stock in open market transactions, inclusive of any amounts repurchased since November 1, 2012. On May 14, 2013 we announced that our board of directors authorized an increase of $500 million to the 2013 repurchase program bringing the cumulative authorization to $1 billion . Unless terminated earlier by the board of directors, the 2013 repurchase program is designed to cover purchases until the end of the calendar year and any unused portion may be used in the calendar year 2014. The 2013 repurchase program does not require the company to acquire a specific number of shares and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. As of October 31, 2013, the remaining amount to be repurchased under the 2013 program is $100 million. We repurchased the remaining $100 million worth of shares under the 2013 repurchase program in November 2013. For the year ended October 31, 2013, we repurchased 20 million shares for $900 million. All such shares and related costs are held as treasury stock and accounted for using the cost method. For the year ended October 31, 2012 we repurchased approximately 5 million shares for $172 million. For the year ended October 31, 2011 we repurchased 12 million shares for $497 million. On November 22, 2013 we announced that our board of directors has authorized a new share repurchase program effective upon the conclusion of the company's existing $1 billion repurchase program. The new program is designed to reduce or eliminate dilution resulting from issuance of stock under the company's employee equity incentive programs to maintain a weighted average share count of approximately 335 million diluted shares. Dividends During the year ended October 31, 2013, cash dividends of $0.46 per share, or $156 million were declared and paid on the company's outstanding common stock. During the year ended October 31, 2012, cash dividends of $0.30 per share, or $104 million were declared and paid on the company's outstanding common stock. The timing and amounts of any future dividends are subject to determination and approval by our board of directors. On November 22, 2013 we announced that our board of directors has authorized a 10 percent increase in the quarterly dividend to $0.132 per share. The dividend was declared on November 22, 2013 and will be paid on January 22, 2014 to all stockholders of record as of close of business on December 31, 2013. Credit Facility On October 20, 2011, we entered into a five-year credit agreement, which provides for a $400 million unsecured credit facility that will expire on October 20, 2016. The company may use amounts borrowed under the facility for general corporate purposes. As of October 31, 2013 the company has no borrowings outstanding under the facility. We were in compliance with the covenants for the credit facilities during the year ended October 31, 2013. As a result of the Dako acquisition, we have a credit facility in Danish Krone equivalent of $9 million with a Danish financial institution. As of October 31, 2013 the company had no borrowings outstanding under the facility. Short-term debt On July 13, 2010, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $250 million in senior notes ("2013 senior notes"). The 2013 senior notes matured on July 15, 2013 and were paid in full. On September 9, 2009, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $250 million in senior notes ("2012 senior notes"). The 2012 senior notes matured on September 14, 2012 and were paid in full. Long-term debt In September 2009, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $500 million in senior notes ("2015 senior notes"). The 2015 senior notes were issued at 99.69% of their principal amount. The notes will mature on September 14, 2015, and bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.50% per annum. The interest is payable semi-annually on March 14th and September 14th of each year, payments commenced on March 14, 2010. 48 Table of Contents On June 6, 2011, we terminated our interest rate swap contracts related to our 2015 senior notes that represented the notional amount of $500 million. The asset value, including interest receivable, upon termination for these contracts was approximately $31 million and the amount to be amortized at October 31, 2013 was $12 million. The gain is being deferred and amortized to interest expense over the remaining life of the 2015 senior notes. In October 2007, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $600 million in senior notes ("2017 senior notes"). The 2017 senior notes were issued at 99.60% of their principal amount. The notes will mature on November 1, 2017, and bear interest at a fixed rate of 6.50% per annum. The interest is payable semi-annually on May 1st and November 1st of each year and payments commenced on May 1, 2008. On November 25, 2008, we terminated two interest rate swap contracts associated with our 2017 senior notes that represented the notional amount of $400 million. The asset value, including interest receivable, upon termination was approximately $43 million and the amount to be amortized at October 31, 2013 was $22 million. The gain is being deferred and amortized to interest expense over the remaining life of the 2017 senior notes. In July 2010, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $500 million in senior notes ("2020 senior notes"). The 2020 senior notes were issued at 99.54% of their principal amount. The notes will mature on July 15, 2020, and bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.00% per annum. The interest is payable semi-annually on January 15th and July 15th of each year, payments commenced on January 15, 2011. On August 9, 2011, we terminated our interest rate swap contracts related to our 2020 senior notes that represented the notional amount of $500 million. The asset value, including interest receivable, upon termination for these contracts was approximately $34 million and the amount to be amortized at October 31, 2012 was $26 million. The gain is being deferred and amortized to interest expense over the remaining life of the 2020 senior notes. In September 2012, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $400 million in senior notes ("2022 senior notes"). The senior notes were issued at 99.80% of their principal amount. The notes will mature on October 1, 2022, and bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.20% per annum. The interest is payable semi-annually on April 1st and October 1st of each year, payments commenced on April 1, 2013. We used part of the proceeds from the issuance of the 2022 senior notes to pay the 2012 senior notes. In June 2013, the company issued aggregate principal amount of $600 million in senior notes ("2023 senior notes"). The 2023 senior notes were issued at 99.544% of their principal amount. The notes will mature on July 15, 2023 and bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.875% per annum. Interest is payable semi annually on January 15th and July 15th of each year and payments will commence January 15, 2014. All notes issued are unsecured and rank equally in right of payment with all of Agilent's other senior unsecured indebtedness. The company incurred issuance costs of $5 million each in connection with the 2017 and 2023 senior notes and incurred $3 million each in connection with the 2015, 2020 and 2022 senior notes. These costs were capitalized in other assets on the consolidated balance sheet and the costs are being amortized to interest expense over the term of the senior notes. As of October 31, 2013, and as a result of the Dako acquisition, we have a mortgage debt, secured on buildings in Denmark, in Danish Krone equivalent of $46 million aggregate principal outstanding with a Danish financial institution. The loan has a variable interest rate based on 3 months Copenhagen Interbank Rate ("Cibor") and will mature on September 30, 2027. Interest payments are made in March, June, September and December of each year. Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Other We have contractual commitments for non-cancelable operating leases. See Note 17 "Commitments and Contingencies", to our consolidated financial statements for further information on our non-cancelable operating leases. Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which are based on normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from fluctuations related to global economics and markets. Our cash balances are generated and held in many locations throughout the world. Local government regulations may restrict our ability to move cash balances to meet cash needs under certain circumstances. We do not currently expect such regulations and restrictions to impact our ability to pay vendors and conduct operations throughout our global organization. Contractual Commitments 49 Table of Contents Our cash flows from operations are dependent on a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax and other payments. As a result, the impact of contractual obligations on our liquidity and capital resources in future periods should be analyzed in conjunction with such factors. The following table summarizes our total contractual obligations at October 31, 2013 for operations and excludes amounts recorded in our consolidated balance sheet (in millions): Less than one year One to three years Three to five years More than five years Operating leases $ 56 $ 78 $ 33 $ 6 Commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers 727 21 Other purchase commitments 70 Retirement plans 103 Total $ 956 $ 99 $ 33 $ 6 Operating leases. Commitments under operating leases relate primarily to leasehold property, see Note 17, "Commitments and Contingencies". Commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers. We purchase components from a variety of suppliers and use several contract manufacturers to provide manufacturing services for our products. During the normal course of business, we issue purchase orders with estimates of our requirements several months ahead of the delivery dates. However, our agreements with these suppliers usually provide us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to firm orders being placed. Typically purchase orders outstanding with delivery dates within 30 days are non-cancelable. Therefore, only approximately 55 percent of our reported purchase commitments arising from these agreements are firm, non-cancelable, and unconditional commitments. We expect to fulfill most of our purchase commitments for inventory within one year. In addition to the above mentioned commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers, we record a liability for firm, non-cancelable and unconditional purchase commitments for quantities in excess of our future demand forecasts consistent with our policy relating to excess inventory. As of October 31, 2013, the liability for our firm, non-cancelable and unconditional purchase commitments was $5 million, compared to $5 million as of October 31, 2012 and 2011. These amounts are included in other accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet. Other purchase commitments. We have categorized "other purchase commitments" related to contracts with professional services suppliers. Typically we can cancel these contracts within 90 days without penalties. For those contracts that are not cancelable within 90 days without penalties, we are disclosing the amounts we are obligated to pay to a supplier under each contract in that period before such contract can be cancelled. Our contractual obligations with these suppliers under "other purchase commitments" were approximately $70 million within the next year. Retirement Plans. Commitments under the retirement plans relate to expected contributions to be made to our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit plans and to our post-retirement medical plans for the next year only. Contributions after next year are impractical to estimate. We had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as of October 31, 2013 or October 31, 2012. On Balance Sheet Arrangements The following table summarizes our total contractual obligations recorded in our consolidated balance sheet pertaining to our long-term debt as of October 31, 2013 (in millions): Less than one year One to three years Three to five years More than five years Senior notes $ $ 1,100 $ $ 1,500 Other debt 46 Total $ $ 1,100 $ $ 1,546 We have contractual obligations for interest payments on the above debts. Interest rates and payment dates are detailed in 50 Table of Contents "Long-term debt". Other long-term liabilities include $341 million and $320 million of liabilities for uncertain tax positions as of October 31, 2013 and October 31, 2012, respectively. We are unable to accurately predict when these amounts will be realized or released. However, it is reasonably possible that there could be significant changes to our unrecognized tax benefits in the next twelve months due to either the expiration of a statute of limitations or a tax audit settlement. 51 Table of Contents 
