CIK: 1090872
Company Name: AGILENT TECHNOLOGIES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-12-21


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This report contains forward-looking statements including, without limitation, statements regarding trends, seasonality, cyclicality and growth in, and drivers of, the markets we sell into, our strategic direction, our future effective tax rate and tax valuation allowance, earnings from our foreign subsidiaries, remediation activities, new product and service introductions, the ability of our products to meet market needs, changes to our manufacturing processes, the use of contract manufacturers, the impact of local government regulations on our ability to pay vendors or conduct operations, our liquidity position, our ability to generate cash from operations, growth in our businesses, our investments, the potential impact of adopting new accounting pronouncements, our financial results, our purchase commitments, our contributions to our pension plans, the selection of discount rates and recognition of any gains or losses for our benefit plans, our cost-control activities, savings and headcount reduction recognized from our restructuring programs, the closing of the proposed Varian transaction, our stock repurchase program, our transition to lower-cost regions, the existence, length or timing of an economic recovery that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to various factors, including those discussed in Item 1A and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Revisions to Financial Statement Presentation. We have revised our consolidated balance sheet as of October 31, 2008 to correct an error in the classification of deferred tax assets and liabilities. This revision does not impact the consolidated statement of operations or the consolidated statement of cash flows for any period. During the April 30, 2009 quarter-end process, we noted that the October 31, 2008 U.S. deferred tax valuation allowances and certain deferred tax assets/ deferred tax liabilities were misclassified on the balance sheet as a result of improperly applying the jurisdictional netting rules. We have therefore revised our balance sheet as of October 31, 2008 by decreasing other long-term liabilities by $435 million and decreasing other long-term assets by $404 million, decreasing other current assets by $26 million and increasing other accrued liabilities by $5 million. FASB Accounting Standards Codification. In June 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") introduced the "FASB Accounting Standards Codification " and the Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles", ("The Codification or ASC"). The Codification, which was launched on July 1, 2009, became the single source of authoritative nongovernmental U.S. GAAP, superseding existing literature issued by FASB, American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Emerging Issues Task Force and other related literature. The Codification eliminates the GAAP hierarchy and establishes one level of authoritative guidance for GAAP. All other literature is considered non-authoritative. The Codification is effective for financial statements issued for interim and annual periods ending after September 15, 2009. We have adopted the Codification in the quarter ending October 31, 2009 and provided the appropriate references to the Codification, where appropriate. There has been no change to our financial statements due to the implementation of the Codification. Overview and Executive Summary Agilent is the world's premier measurement company, providing core electronic and bio-analytical measurement solutions to the communications, electronics, life sciences and chemical analysis industries. 39 Table of Contents In the first fiscal quarter of 2009, we formed a new operating segment from our existing businesses: the semiconductor and board test segment. The new segment covers semiconductor equipment and services sold to semiconductor manufacturing and printed circuit board assembly customers. In addition, in the first quarter of 2009, we moved microscopy measurement from the bio-analytical measurement segment to the electronic measurement segment. All historical segment numbers have been recast to conform to this reporting structure in our financial statements. The Agilent business is comprised of the electronic measurement business, the bio-analytical measurement business and the semiconductor and board test business. Our fiscal year end is October 31. Unless otherwise stated, all years and dates refer to our fiscal year. Agilent's net revenue in 2009 was $4,481 million, a decrease of 22 percent when compared to 2008. Foreign currency movements accounted for 2 percentage points of revenue decline in 2009 compared to 2008. Bio-analytical measurement revenues decreased 6 percent in 2009 compared to last year with foreign currency movements accounting for 4 percentage points of revenue decline. Within bio-analytical measurement, life sciences revenues declined 5 percent in 2009 compared to 2008 with declines in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology markets and a modest increase in demand within the academic and government research markets. Also within bio-analytical measurement, chemical analysis revenues declined 7 percent compared to 2008 with the food safety market showing strength throughout the year, but other markets down compared to last year. Electronic measurement revenues decreased 30 percent in 2009 when compared to 2008. Within electronic measurement, revenues in general purpose test decreased 23 percent when compared to last year with aerospace and defense markets declining moderately and semiconductor related markets remaining depressed. Also within electronic measurement, communications test markets were particularly weak and fell 39 percent in 2009 compared to 2008. Our semiconductor and board test business continued to experience depressed market conditions in 2009 and revenue declined 54 percent compared to 2008. Agilent's total net revenue in 2008 increased 7 percent in comparison to 2007. Foreign currency movements accounted for 3 percentage points of revenue growth in 2008 when compared to 2007 and a further 1 percentage point increase in revenue was attributable to acquisitions in 2008 when compared to 2007. Net loss was $31 million in 2009 and net income of $693 million in 2008 and $638 million in 2007. In 2009, 2008 and 2007 we generated operating cash flows of $408 million, $756 million and $969 million, respectively. As of October 31, 2009 and 2008 we had cash and cash equivalents balances of $2,479 million and $1,405 million, respectively. We announced restructuring activities in December 2008, February 2009 and March 2009 in response to the deterioration of economic conditions. The restructuring activities were combined under a single restructuring plan (the "FY 2009 Plan") and are part of a series of actions taken by Agilent in response to the current economic situation. In connection with the combined restructuring plan, we expect to record in aggregate approximately $315 million in pre-tax restructuring and other charges related to business and infrastructure cost reduction. Total restructuring and other special charges of $267 million have been incurred in the year ended October 31, 2009 with respect to these actions. A significant portion of these charges has resulted and will continue to result in cash expenditures. When completed, these actions together are expected to result in future annual operating savings of approximately $525 million and workforce reductions of approximately 3,800 regular positions. We completed the majority of these activities related to the FY 2009 Plan by October 31, 2009 with the remainder expected to be completed by the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2010. As of October 31, 2009 approximately 600 employees within electronic measurment are pending termination under the FY 2009 Plan. 40 Table of Contents On July 26, 2009, Agilent, Varian, Inc. ("Varian"), and Cobalt Acquisition Corp., a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of Agilent, entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the "Merger Agreement"). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, Varian would become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Agilent. Varian is a leading worldwide supplier of scientific instrumentation and associated consumables for life science and applied market applications. The estimated $1.5 billion total purchase price of Varian includes $52 cash per share of Varian's common stock, the cashing out of in the money stock options (after acceleration) and assumed debt. The transaction has been approved by shareholders of Varian and is expected to be completed after achieving customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals. We may finance the purchase price of Varian using a portion of the proceeds from our September 2009 offering of senior notes and other existing cash. On October 30, 2009 we completed the sale of our Data Networks Product Line ("DNPL") to Ixia (Nasdaq: XXIA) for $44 million in cash. DNPL comprises the N2X family of products for next-generation internet protocol ("IP") performance testing. Ixia is a leading provider of converged IP performance test systems and service verification platforms for wireless and wired infrastructures. We recorded the gain on this divestiture in other income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations. Looking forward, we have seen signs that our businesses may have reached the bottom of the economic downturn. We remain committed to delivering performance consistent with Agilent's operating model. We have announced that starting in the first quarter of 2010, Agilent will report in the following three segments: electronic measurement, chemical analysis and life sciences. The electronic measurement segment will recombine electronic measurement and semiconductor and board test, which were reported separately in 2009 (see "2010 Segment Reporting Changes"). Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable. Although these estimates are based on management's best knowledge of current events and actions that may impact the company in the future, actual results may be different from the estimates. Our critical accounting policies are those that affect our financial statements materially and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. Those policies are revenue recognition, inventory valuation, investment impairments, share-based compensation, retirement and post-retirement plan assumptions, goodwill and purchased intangible assets, restructuring and asset impairment charges and accounting for income taxes. Revenue recognition. We enter into agreements to sell products (hardware or software), services, and other arrangements (multiple element arrangements) that include combinations of products and services. Revenue from product sales, net of trade discounts and allowances, is recognized provided that persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the price is fixed or determinable, and collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery is considered to have occurred when title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer. Revenue is reduced for estimated product returns, when appropriate. For sales that include customer-specified acceptance criteria, revenue is recognized after the acceptance criteria have been met. For products that include installation, if the installation meets the criteria to be considered a separate element, product revenue is recognized upon delivery, and recognition of installation revenue occurs when the installation is complete. Otherwise, neither the product nor the installation revenue is recognized until the installation is complete. Revenue from services is deferred and recognized over the contractual period 41 Table of Contents or as services are rendered and accepted by the customer. When arrangements include multiple elements, we use verifiable objective evidence of fair value or vendor-specific objective evidence of fair value for software to allocate revenue to the elements and recognize revenue when the criteria for revenue recognition have been met for each element. The amount of product revenue recognized is affected by our judgments as to whether an arrangement includes multiple elements and if so, whether fair value exists for those elements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the ability to establish fair value for those elements could affect the timing of the revenue recognition. Inventory valuation. We assess the valuation of our inventory on a quarterly basis and periodically write down the value for estimated excess and obsolete inventory based upon estimates about future demand and actual usage. Such estimates are difficult to make under most economic conditions. The excess balance determined by this analysis becomes the basis for our excess inventory charge. Our excess inventory review process includes analysis of sales forecasts, managing product rollovers and working with manufacturing to maximize recovery of excess inventory. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional write-downs may be required. If actual market conditions are more favorable than anticipated, inventory previously written down may be sold to customers, resulting in lower cost of sales and higher income from operations than expected in that period. Investment impairments. We recognize an impairment charge when the decline in the fair value of our equity and debt securities and our cost-method investments below their cost basis are judged to be other-than-temporary. Significant judgment is used to identify events or circumstances that would likely have a significant adverse effect on the future use of the investment. We consider various factors in determining whether an impairment is other-than-temporary, including the severity and duration of the impairment, forecasted recovery, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the investee, and our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in market value. Share-based compensation. We account for share-based awards in accordance with the authoritative guidance. Under the authoritative guidance, share-based compensation expense is primarily based on estimated grant date fair value which generally uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model and is recognized on a straight-line basis. Our estimate of share-based compensation expense requires a number of complex and subjective assumptions including our stock price volatility, employee exercise patterns (expected life of the options), future forfeitures and related tax effects. We consider the historical option exercise behavior of our employees in estimating the expected life of our options granted, which we believe is representative of future behavior. In 2008 and 2007 we used implied volatility of Agilent's publicly traded, similar priced stock options to estimate the expected stock price volatility assumption for employee stock option awards. In 2009, we moved to historical volatility of Agilent's stock options over the most recent historical period equivalent to the expected life. In reaching this conclusion, we have considered many factors including the extent to which our options are currently traded and our ability to find traded options in the current market with similar terms and prices to the options we are valuing. A 10 percent increase in our estimated volatility from 36 percent to 46 percent for our most recent employee stock option grant would generally increase the value of an award and the associated compensation cost by approximately 23 percent if no other factors were changed. In the first quarter of 2009, we revised our estimate of the expected life of our employee stock options from 4.6 years to 4.4 years. In revising this estimate, we considered the historical option exercise behavior of our employees. In the first quarter of 2009, we granted the majority of our employee stock options to executive employees and the review of our data indicated that our executive 42 Table of Contents employees, on average, exercise their options at 4.4 years. See Note 3, "Share-Based Compensation," to the consolidated financial statements for more information. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, changes in assumptions could materially impact our reported financial results. Retirement and post-retirement benefit plan assumptions. Retirement and post-retirement benefit plan costs are a significant cost of doing business. They represent obligations that will ultimately be settled sometime in the future and therefore are subject to estimation. Pension accounting is intended to reflect the recognition of future benefit costs over the employees' average expected future service to Agilent based on the terms of the plans and investment and funding decisions. To estimate the impact of these future payments and our decisions concerning funding of these obligations, we are required to make assumptions using actuarial concepts within the framework of accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Two critical assumptions are the discount rate and the expected long-term return on plan assets. Other important assumptions include the health care cost trend rate, expected future salary increases, expected future increases to benefit payments, expected retirement dates, employee turnover, retiree mortality rates, and portfolio composition. We evaluate these assumptions at least annually. The discount rate is used to determine the present value of future benefit payments at the measurement date October 31 for both U.S. and non-U.S. plans. The U.S. discount rates were determined by matching the expected plan benefit payments against an industry discount curve. The discount rate decreased significantly over the prior year from 8.5 percent to 5.25 percent due to lower bond yields. The discount rate for non-U.S. plans was generally based on published rates for high quality corporate bonds and either remained unchanged or decreased. Lower discount rates increase present values and subsequent year pension expense; higher discount rates decrease present values and subsequent year pension expense. The expected long-term return on plan assets is estimated using current and expected asset allocations as well as historical and expected returns. Plan assets are valued at fair value. A one percent change in the estimated long-term return on plan assets for 2009 would result in a $5 million impact on U.S. pension expense and a $15 million impact on non-U.S. pension expense. The net periodic pension and post-retirement benefit costs recorded in operations excluding curtailments and settlements were $103 million in 2009, $15 million in 2008, and $57 million in 2007. Goodwill and purchased intangible assets. Agilent reviews goodwill for impairment annually during our fourth fiscal quarter and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. As defined in the authoritative guidance, a reporting unit is an operating segment, or one level below an operating segment. We have aggregated components of an operating segment that have similar economic characteristics into our reporting units. We have three reporting units for goodwill impairment testing purposes: electronic measurement, bio-analytical measurement, and semiconductor and board test. We test goodwill for possible impairment by first determining the fair value of the related reporting unit and comparing this value to the recorded net assets of the reporting unit, including goodwill. The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill is highly subjective and requires significant judgment, as our businesses operate in a number of markets and geographical regions. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on an income approach, whereby we calculate the 43 Table of Contents fair value of each reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows, which are formed by evaluating historical trends, current budgets, operating plans and industry data. We evaluate the reasonableness of the fair value calculations of our reporting units by reconciling the total of the fair values of all of our reporting units to our total market capitalization, taking into account an appropriate control premium. We then compare the carrying value of our reporting units to the fair value calculations based on the income approach. Estimates of the future cash flows associated with the businesses are critical to these assessments. The assumptions used in the fair value calculation change from year to year and include revenue growth rates, operating margins, risk adjusted discount rates and future economic and market conditions. Changes in these assumptions based on changed economic conditions or business strategies could result in material impairment charges in future periods. The circumstances that could trigger a goodwill impairment could include, but are not limited to, the following items to the extent that management believes the occurrence of one or more would make it more likely than not that we would fail step 1 of the goodwill impairment test: significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, unanticipated competition, a loss of key personnel, a more-likely-than-not expectation that a reporting unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise disposed of, a portion of a reporting unit's goodwill has been included in the carrying amounts of a business that will be disposed or if our market capitalization is below our net book value. We have considered the negative effects of the current downturn in the business environment in evaluating whether we should perform interim goodwill impairment testing. Due to the significant business downturn in the semiconductor and board test reporting unit, we performed step 1 of the goodwill impairment test during the first quarter of 2009 and determined that there was no impairment at that time. The results of our test for goodwill impairment, as of September 30, 2009, showed that the estimated fair values of our electronic measurement, bio-analytical measurement, and semiconductor and board test reporting units exceeded their carrying values by approximately $3.0 billion, $5.5 billion, and $0.2 billion, respectively. A 1 percent increase in the discount rate lowered the fair value by approximately 14 percent. There was no impairment of goodwill during the year ended October 31, 2009. We continue to assess the overall environment to determine if we would trigger and fail step 1 of the goodwill impairment test. We continually monitor events and changes in circumstances that could indicate carrying amounts of long-lived assets, including purchased intangible assets, may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we assess the recoverability of long-lived assets by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the total of the undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of those assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. We performed an impairment analysis of purchased intangible assets in 2009 and recorded $16 million of impairment charges primarily related to divested businesses. Restructuring and asset impairment charges. The four main components of our restructuring plans are related to workforce reductions, the consolidation of excess facilities, asset impairments and special charges related to inventory. Workforce reduction charges are accrued when it is determined that a liability has been incurred, which is generally after individuals have been notified of their termination dates and expected severance payments. Plans to consolidate excess facilities result in charges for lease termination fees and future commitments to pay lease charges, net of estimated future sublease income. We recognize charges for consolidation of excess facilities generally when we have vacated the premises. These estimates were derived using the authoritative accounting guidance. We have also assessed the recoverability of our long-lived assets, by determining 44 Table of Contents whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through undiscounted future cash flows. Asset impairments primarily consist of property, plant and equipment and are based on an estimate of the amounts and timing of future cash flows related to the expected future remaining use and ultimate sale or disposal of buildings and equipment net of costs to sell. The charges related to inventory include estimated future inventory disposal payments that we are contractually obliged to make to our suppliers and reserves taken against inventory on hand. If the amounts and timing of cash flows from restructuring activities are significantly different from what we have estimated, the actual amount of restructuring and asset impairment charges could be materially different, either higher or lower, than those we have recorded. Accounting for income taxes. We must make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of tax credits, benefits and deductions, and in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities, which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes, as well as interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to our tax provision in a subsequent period. Significant management judgment is also required in determining whether deferred tax assets will be realized in full or in part. When it is more likely than not that all or some portion of specific deferred tax assets such as net operating losses or foreign tax credit carryforwards will not be realized, a valuation allowance must be established for the amount of the deferred tax assets that cannot be realized. We consider all available positive and negative evidence on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis when assessing whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. We consider evidence such as our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in recent years and our forecast of future taxable income. At October 31, 2009, we provided partial valuation allowances for our U.S. deferred tax assets and full or partial valuation allowances on certain foreign deferred tax assets. We intend to maintain partial or full valuation allowances until sufficient positive evidence exists to support reversal of a valuation allowance in a given taxing jurisdiction. We have not provided for all U.S. federal income and foreign withholding taxes on the undistributed earnings of some of our foreign subsidiaries because we intend to reinvest such earnings indefinitely. Should we decide to remit this income to the U.S. in a future period, our provision for income taxes may increase materially in that period. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax law and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions. Although the guidance on the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes the use of a recognition and measurement model, the determination of whether an uncertain tax position has met those thresholds will continue to require significant judgment by management. If the ultimate resolution of tax uncertainties is different from what is currently estimated, a material impact on income tax expense could result. Adoption of New Pronouncements See Note 2, "New Accounting Pronouncements," to the consolidated financial statements for a description of new accounting pronouncements. Restructuring Costs, Asset Impairments and Other Charges In December 2008, we announced the FY 2009 Plan. Initially, we expected to reduce our annual operating expenses by reducing approximately 500 positions of the global workforce of regular employees. In February 2009, we announced we had expanded the FY 2009 Plan to include actions to 45 Table of Contents exit the inspection businesses in our semiconductor and board test segment and to restructure our global infrastructure organization. In March 2009, we announced that the FY 2009 Plan had been expanded further to restructure our electronic measurement and semiconductor and board test segments in response to the continuing deterioration of economic conditions. Under the FY 2009 Plan, we expect to record in aggregate approximately $315 million in pre-tax restructuring and other charges related to business and infrastructure cost reduction. We expect that a significant proportion of these charges will result in cash expenditures. When completed, these actions together are expected to result in annual operating savings of approximately $525 million and workforce reductions of approximately 3,800 regular positions. Total restructuring and other special charges of $267 million have been incurred in the year ended October 31, 2009 with respect to these actions. Of the $267 million, $27 million related to asset impairments and $20 million related to special charges for excess inventory as a result of exiting the inspection businesses in our semiconductor and board test segment and other excess inventory charges incurred as part of our restructuring of the electronic measurement businesses. We completed the majority of these activities related to the FY 2009 Plan by October 31, 2009 with the remainder expected to be completed by the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2010. As of October 31, 2009 approximately 600 employees within electronic measurement are pending termination under the FY 2009 Plan. As a result of these actions, the average future working lifetime of the employees remaining in our retirement and post retirement benefit plans decreased and accordingly, we recorded a $16 million net curtailment gain in the year ended October 31, 2009. Foreign Currency Our revenues, costs and expenses, and monetary assets and liabilities are exposed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates as a result of our global operating and financing activities. We hedge revenues, expenses and balance sheet exposures that are not denominated in the functional currencies of our subsidiaries on a short term and anticipated basis. We do experience some fluctuations within individual lines of the consolidated statement of operations and balance sheet because our hedging program is not designed to offset the currency movements in each category of revenues, expenses, monetary assets and liabilities. Our hedging program is designed to hedge currency movements on a relatively short-term basis (rolling twelve month period). Therefore, we are exposed to currency fluctuations over the longer term. Results from Operations Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Orders $ 4,486 $ 5,750 $ 5,441 (22 )% 6 % Net revenue: Products $ 3,566 $ 4,804 $ 4,505 (26 )% 7 % Services and other $ 915 $ 970 $ 915 (6 )% 6 % Total net revenue $ 4,481 $ 5,774 $ 5,420 (22 )% 7 % 46 Table of Contents Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 % of total net revenue: Products 80 % 83 % 83 % (3) ppts Services and other 20 % 17 % 17 % 3 ppts Total 100 % 100 % 100 % Agilent orders decreased 22 percent in 2009 compared to 2008. Our bio-analytical measurement business experienced weak market activity and recorded an order decrease of 8 percent in 2009 compared to last year. Electronic measurement orders were down compared to 2008 by 28 percent with order weakness most pronounced in communications test. Net revenue in 2009 was $4,481 million, a 22 percent decrease over the $5,774 million net revenue recorded in 2008. Foreign currency movements accounted for 2 percentage points of revenue decline in 2009 compared to 2008. Net revenue from services declined 6 percent in 2009 versus a 26 percent decline in product revenues. Revenue decreased in both bio-analytical measurement and electronic measurement when compared to 2008, but there were signs that there was a recovery in a number of end markets towards the end of 2009. Net revenue in 2008 was $5,774 million, a 7 percent increase over the $5,420 million net revenue recorded in 2007. Foreign currency movements accounted for 3 percentage points of revenue growth in 2008 when compared to 2007 and a further 1 percentage point increase in revenue was attributable to acquisitions in 2008 when compared to 2007. Services and other revenue include revenue generated from servicing our installed base of products, warranty extensions and consulting. Services and other revenue decreased 6 percent in 2009 as compared to 2008. We saw relative strength in aftermarket services, including service contract activity which contributed to the relative stability in service revenue. Services and other revenue increased 6 percent in 2008 compared to 2007. Bio-analytical measurement revenues decreased 6 percent in 2009 when compared to 2008 with decreases in both life sciences and chemical analysis businesses of 5 percent and 7 percent, respectively. Within life sciences, we saw modest growth in revenue in the academic and government markets, but weakness in pharmaceutical and biotechnology markets. Within chemical analysis, all markets recorded revenue decreases in 2009 when compared to 2008 with the exception of food safety which reported strong results driven by analysis of contaminated foods and worldwide regulatory efforts. Electronic measurement revenues decreased 30 percent in 2009 when compared to 2008 with sustained weakness in general purpose and communication test down 23 percent and 39 percent, respectively. Within general purpose test, the aerospace and defense market showed signs of recovery toward the end of 2009, but other markets remained difficult and demand declined over the year. Communication test revenues were depressed throughout the year across all markets when compared to 2008. The semiconductor and board test business reported a decline in revenues of 54 percent in 2009 when compared to 2008 as markets declined markedly. Backlog On October 31, 2009, our unfilled orders for the electronic measurement business were approximately $630 million, as compared to approximately $610 million at October 31, 2008. On 47 Table of Contents October 31, 2009, our unfilled orders for the bio-analytical measurement business were approximately $380 million, as compared to approximately $360 million at October 31, 2008. Within our semiconductor and board test business our unfilled orders were approximately $40 million on October 31, 2009 as compared to approximately $60 million at October 31, 2008. We expect that a large majority of the unfilled orders for all three businesses will be delivered to customers within six months. On average, our unfilled orders represent approximately two months' worth of revenues. In light of this experience, backlog on any particular date, while indicative of short-term revenue performance, is not necessarily a reliable indicator of medium or long-term revenue performance. Costs and Expenses Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 Gross margin on products 52.6 % 57.7 % 57.2 % (5)ppts 1 ppt Gross margin on services and other 45.7 % 43.5 % 42.8 % 2ppts 1 ppt Total gross margin 51.1 % 55.4 % 54.8 % (4)ppts 1 ppt Operating margin 1 % 13.8 % 10.8 % (13)ppts 3 ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 642 $ 704 $ 685 (9)% 3% Selling, general and administrative $ 1,603 $ 1,697 $ 1,700 (6)% In 2009, total gross margin decreased 4 percentage points in comparison to 2008. The majority of the decrease in gross margins was related to the drop in volume of revenues. Operating margins in 2009 decreased 13 percentage points as compared to 2008. In January 2009, we implemented wage reductions across the company in response to deteriorating economic conditions. Those payroll reductions resulted in cash savings of approximately $70 million in 2009 and were fully restored to all employees effective November 1, 2009. Research and development expenditures have decreased 9 percent in 2009 compared to 2008. A net decrease in expenses after incurring restructuring costs was attributable to lower variable pay and wage reductions. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 6 percent during the year. The net decrease in expenses after incurring restructuring costs was due to the expense controls we have implemented, and in particular, lower variable pay, wage reductions and reduced commissions. Gross inventory charges were $54 million in 2009, $24 million in 2008 and $21 million in 2007. Sales of previously written down inventory were $8 million in 2009, $6 million in 2008 and $5 million in 2007. Our research and development efforts focus on potential new products and product improvements covering a wide variety of technologies, none of which is individually significant to our operations. We conduct five types of research and development: basic research, which contributes to the fundamental understanding of areas critical to our future; foundation technologies, which enables fundamental advances across all businesses; communications, which creates technologies to enable pervasive access to information; life sciences, which enables next-generation pharmaceuticals and improved patient outcomes; and measurement, which provides critical advances in test and measurement electronics and systems. Our research seeks to improve on various technical 48 Table of Contents competencies in electronics such as compound semiconductor devices, digital imaging systems and microfabrication technologies; software, systems and solutions such as applied mathematics, knowledge management and measurement science; life sciences such as computational biology, molecular diagnostics and high-throughput measurements; and photonics, such as precision automation technology, optical switching and high-speed optical links. In each of these research fields, we conduct research that is focused on specific product development for release in the short-term as well as other research that is intended to be the foundation for future products over a longer time-horizon. Some of our product development research is designed to improve on the more than 20,000 products already in production, other research is on major new product releases, and yet other focused on developing new product segments for the future. Due to the breadth of research and development projects across all of our businesses, there are a number of drivers of this expense. Net loss in 2009 was $31 million. Net income in 2008 and 2007 was $693 million and $638 million, respectively. At October 31, 2009, our headcount was approximately 16,800 compared to 19,600 in 2008 and 19,400 in 2007. Provision for Income Taxes Years Ended October 31, 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Provision for income taxes $ 38 $ 122 $ 32 For 2009, the annual effective tax rate was 543 percent on operations. The 543 percent operations tax rate reflects that our structure has a fixed component of tax and that on reduced profitability unusual tax rate results. The tax rate also includes tax on earnings in jurisdictions that have low effective tax rates. In addition, net tax benefits totaling $67 million relating primarily to the lapses of statutes of limitations and tax settlements in foreign jurisdictions are incorporated in the rate. Without considering interest and penalties, the rate reflects taxes in all jurisdictions except the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions in which income tax expense or benefit continues to be offset by adjustments to valuation allowances. We intend to maintain partial or full valuation allowances in these jurisdictions until sufficient positive evidence exists to support the reversal of the valuation allowances. For 2008, the annual effective tax rate was 15 percent on operations. The 15 percent operations tax rate includes a beneficial release of a portion of the U.S. federal and state valuation allowances which results in U.S. tax expense of nearly zero. It also includes tax on earnings in other jurisdictions that have low effective tax rates. Without considering interest and penalties, the provision for taxes was recorded for income generated in jurisdictions other than the Netherlands, Puerto Rico, Switzerland, the U.S., and the U.K. where we have recorded valuation allowances. For 2007, the annual effective tax rate was 4.8 percent on operations. The 4.8 percent operations tax rate reflects taxes at an effective tax rate of zero in the U.S. (due to a release of a significant portion of the valuation allowance) and at low effective tax rates in other jurisdictions. The low operations tax rate includes a benefit of $31 million related to valuation allowance adjustments based on changes in other comprehensive income items, portions of which are attributable to increases in currency translation adjustments and to increases in the value of certain stock investments. In addition, the tax rate includes benefits totaling $73 million related to the resolution of primarily non-U.S. tax issues associated with the 2000 spin-off of Agilent from Hewlett-Packard. 49 Table of Contents Agilent enjoys tax holidays in several different jurisdictions, most significantly in Singapore, Malaysia and Switzerland. The tax holidays provide lower rates of taxation on certain classes of income and require various thresholds of investments and employment or specific types of income in those jurisdictions. As a result of the incentives, the impact of the tax holidays decreased income taxes by $14 million, $112 million and $190 million in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The benefit of the tax holidays on net income per share (diluted) was approximately $0.04, $0.30 and $0.47 in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. During 2003, we established valuation allowances for the deferred tax assets of the U.S. and certain entities in foreign jurisdictions. The valuation allowances require an assessment of both positive and negative evidence when determining whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. Such assessment is required on a jurisdiction by jurisdiction basis. During 2007, we concluded that it is more likely than not that a significant portion of our U.S. federal deferred tax assets would be realized and reversed a portion of the valuation allowance. During 2008, we maintained a partial U.S. federal valuation allowance and concluded that a significant portion of our U.S. state deferred tax assets would be realized and reversed a portion of the valuation allowance. In 2008, the valuation allowance increased substantially as a result of changes to other comprehensive income-related taxes for pensions, certain mark to market investments, currency translation adjustments and an increase in the amount of foreign tax credits. During 2009, we continued to maintain the partial valuation allowances for U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets. In 2009, the valuation allowance increased over the prior year reflecting an offset of an increase in the gross deferred tax liability for other comprehensive income and the increases of the gross deferred tax assets for losses incurred and other operating timing items. The valuation allowance increases are primarily associated with the U.S. and U.K. We intend to maintain partial or full valuation allowances until sufficient positive evidence exists to support reversal of a valuation allowance in a given taxing jurisdiction. Cumulative losses incurred by certain entities in foreign jurisdictions in recent years represent sufficient negative evidence to require maintaining full valuation allowances. In accordance with the guidance on the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, for all U.S. and other tax jurisdictions, we recognize potential liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes and interest will be due. If our estimate of income tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, a further charge to expense would be required. If events occur and the payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be unnecessary, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary. We include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for income taxes on the consolidated statements of operations. Our U.S. federal income tax returns for 2000 through 2007 have been or are under audit by the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS"). In August 2007, we received a Revenue Agent's Report ("RAR") for 2000 through 2002. The RAR proposed many adjustments to taxable income. One adjustment, however, which deals with the use of Agilent's brand name by our foreign affiliates accounts for the majority of the proposed adjustments. In August of 2009, this brand name issue was resolved with no adjustments made to Agilent's taxable income. We continue to meet with the Appeals Office of the IRS in order to resolve the remaining issues associated with the RAR's proposed adjustments. We are uncertain as to how and when these issues will be finally resolved. It may take several years. We believe that any required adjustments however will be more than offset by applying available net operating losses from the years under audit and undisputed tax credits. Based on current information, we believe that the ultimate disposition of these matters is unlikely to have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or liquidity. 50 Table of Contents Global Infrastructure Organization Our global infrastructure organization ("GIO") remains a key component of our operating model. GIO, which includes IT, Workplace Services, HR, Legal and Finance, has reduced expense levels this year while delivering infrastructure support to business operations. In response to deteriorating economic conditions earlier this year, we announced a GIO restructuring program in February 2009. The results of this program brought GIO workforce to a more appropriate size and structure for the current economic realities of our business. All of the actions associated with the restructuring of our GIO have now been taken and are complete. Our global infrastructure costs decreased by 12 percent year-over-year compared to 2008. GIO passes these costs on to our businesses based on their usage of the services provided. GIO has scaled down its staffing over several years, reducing the number of employees in our workforce that provide support services such as finance, IT and workplace services and moved many of our global shared services operations sites to lower cost regions or external service providers. The global infrastructure organization ended 2009 with approximately 2,200 employees, a decline of 250 employees from one year ago and a decline of 300 employees from two years ago. Segment Overview Agilent is a measurement company providing core bio-analytical and electronic measurement solutions to the communications, electronics, life sciences and chemical analysis industries. In the first fiscal quarter of 2009, we formed a new operating segment from our existing businesses: the semiconductor and board test segment. The segment covers semiconductor equipment and services sold to semiconductor manufacturing and printer circuit board assembly customers. In addition, in the first quarter of 2009, we moved microscopy measurement from the bio-analytical measurement segment to the electronic measurement segment. All historical segment numbers have been recast to conform to this reporting structure in our financial statements. Electronic Measurement Our electronic measurement business provides standard and customized electronic measurement instruments and systems monitoring, management and optimization tools for communications networks and services, software design tools and related services that are used in the design, development, manufacture, installation, deployment and operation of electronics equipment, communications networks and services, and microscopy products. Related services include start-up assistance, instrument productivity and application services and instrument calibration and repair. We also offer customization, consulting and optimization services throughout the customer's product lifecycle. Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Orders $ 2,264 $ 3,148 $ 3,102 (28 )% 1 % Net revenue from products $ 1,836 $ 2,775 $ 2,635 (34 )% 5 % Net revenue from services and other 421 453 456 (7 )% (1 )% Total net revenue $ 2,257 $ 3,228 $ 3,091 (30 )% 4 % 51 Table of Contents Electronic measurement orders declined 28 percent in 2009, down from 1 percent growth in 2008. Foreign currency movements accounted for 1 percentage point of the decline in 2009. In our general purpose test business, weakness in the manufacturing market prevailed through the year, while the computers and semiconductor market was similarly depressed. Aerospace and defense demand was strong relative to other markets and performance was stable on the year. In our communications test business, all end markets declined significantly; however, toward the end of 2009 year-over-year rates of decline have slowed or flattened. On a geographic basis, 2009 orders declined 21 percent in the Americas, 30 percent in Europe, 32 percent in Asia and 38 percent in Japan. Orders in 2008 grew 1 percent compared to 2007 as growth in Europe and Asia was offset by declines in the Americas and Japan. Electronic measurement revenues declined 30 percent in 2009 compared to a 4 percent growth in 2008 due to weakness across both general purpose and communications test markets. Foreign currency movements accounted for 1 percentage point of the decline in 2009. Regionally, revenues from the Americas declined 28 percent, while Europe, Japan and Other Asia declined 31 percent, 38 percent and 29 percent respectively from one year ago. Revenues from services declined only 7 percent in 2009 versus a 34 percent decline in product revenues. Upfront service and support contracts provide stability in services revenues performance relative to product revenues. Revenue in 2008 grew 4 percent compared to 2007 as strength in the communications test market was offset by a slight decline in general purpose test. General purpose test revenues of $1,369 million, representing approximately 61 percent of electronic measurement revenues, declined 23 percent in 2009 compared to 2008. Within general purpose test, all market segments declined with relative strength in aerospace and defense offset by steeper declines in computer and semiconductor and other general purpose test business. Government demand in aerospace and defense was stable, particularly in homeland security-related applications for surveillance and intelligence. Weakness persisted in the computer and semiconductor measurement markets due to continued capital spending contraction in both R&D and manufacturing applications. Other general purpose test markets were weak with particular softness in electronic manufacturing and automotive markets. Quarterly year-on-year rates of decline in general purpose end markets have slowed in the second half of the year, but revenue remained down significantly from 2008. Communications test revenues of $888 million, representing approximately 39 percent of electronic measurement revenues, declined 39 percent compared to the same period last year. All communications test end markets experienced double-digit declines compared to 2008. The wireless R&D market, as well as the electronic design automation market, performed better than other submarkets as R&D investment continues for high-speed applications, as well as pre-conformance and interoperability test solutions, particularly for long-term evolution (an emerging wireless standard). Investment in next-generation technology in China increased in the second half of the year. Wireless manufacturing markets declined significantly versus a peak in the second half of 2008 as handset market capacity expansion is limited primarily to smart phones. Capital spending remains limited in the other communications test submarkets. Network equipment manufacturing ("NEM") business declined due to the continued consolidation in the network operator and service provider markets. NEM business remains soft with the majority of investment focused only on critical R&D spending for new technologies, which led to declines in the Broadband R&D and manufacturing market versus a strong 2009 year-over-year compare. Looking forward, while some indications of stabilization and improvement in our electronics measurement markets exist, we expect any recovery to be gradual in the near-term due to on-going market uncertainty. 52 Table of Contents Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the electronic measurement business's margins, expenses and income from operations for 2009 versus 2008 and 2008 versus 2007. Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 Total gross margin 54.8 % 58.5 % 57.2 % (4) ppts 1 ppt Operating margin 1.7 % 14.0 % 11.0 % (12) ppts 3 ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 393 $ 461 $ 464 (15)% (1)% Selling, general and administrative $ 806 $ 977 $ 964 (18)% 1% Income from operations $ 39 $ 451 $ 340 (91)% 33% Gross margins for products and services declined 4 percentage points year-over-year in 2009 due primarily to the significant decline in revenue volume. Volume-adjusted gross margins compared to 2008 improved as expense reductions from restructuring, lower variable pay, wage reductions, lower general and direct infrastructure costs were offset by the unfavorable impact of higher pension expenses and E&O (excess and obsolescence) inventory charges. Gross margins for products and services improved 1 percentage point year-over-year in 2008 as the favorable impact of foreign currency movement and lower overhead costs were nearly offset by changes in product mix and pricing pressure. Research and development expenses in 2009 declined $68 million, or 15 percent, compared to 2008. This decline was driven by lower variable pay, wage reductions, savings from restructuring, lower general infrastructure costs and the favorable year-over-year impact of currency movements, which were offset by higher pension benefit expenses. Research and development expenses in 2008 declined $3 million, or 1 percent, compared to 2007. This decline was driven largely by operational spending reductions that more than offset the unfavorable year-over-year impact of currency movements. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2009 decreased $171 million, or 18 percent, compared to 2008. Year-over-year reductions in selling, general and administrative expenses were similar to R&D and were driven by lower variable pay, wage reductions, savings from restructuring, lower general infrastructure costs, reduced commissions and the favorable year-over-year impact of currency movements, which were offset by higher pension benefit expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2008 increased $13 million, or 1 percent, compared to 2007. This increase was due primarily to the unfavorable impact of foreign currency movement. Operating margins declined by 12 percentage points in 2009 compared to 2008 due to lower revenue volume that was partially offset by structural and operational expense reductions. Operating margins increased by 3 percentage points in 2008 compared to 2007 due to higher revenue volume and structural expense reductions. Income from Operations Income from operations declined by $412 million in 2009 compared to 2008 on a revenue decrease of $971 million, a 42 percent year-over-year operating margin decremental as structural and operational expense reductions offset the unfavorable impact of lower revenue. Income from operations increased by $111 million in 2008 compared to 2007 on a revenue increase of $137 million, 53 Table of Contents an 81 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental due to structural expense reductions that more than offset the unfavorable impact of foreign currency movement. Bio-analytical Measurement Our bio-analytical measurement business provides application-focused solutions that include instruments, software, consumables, and services that enable customers to identify, quantify and analyze the physical and biological properties of substances and products. Our key product categories include: microarrays, microfluidics, electrophoresis, gas chromatography, liquid chromatography, mass spectrometry, software and informatics, laboratory automation and robotics, spectroscopy, and related consumables, reagents and services. Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Orders $ 2,087 $ 2,275 $ 1,894 (8)% 20% Net revenue from products $ 1,617 $ 1,742 $ 1,486 (7)% 17% Net revenue from services and other 446 453 390 (2)% 16% Total net revenue $ 2,063 $ 2,195 $ 1,876 (6)% 17% Order and revenue results for 2009 in bio-analytical measurement were impacted by the significant downturn in the global economy, although the business was able to sustain growth in key markets, including food safety, academic and government. Bio-analytical measurement orders in 2009 declined 8 percent when compared to 2008. We had mixed results across geographies with Americas down 11 percent, Europe down 19 percent and Asia and Japan both up 11 percent when compared to 2008. Foreign currency movements in 2009 accounted for 3 percentage points of the decline in orders when compared to 2008. In our chemical analysis business, we continue to see strength in China and food safety markets. In life sciences, we saw sustained demand from academic and government markets, partially offsetting a slowdown in pharmaceutical and biotechnology markets. In 2008, orders grew 20 percent when compared to 2007. The Stratagene and Velocity11 acquisitions contributed 5 percentage points of the order growth in 2008, when compared to 2007. Bio-analytical measurement revenues in 2009 declined 6 percent compared to 2008 with declines in both life sciences and chemical analysis end markets. Foreign currency movements in 2009 accounted for 4 percentage points of the revenue decline when compared to 2008. Geographically, revenues were down 9 percent in the Americas, 15 percent in Europe, and up 9 percent in Asia in 2009 compared to 2008. Net revenue from services declined only 2 percent in 2009 versus a 7 percent decline in product revenues. In services, expansion in Asia and relative strength in aftermarket services, including service contract activity, contributed to the stability. In 2008, bio-analytical revenues grew 17 percent compared to 2007, with strength across most end markets in chemical analysis and life science, favorable impact from foreign currency movements, and growth from the Stratagene and Velocity11 acquisitions. Chemical analysis revenue, representing approximately 53 percent of the bio-analytical measurement segment, declined 7 percent to $1,094 million in 2009 compared to 2008. Chemical analysis saw declines in petrochemical, environmental, forensics, while the food safety market had 54 Table of Contents robust growth in 2009. Macro-economic conditions worldwide led to reduced capital investments in both instrument replacements and upgrades. Food testing posted strong revenue growth in 2009. Growth in this sector was driven by recent food safety issues in the U.S. causing updated regulations in China, Malaysia and India and by overall increases made to regulatory standards worldwide. Life science revenue, representing approximately 47 percent of the bio-analytical measurement segment, declined 5 percent to $969 million in 2009 compared to 2008. In 2009, we experienced year-over-year declines in the pharmaceutical and biotech markets but modest year-over-year growth in the academic and government markets. We continue to see academic research moving toward the use of high-end mass spectrometry instrumentation to answer complex biological questions and enhance research on proteins, peptides, and small molecules. The market continues to partner and collaborate between not-for-profit organizations and big pharmaceutical and biotech companies. In Asia Pacific, governments are investing in the modernization of their healthcare systems and in improving the quality of pharmaceuticals they produce. Looking forward, we expect modest growth in our major markets. Our chemical analysis market growth is expected to be driven by investments in food safety on a global basis and in environmental testing in China, India and selected Eastern European countries. Our liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy ("LC/MS") and gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy ("GC/MS") systems are well positioned to address these market needs. In life sciences, our differentiated product portfolio provides customers an expanded range of technology offerings along the life sciences workflow. Workflow solutions can span from sample delivery and preparation through sample measurement to data analysis and management. In addition, our ongoing expansion of the LC/MS portfolio, augmented with focused R&D programs will enable Agilent to address the proteomics and metabolomics market needs. Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the bio-analytical measurement business's margins, expenses and income from operations for 2009 versus 2008, and 2008 versus 2007. Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 Total gross margin 54.3 % 53.8 % 53.4 % Operating margin 18.9 % 18.7 % 16.4 % 2 ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 181 $ 188 $ 153 (4)% 22% Selling, general and administrative $ 549 $ 584 $ 542 (6)% 8% Income from operations $ 390 $ 410 $ 307 (5)% 33% Gross margins were relatively flat in 2009 compared to 2008, as lower volume and higher discounts, were offset by lower variable pay, wage reductions, lower global infrastructure costs and favorable currency movements. Gross margins were also flat in 2008 compared to 2007 as improvements in product mix and overhead costs were offset by the impact of unfavorable foreign currency movements and competitive pressures. Research and development expenses declined 4 percent in 2009 compared to 2008. The decline was also driven by lower variable pay, wage reductions, lower global infrastructure costs and favorable foreign currency movements. Research and development expenses grew 22 percent in 2008, compared 55 Table of Contents to 2007. The Stratagene and Velocity11 acquisitions accounted for 13 percentage points of this growth in 2008 compared to 2007. Selling, general and administrative expenses declined 6 percent in 2009 compared to 2008. The decline was driven by lower variable pay, wage reductions, lower global infrastructure costs and foreign currency movements. Selling, general and administrative increased 8 percent in 2008 compared to 2007. The Stratagene and Velocity11 acquisitions accounted for 8 percentage points of this growth in 2008 compared to 2007. Operating margins were flat in 2009 compared to 2008. Wage reductions and lower variable pay helped offset lower sales volumes. Operating margins increased by 2 percentage points in 2008 compared to 2007. This was due to higher revenues and operational efficiencies offsetting the higher investments made in research and development and selling, general, and administrative to accommodate growth. Income from Operations Income from operations in 2009 declined by $20 million or 5 percent compared to 2008 on a revenue decrease of $132 million, a 15 percent year-over-year operating margin decremental. Income from operations in 2008 increased by $103 million or 33 percent compared to 2007 on a revenue increase of $319 million, a 32 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental. Semiconductor and Board Test Our semiconductor and board test business provides standard and customized laser interferometer, parametric and manufacturing test and measurement instruments and systems monitoring, management and optimization tools that are used in the design, development, manufacture, installation, deployment and operation of semiconductor and printed circuit assembly fabrication. The laser interferometer business was formerly part of the bio-analytical measurement segment and both the parametric test and printed circuit test businesses were formerly part of the electronic measurement segment. Related services include start-up assistance, instrument productivity and application services and instrument calibration and repair. We also offer customization, consulting and optimization services throughout the customer's product lifecycle. Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 (in millions) Orders $ 135 $ 327 $ 445 (59)% (26)% Net revenue from products $ 113 $ 287 $ 384 (61)% (25)% Net revenue from services and other 48 64 69 (25)% (7)% Total net revenue $ 161 $ 351 $ 453 (54)% (23)% Semiconductor and board test orders declined 59 percent in 2009, down from a 26 percent decline in 2008. On a regional basis, 2009 orders declined 62 percent in the Americas, 54 percent in Europe, 64 percent in Japan and 56 percent in rest of Asia. Semiconductor and board test revenues declined 54 percent in 2009, down from a 23 percent decline in 2008 as all markets and geographies weakened markedly. Capital spending was depressed in 56 Table of Contents all markets due to low capacity utilization in both electronic manufacturing and semiconductor fabrication facilities. The electronic manufacturing market remains under significant pressure due to the global decline in demand for consumer electronics and market uncertainty. While contract manufacturers have seen capacity utilization rates increase slightly, production line expansion is minimal. The semiconductor fabrication market remains soft as global semiconductor demand continues to be down on weak demand for wireless and computing devices. In addition, semiconductor equipment supplier demand is weak as semiconductor fabrication utilization rates are improving, but still remain low. Demand for parametric test applications and solutions continue to be soft. Looking forward, we expect near-term weakness in our semiconductor and board test business due to the current market uncertainty and volatility with gradual improvement longer term. Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the electronic measurement business's margins, expenses and income (loss) from operations for 2009 versus 2008 and 2008 versus 2007. Years Ended October 31, 2009 over 2008 Change 2008 over 2007 Change 2009 2008 2007 Total gross margin 35.3 % 49.5 % 54.6 % (14) ppts (5) ppts Operating margin (23.5 )% 7.4 % 15.6 % (31) ppts (8) ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 32 $ 49 $ 57 (34)% (15)% Selling, general and administrative $ 63 $ 99 $ 119 (36)% (17)% Income (loss) from operations $ (38 ) $ 26 $ 71 (246)% (63)% Gross margins for products and services declined 14 percentage points year-over-year in 2009 due primarily to the significant decline in revenue volume. Volume-adjusted gross margins in 2009 compared to 2008 improved as expense reductions from savings due to restructuring, lower variable pay, wage reductions, lower general and direct infrastructure costs were offset by the unfavorable impact of higher pension expenses and E&O (excess and obsolescence) inventory charges. Gross margins for products and services declined 5 percentage points year-over-year in 2008 due largely to the decline in revenue volume. Research and development expenses in 2009 declined $17 million, or 34 percent, compared to 2008. This decline was driven by lower variable pay, wage reductions, savings due to restructuring, and lower general infrastructure costs, which were offset by higher pension expenses. Research and development expenses in 2008 declined $8 million, or 15 percent, compared to 2007. This decline was driven largely by structural and operational spending reductions. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2009 decreased $36 million, or 36 percent, compared to 2008. Year-over-year reductions in selling, general and administrative expenses were consistent with R&D and were driven by lower variable pay, wage reductions, savings due to restructuring, and lower general infrastructure costs, which were offset by higher pension expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses in 2008 declined $20 million, or 17 percent, compared to 2007. This decrease was driven largely by structural and operational spending reductions. 57 Table of Contents Operating margins declined by 31 percentage points in 2009 compared to 2008 due to lower revenue volume that was partially offset by structural and operational expense reductions. Operating margins decreased by 8 percentage points in 2008 compared to 2007 due to lower revenue volume. Income from Operations Income from operations declined by $64 million in 2009 compared to 2008 on a revenue decrease of $190 million, a 34 percent year-over-year operating margin decremental as structural and operational expense reductions partially offset the unfavorable impact of lower revenue. Income from operations declined by $45 million in 2008 compared to 2007 on a revenue decline of $102 million, a 44 percent year-over-year operating margin decremental as operational expense reductions partially offset the unfavorable impact of lower revenue. 2010 Segment Reporting Changes In the first quarter of 2010, we will form three new operating segments from our existing businesses. The bio-analytical measurement segment will be separated into two operating segments life sciences and chemical analysis. The electronic measurement segment will recombine electronic measurement and semiconductor and board test, which were reported separately in 2009. Following this re-organization, Agilent will have three businesses life sciences, chemical analysis and electronic measurement each of which will comprise a reportable segment. The three new operating segments are determined based primarily on how the chief operating decision maker views and evaluates our operations. Operating results are regularly reviewed by the chief operating decision maker to make decisions about resources to be allocated to the segment and to assess its performance. Other factors, including technology and delivery channels, consumer-specific solutions and specialized manufacturing, are considered in determining the formation of these new operating segments. The life sciences segment will include DNA microarrays and associated scanner, software, and reagents; microfluidics-based sample analysis systems; liquid chromatography systems, columns and components; liquid chromatography mass spectrometry systems; capillary electrophoresis systems; laboratory software and informatics systems; bio-reagents and related products; laboratory automation and robotic systems; services and support for the aforementioned products. The chemical analysis segment will include gas chromatography systems, columns and components; gas chromatography mass spectrometry systems; inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry products; spectroscopy analyzers; software and data systems; services and support for the aforementioned products. The electronic measurement segment will now include the semiconductor and board test segment by recombining laser interferometer, parametric test and printed circuit board manufacturing test equipment. All historical segment numbers will be recast to conform to this new reporting structure in our financial statements, beginning with our Form 10-Q filing for the first quarter of 2010. 58 Table of Contents The following table reflects the restatement of selected financial information of our operating segments for fiscal 2009, 2008 and 2007 on the new basis: Electronic Measurement Life Sciences Chemical Analysis Total Segments (in millions) Year ended October 31, 2009: Orders $ 2,399 $ 1,234 $ 853 $ 4,486 Total net revenue $ 2,418 $ 1,219 $ 844 $ 4,481 Income from operations $ 1 $ 174 $ 216 $ 391 Year ended October 31, 2008: Orders $ 3,475 $ 1,313 $ 962 $ 5,750 Total net revenue $ 3,579 $ 1,258 $ 937 $ 5,774 Income from operations $ 477 $ 166 $ 244 $ 887 Year ended October 31, 2007: Orders $ 3,547 $ 1,052 $ 842 $ 5,441 Total net revenue $ 3,544 $ 1,046 $ 830 $ 5,420 Income from operations $ 411 $ 123 $ 184 $ 718 Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, including substantial amounts held outside of the U.S. Most of the amounts held outside of the U.S. could be repatriated to the U.S. but, under current law, would be subject to U.S. federal and state income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Agilent has accrued for U.S. federal and state tax liabilities on the earnings of its foreign subsidiaries except when the earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the U.S. Repatriation could result in additional U.S. federal and state income tax payments in future years. Where local restrictions prevent an efficient intercompany transfer of funds, our intent is that cash balances would remain outside of the U.S. and we would meet U.S. liquidity needs through ongoing cash flows, external borrowings, or both. We utilize a variety of financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. Our financial position as of October 31, 2009 consisted of cash and cash equivalents of $2,479 million as compared to $1,405 million as of October 31, 2008. Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities was $408 million in 2009 compared to $756 million provided in 2008. We paid approximately $113 million in taxes in 2009 as compared to $210 million in the same period in 2008. Higher tax payments in 2008 were primarily due to one-time taxes related to transfers of intellectual property between affiliated entities. In 2007, we generated $969 million in net cash provided by operating activities. In 2009, accounts receivable provided cash of $193 million as compared to cash used of $44 million in 2008. Days sales outstanding were 46 days in 2009 as compared to 47 days in 2008. Accounts payable used cash of $7 million in 2009 as compared to cash used of $21 million in 2008. Cash provided by inventory was $47 million in 2009 compared to cash used of $14 million in 2008. Inventory days on-hand increased to 93 days in 2009 compared to 89 days in 2008. We contributed $37 million and $1 million to our U.S. defined benefit plans in 2009 and 2008, respectively. We contributed $71 million and $43 million to our non-U.S. defined benefit plans in 2009 59 Table of Contents and 2008, respectively. We contributed $1 million and zero to our U.S. post-retirement benefit plans in 2009 and 2008, respectively. Our non-U.S. defined benefit plans are generally funded ratably throughout the year. Total contributions in 2009 were $109 million or 148 percent more than 2008. Our annual contributions are highly dependent on the relative performance of our assets versus our projected liabilities, among other factors. We increased our contributions to offset significant declines in asset values during 2009. We expect to contribute approximately $86 million to our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit plans during 2010. Net Cash Used in Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities in 2009 was $14 million compared to $399 million used in 2008. In 2007, we used $456 million of net cash in the investing activities of operations. Investments in property, plant and equipment were $128 million in 2009 and $154 million in 2008. Proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment were $1 million in 2009 as compared to $14 million in 2008. In 2009, we invested $2 million in acquisitions and intangible assets compared to $172 million in 2008 which was primarily related to our acquisition of Velocity11. In 2007, we invested $344 million in acquisitions and purchase of intangible assets. In 2009, we purchased $30 million of investment securities as compared to $256 million in 2008. Proceeds from the sale of such securities in 2009 were $94 million as compared to $150 million in 2008. Proceeds from divestitures were $45 million in 2009. We may finance the purchase price of Varian using a portion of the proceeds from our September 2009 offering of senior notes and other existing cash. Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities Net cash provided by financing activities in 2009 was $657 million compared to cash used of $774 million used in 2008. In 2007, we used $980 million in financing activities. In the first quarter of 2008, the Audit and Finance Committee of the Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program of up to $2 billion. We repurchased approximately 9 million shares for $157 million during 2009, based on settlement date, as compared to approximately 30 million shares for $1,001 million during 2008. On March 26, 2009, the company announced that it was suspending its stock repurchase program until the end of the 2009 fiscal year. On November 15, 2009, the company's 2008 stock repurchase program expired upon the termination of its two-year term. Proceeds from the issuance of common stock under employee stock plans was $71 million in 2009 compared to $211 million during 2008 and $375 million in 2007. We currently hold $1.5 billion of long-term debt that was refinanced on November 17, 2008 and the repayment date was extended to January 27, 2011. We are currently considering a number of refinancing and other options regarding the long-term debt. On August 11, 2008 a consolidated wholly-owned subsidiary of Agilent, borrowed a Rupee equivalent of $15 million from Citibank N.A at 12.75 percent per annum interest rate for 5 years, maturing on August 9, 2013 to finance a capital project in India. The loan is classified as long- term debt in our consolidated balance sheet. As of October 31, 2009, we had approximately $2.5 billion of unrestricted cash and $1.6 billion of restricted cash that could be used to repurchase or redeem this long-term debt. However, most of this cash is held overseas and would need to be repatriated to the U.S. in order to be used to satisfy the repurchase obligation. Repatriation could result in additional U.S. federal and state income tax payments in future years. 60 Table of Contents On May 11, 2007, we entered into a five-year credit agreement, which provides for a $300 million unsecured credit facility that will expire on May 11, 2012. The company may use amounts borrowed under the facility for general corporate purposes. On September 8, 2009, we entered into an Accession Agreement, increasing the credit facility from $300 million to $330 million. The company may use amounts borrowed under the facility for general corporate purposes. As of October 31, 2009 the company has no borrowings outstanding under the facility. On August 17, 2009 the credit agreement was amended to provide additional financing flexibility in advance of the pending acquisition of Varian, Inc. The amendment allows for up to $1 billion of additional indebtedness, incurred during the period from August 17, 2009 through the closing of the acquisition, to be excluded from the leverage ratio covenant until the later of the first day of the month following the ninth full calendar month after the closing of the acquisition or August 1, 2010; it also temporarily reduces the basket for other secured financing we are permitted to incur from $300 million to $75 million during this period. The amendment also increases by $500 million the amount of repurchase obligations (such as those of Agilent Technologies World Trade, Inc., ("World Trade")), a consolidated wholly-owned subsidiary of Agilent, that we are permitted to incur. On September 9, 2009, Agilent Technologies, Inc. entered into an underwriting agreement with Barclays Capital Inc., Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC. Pursuant to the underwriting agreement, Agilent issued an aggregate principal amount of $250 million in senior notes (the "2012 notes"). The senior notes were issued at 99.91% of their principal amount. The notes will mature on September 14, 2012, and bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.45% per annum. The interest is payable semi-annually on March 14 th and September 14 th of each year, payments commencing on March 14, 2010. Agilent also issued an aggregate principal amount of $500 million in senior notes (the "2015 notes"). These senior notes were issued at 99.69% of their principal amount. The notes will mature on September 14, 2015, and bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.50% per annum. The interest is payable semi-annually on March 14 th and September 14 th of each year, payments commencing on March 14, 2010. Upon the closing of the offering of the 2012 and 2015 notes, we entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of $750 million. Under the interest rate swaps, we will receive fixed-rate interest payments and will make payments based on the U.S. dollar London inter-bank offered rate ("LIBOR") plus 257.6 basis points and 253 basis points with respect to the 2012 and 2015 notes, respectively. The economic effect of these swaps will be to convert the fixed-rate interest expense on the senior notes to a variable LIBOR-based interest rate. Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Other We have contractual commitments for non-cancelable operating leases. See Note 16 "Commitments and Contingencies", to our consolidated financial statements for further information on our non-cancelable operating leases. Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which are based on normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from fluctuations related to global economics and markets. Our cash balances are generated and held in many locations throughout the world. Local government regulations may restrict our ability to move cash balances to meet cash needs under certain circumstances. We do not currently expect such regulations and restrictions to impact our ability to pay vendors and conduct operations throughout our global organization. Contractual Commitments Our cash flows from operations are dependent on a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax 61 Table of Contents and other payments. As a result, the impact of contractual obligations on our liquidity and capital resources in future periods should be analyzed in conjunction with such factors. The following table summarizes our total contractual obligations at October 31, 2009 for operations and excludes amounts recorded in our consolidated balance sheet (in millions): Less than one year One to three years Three to five years More than five years Operating leases $ 60 $ 84 $ 33 $ 32 Commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers 456 2 Other purchase commitments 17 24 6 4 Retirement plans 86 Total $ 619 $ 110 $ 39 $ 36 Operating leases. Commitments under operating leases relate primarily to leasehold property. Commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers. We purchase components from a variety of suppliers and use several contract manufacturers to provide manufacturing services for our products. During the normal course of business, we issue purchase orders with estimates of our requirements several months ahead of the delivery dates. However, our agreements with these suppliers usually provide us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to firm orders being placed. Typically purchase orders outstanding with delivery dates within 30 days are non-cancelable. Therefore, only approximately 40 percent of our reported purchase commitments arising from these agreements are firm, non-cancelable, and unconditional commitments. We expect to fulfill all purchase commitments for inventory within one year. In addition to the above mentioned commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers, we record a liability for firm, non-cancelable, and unconditional purchase commitments for quantities in excess of our future demand forecasts consistent with our policy relating to excess inventory. As of October 31, 2009, the liability for our firm, non-cancelable and unconditional purchase commitments was $4 million, compared to same amount as of October 31, 2008. These amounts are included in other accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet. Other purchase commitments. These relate primarily to contracts with professional services suppliers. Purchase commitments are typically cancelable within a 90-day period without significant penalties. Retirement Plans. Commitments under the retirement plans relate to expected contributions to be made to our U.S. and non U.S. defined benefit plans and to our post-retirement medical plans. We had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as of October 31, 2009 or October 31, 2008. 62 Table of Contents On Balance Sheet Arrangements The following table summarizes our total contractual obligations recorded in our consolidated balance sheet pertaining to long-term debt (in millions): Less than one year One to three years Three to five years More than five years World Trade debt $ $ 1,500 $ $ Senior notes 251 1,137 Other debt 1 15 Total $ $ 1,752 $ 15 $ 1,137 We have contractual obligations for interest payments on the above debts. World Trade is obligated to make interest payments, reset quarterly, at LIBOR plus 175 basis points. For the Indian Rupee loan from Citibank, the interest rate is 12.75 percent. The interest rates for the $600 million, $250 million and $500 million senior notes are 6.5 percent, 4.45 percent and 5.5 percent, respectively. We entered into interest rate swaps for the 2012 and 2015 notes. Under the interest rate swaps for the 2012 and 2015 notes, we are obligated to make interest payments semi-annually, at LIBOR plus 257.6 basis points and 253 basis points, respectively. As a result of adopting the amended authoritative guidance, $418 million of taxes payable are now included in other long-term liabilities as of October 31, 2009. We are unable to accurately predict when these amounts will be paid or released. 63 Table of Contents 
