CIK: 1090872
Company Name: AGILENT TECHNOLOGIES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-12-16


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This report contains forward-looking statements including, without limitation, statements regarding trends, seasonality, cyclicality and growth in, and drivers of, the markets we sell into, our strategic direction, our future effective tax rate and tax valuation allowance, earnings from our foreign subsidiaries, remediation activities, new product and service introductions, the ability of our products to meet market needs, changes to our manufacturing processes, the use of contract manufacturers, the impact of local government regulations on our ability to pay vendors or conduct operations, our liquidity position, our ability to generate cash from operations, growth in our businesses, our investments, the potential impact of adopting new accounting pronouncements, our financial results, our purchase commitments, our contributions to our pension plans, the selection of discount rates and recognition of any gains or losses for our benefit plans, our cost-control activities, savings and headcount reduction recognized from our restructuring programs, uncertainties relating to Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") and other regulatory approvals, the integration of our Varian acquisition and other transactions, our stock repurchase program, our transition to lower-cost regions, and the existence of economic instability, that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to various factors, including those discussed in Item 1A and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Overview and Executive Summary Agilent is the world's premier measurement company, providing core electronic and bio-analytical measurement solutions to the communications, electronics, life sciences and chemical analysis industries. Our fiscal year end is October 31. Unless otherwise stated, all years and dates refer to our fiscal year. For the year ended October 31, 2011 we acquired three separate businesses: A2 Technologies, Lab901 and Biocius Life Sciences Inc., for a total cost of $96 million, net of cash acquired. Agilent's total orders in 2011 were $6,769 million, an increase of 18 percent when compared to 2010. The increase in orders associated with the Varian acquisition less the orders attributable to divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) accounted for 5 percentage points of order growth for the year ended October 31, 2011 when compared to 2010. Due to the close date of the Varian acquisition, which occurred on May 14, 2010, we have excluded orders related to Varian for the period November 1, 2010 to May 14, 2011 when we compare periods without the Varian acquisition. The increase in orders in the year ended October 31, 2011 compared with last year was attributable to improvement in many of our instrument platforms, consumables and services. Agilent's total orders in 2010 increased 28 percent when compared to 2009. The increase in orders associated with the Varian acquisition less the orders attributable to our divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) accounted for 3 percentage points of order growth for the year ended October 31, 2010 when compared to 2009. The increase in orders in the year ended October 31, 2010 compared with the prior year was due to a strong performance in new products and service and support businesses. Agilent's net revenue of $6,615 million increased 22 percent when compared to 2010. The revenue increase associated with the Varian acquisition less the revenue attributable to our divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) accounted for approximately 5 percentage points of the revenue increase for the year ended October 31, 2011 when compared to 2010. Due to the close date of the Varian acquisition, which occurred on May 14, 2010, we have excluded revenue related to Varian for the period November 1, 2010 to May 14, 2011 when we compare periods without the Varian acquisition. 38 Table of Contents Excluding the Varian acquisition and Hycor divestiture, growth in demand for life sciences products increased in all markets led by sales into the pharmaceutical and biotechnology end-market for the year ended October 31, 2011, when compared to the prior year. Excluding the Varian acquisition, sales to all end-markets grew across the chemical analysis business, in particular the petrochemical market, for the year ended October 31, 2011 when compared to 2010. Within electronic measurement, general purpose end-markets improved in 2011 when compared to the prior year as a result of the recovery in the electronics and semiconductor businesses. Also within electronic measurement, the communications test businesses improved strongly in the year ended October 31, 2011 when compared to the prior year with wireless manufacturing reporting good revenue growth in the year. Agilent's total net revenue in 2010 increased 21 percent when compared to 2009. The revenue increase associated with the Varian acquisition less the revenue attributable to our divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) accounted for 3 percentage points of revenue increase for the year ended October 31, 2010 when compared to 2009. Net income was $1,012 million in 2011 compared to net income of $684 million in 2010 and a net loss of $31 million in 2009. In 2011, 2010 and 2009 we generated operating cash flows of $1,260 million, $718 million and $408 million, respectively. As of October 31, 2011 and 2010 we had cash and cash equivalents balances of $3,527 million and $2,649 million, respectively. On May 14, 2010, we completed our acquisition of Varian by means of a merger of one of our wholly-owned subsidiaries with and into Varian such that Varian became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Agilent. We financed the purchase price of Varian using the proceeds from our September 2009 offering of senior notes and other existing cash. The Varian merger has been accounted for in accordance with the authoritative accounting guidance and the results of Varian are included in Agilent's consolidated financial statements from the date of merger. For additional details related to the acquisition of Varian, see Note 3, "Acquisition of Varian". Looking forward, we believe there are continued marketing opportunities in emerging markets and improvements to be achieved in operating performance by leveraging our design, supply chain and manufacturing capabilities. In addition, we will continue integrating Varian's order fulfillment systems and processes into Agilent and our priority is to focus on revenue and cost synergies, as well as increase technology sharing between our businesses. As a result of the integration of Varian into Agilent, we are expecting to achieve $100 million in net cost savings. Approximately 1 / 3 of the net cost savings have been generated within general and administrative expenses at the end of fiscal 2011 and the remaining savings within the costs of products and services are expected to be realized by the end of fiscal 2013. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable. Although these estimates are based on management's best knowledge of current events and actions that may impact the company in the future, actual results may be different from the estimates. Our critical accounting policies are those that affect our financial statements materially and involve difficult, subjective or complex judgments by management. Those policies are revenue recognition, inventory valuation, share-based compensation, retirement and post-retirement plan assumptions, goodwill and purchased intangible assets, restructuring and asset impairment charges and accounting for income taxes. 39 Table of Contents Revenue recognition. We enter into agreements to sell products (hardware or software), services, and other arrangements (multiple element arrangements) that include combinations of products and services. Revenue from product sales, net of trade discounts and allowances, is recognized provided that persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred, the price is fixed or determinable, and collectability is reasonably assured. Delivery is considered to have occurred when title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer. Revenue is reduced for estimated product returns, when appropriate. For sales that include customer-specified acceptance criteria, revenue is recognized after the acceptance criteria have been met. For products that include installation, if the installation meets the criteria to be considered a separate element, product revenue is recognized upon delivery, and recognition of installation revenue occurs when the installation is complete. Otherwise, neither the product nor the installation revenue is recognized until the installation is complete. Revenue from services is deferred and recognized over the contractual period or as services are rendered and accepted by the customer. We allocate revenue to each element in our multiple-element arrangements based upon their relative selling prices. We determine the selling price for each deliverable based on a selling price hierarchy. The selling price for a deliverable is based on our vendor specific objective evidence (VSOE) if available, third-party evidence (TPE) if VSOE is not available, or estimated selling price (ESP) if neither VSOE nor TPE is available. Revenue from the sale of software products that are not required to deliver the tangible product's essential functionality are accounted for under software revenue recognition rules. Revenue allocated to each element is then recognized when the basic revenue recognition criteria for that element have been met. The amount of product revenue recognized is affected by our judgments as to whether an arrangement includes multiple elements. We use VSOE of selling price in the selling price allocation in all instances where it exists. VSOE of selling price for products and services is determined when a substantial majority of the selling prices fall within a reasonable range when sold separately. TPE of selling price can be established by evaluating largely interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone sales to similarly situated customers. As our products contain a significant element of proprietary technology and the solution offered differs substantially from that of competitors, it is difficult to obtain the reliable standalone competitive pricing necessary to establish TPE. ESP represents the best estimate of the price at which we would transact a sale if the product or service were sold on a standalone basis. We determine ESP for a product or service by using historical selling prices which reflect multiple factors including, but not limited to customer type, geography, market conditions, competitive landscape, gross margin objectives and pricing practices. The determination of ESP is made through consultation with and approval by management. We may modify or develop new pricing practices and strategies in the future. As these pricing strategies evolve, we may modify our pricing practices in the future, which may result in changes in ESP. The aforementioned factors may result in a different allocation of revenue to the deliverables in multiple element arrangements from the current fiscal quarter, which may change the pattern and timing of revenue recognition for these elements but will not change the total revenue recognized for the arrangement. Inventory valuation. We assess the valuation of our inventory on a periodic basis and make adjustments to the value for estimated excess and obsolete inventory based upon estimates about future demand and actual usage. Such estimates are difficult to make under most economic conditions. The excess balance determined by this analysis becomes the basis for our excess inventory charge. Our excess inventory review process includes analysis of sales forecasts, managing product rollovers and working with manufacturing to maximize recovery of excess inventory. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional write-downs may be required. If actual market conditions are more favorable than anticipated, inventory previously written down may be sold to customers, resulting in lower cost of sales and higher income from operations than expected in that period. 40 Table of Contents Share-based compensation. We account for share-based awards in accordance with the authoritative guidance. Under the authoritative guidance, share-based compensation expense is primarily based on estimated grant date fair value and is recognized on a straight line basis. The fair value of share-based awards for employee stock option awards was estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Shares granted under the LTPP were valued using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The estimated fair value of restricted stock unit awards is determined based on the market price of Agilent's common stock on the date of grant. The ESPP allows eligible employees to purchase shares of our common stock at 85 percent of the purchase price and uses the purchase date to establish the fair market value. Both the Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo simulation fair value models require the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the option's expected life and the price volatility of the underlying stock. The expected stock price volatility assumption was determined using the historical volatility of Agilent's stock option over the most recent historical period equivalent to the expected life. A 10 percent increase in our estimated volatility from 35 percent to 45 percent for our most recent employee stock option grant would generally increase the value of an award and the associated compensation cost by approximately 23 percent if no other factors were changed. In 2009 and 2010 the expected life of our employee stock options was 4.4 years. In the first quarter of 2011, we revised our estimate of the expected life of our employee stock options from 4.4 to 5.8 years. For the grants awarded under the 2009 stock plan after November 1, 2010, we increased the period available to retirement eligible employees to exercise their options from three years at retirement date to the full contractual term of ten years. In developing our estimated life of our employee stock options of 5.8 years, we considered the historical option exercise behavior of our executive employees who were granted the majority of the options in the annual grants made during the three months ended January 31, 2011, which we believe is representative of future behavior. See Note 4, "Share-based Compensation," to the consolidated financial statements for more information. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable and appropriate, changes in assumptions could materially impact our reported financial results. Retirement and post-retirement benefit plan assumptions. Retirement and post-retirement benefit plan costs are a significant cost of doing business. They represent obligations that will ultimately be settled sometime in the future and therefore are subject to estimation. Pension accounting is intended to reflect the recognition of future benefit costs over the employees' average expected future service to Agilent based on the terms of the plans and investment and funding decisions. To estimate the impact of these future payments and our decisions concerning funding of these obligations, we are required to make assumptions using actuarial concepts within the framework of accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Two critical assumptions are the discount rate and the expected long-term return on plan assets. Other important assumptions include , expected future salary increases, expected future increases to benefit payments, expected retirement dates, employee turnover, retiree mortality rates, and portfolio composition. We evaluate these assumptions at least annually. The discount rate is used to determine the present value of future benefit payments at the measurement date October 31 for both U.S. and non-U.S. plans. For 2011 and 2010, the U.S. discount rates were based on the results of matching expected plan benefit payments with cash flows from a hypothetically constructed bond portfolio and decreased in 2011 from the previous year. In 2011, the discount rate for non-U.S. plans was generally based on published rates for high quality corporate 41 Table of Contents bonds and either remained unchanged or decreased. Lower discount rates increase present values and subsequent year pension expense; higher discount rates decrease present values and subsequent year pension expense. The company uses alternate methods of amortization as allowed by the authoritative guidance which amortizes the actuarial gains and losses on a consistent basis for the years presented. For U.S. Plans, gains and losses are amortized over the average future working lifetime. For most Non-U.S. Plans and U.S. Post-Retirement Benefit Plans, gains and losses are amortized using a separate layer for each year's gains and losses. The expected long-term return on plan assets is estimated using current and expected asset allocations as well as historical and expected returns. Plan assets are valued at fair value. If we changed our estimated return on assets by 1 percent, the impact would be $6 million on U.S. pension expense and $17 million on non-U.S. pension expense. The net periodic pension and post-retirement benefit costs recorded in operations excluding curtailments and settlements were $58 million in 2011, $82 million in 2010, and $103 million in 2009. Goodwill and purchased intangible assets. Agilent reviews goodwill for impairment annually during our fourth fiscal quarter and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. As defined in the authoritative guidance, a reporting unit is an operating segment, or one level below an operating segment. We have aggregated components of an operating segment that have similar economic characteristics into our reporting units. We have three reporting units for goodwill impairment testing purposes: life sciences, chemical analysis and electronic measurement. At the time of an acquisition, we assign goodwill to the reporting unit that is expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination. In September 2011, the FASB approved changes to the goodwill impairment guidance which are intended to reduce the cost and complexity of the annual impairment test. The changes provide entities an option to perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. The revised standard gives an entity the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether performing the current two-step test is necessary. If an entity believes, as a result of its qualitative assessment, that it is more-likely-than-not (i.e. > 50% chance) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test will be required. Otherwise, no further testing will be required. The revised guidance includes examples of events and circumstances that might indicate that a reporting unit's fair value is less than its carrying amount. These include macro-economic conditions such as deterioration in the entity's operating environment or industry or market considerations; entity-specific events such as increasing costs, declining financial performance, or loss of key personnel; or other events such as an expectation that a reporting unit will be sold or a sustained decrease in the stock price on either an absolute basis or relative to peers. The new qualitative indicators replace those currently used to determine whether an interim goodwill impairment test is required. The changes will be effective for annual and interim goodwill impairment tests performed for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2011. However, earlier adoption is permitted. Agilent has opted to early adopt this guidance for the year ended October 31, 2011. If it is determined, as a result of the qualitative assessment, that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the provisions of authoritative guidance require that we perform a two-step impairment test on goodwill. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. The second step (if necessary) measures the amount 42 Table of Contents of impairment by applying fair-value-based tests to the individual assets and liabilities within each reporting unit. Based on our results of our qualitative test for goodwill impairment, as of September 30, 2011, we believe that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of each of our three reporting units, life sciences, chemical analysis and electronic measurement, is greater than their respective carrying values. There was no impairment of goodwill during the years ended October 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. Each quarter we review the events and circumstances to determine if goodwill impairment is indicated. Purchased intangible assets consist primarily of acquired developed technologies, proprietary know-how, trademarks, and customer relationships and are amortized using the straight-line method over estimated useful lives ranging from 6 months to 15 years. In process research and development (IPR&D) is initially capitalized at fair value as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter. When the IPR&D project is complete, it is reclassified as an amortizable purchased intangible asset and is amortized over its estimated useful life. If an IPR&D project is abandoned, Agilent will record a charge for the value of the related intangible asset to Agilent's consolidated statement of operations in the period it is abandoned. We continually monitor events and changes in circumstances that could indicate carrying amounts of long-lived assets, including purchased intangible assets, may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we assess the recoverability of long-lived assets by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the total of the undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of those assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. We performed impairment analyses of purchased intangible assets in 2011 and recorded $3 million of impairment charges primarily related to a business where we ceased operations. We performed impairment analyses of purchased intangible assets in 2010 and recorded $13 million of impairment charges primarily related to a divested business. Restructuring and asset impairment charges. The four main components of our restructuring plans are related to workforce reductions, the consolidation of excess facilities, asset impairments and special charges related to inventory. Workforce reduction charges are accrued when it is determined that a liability has been incurred, which is generally after individuals have been notified of their termination dates and expected severance payments. Plans to consolidate excess facilities result in charges for lease termination fees and future commitments to pay lease charges, net of estimated future sublease income. We recognize charges for consolidation of excess facilities generally when we have vacated the premises. These estimates were derived using the authoritative accounting guidance. We have also assessed the recoverability of our long-lived assets, by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through undiscounted future cash flows. Asset impairments primarily consist of property, plant and equipment and are based on an estimate of the amounts and timing of future cash flows related to the expected future remaining use and ultimate sale or disposal of buildings and equipment net of costs to sell. The charges related to inventory include estimated future inventory disposal payments that we are contractually obliged to make to our suppliers and reserves taken against inventory on hand. If the amounts and timing of cash flows from restructuring activities are significantly different from what we have estimated, the actual amount of restructuring and asset impairment charges could be materially different, either higher or lower, than those we have recorded. Accounting for income taxes. We must make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the 43 Table of Contents calculation of tax credits, benefits and deductions, and in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes, as well as interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to our tax provision in a subsequent period. Significant management judgment is also required in determining whether deferred tax assets will be realized in full or in part. When it is more likely than not that all or some portion of specific deferred tax assets such as net operating losses or foreign tax credit carryforwards will not be realized, a valuation allowance must be established for the amount of the deferred tax assets that cannot be realized. We consider all available positive and negative evidence on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis when assessing whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. We consider evidence such as our past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in recent years and our forecast of future taxable income. At October 31, 2011, we provided a valuation allowance for our net U.S. deferred tax assets and on certain foreign deferred tax assets. We intend to maintain a valuation allowance in these jurisdictions until sufficient positive evidence exists to support its reversal. Due to improvements in the U.S. operating results over the past three years, management believes a reasonable possibility exists that, within the next year, sufficient positive evidence may become available to reach a conclusion that the U.S. valuation allowance will no longer be needed. We have not provided for all U.S. federal income and foreign withholding taxes on the undistributed earnings of some of our foreign subsidiaries because we intend to reinvest such earnings indefinitely. Should we decide to remit this income to the U.S. in a future period, our provision for income taxes will increase materially in that period. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax law and regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions. Although the guidance on the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes prescribes the use of a recognition and measurement model, the determination of whether an uncertain tax position has met those thresholds will continue to require significant judgment by management. If the ultimate resolution of tax uncertainties is different from what is currently estimated, a material impact on income tax expense could result. Adoption of New Pronouncements See Note 2, "New Accounting Pronouncements," to the consolidated financial statements for a description of new accounting pronouncements. Restructuring Costs, Asset Impairments and Other Charges Our 2009 restructuring program, the ("FY 2009 Plan"), announced in the first half of 2009, was conceived in response to deteriorating economic conditions and was designed to deliver sufficient savings to enable our businesses to reach their profitability targets throughout the cycle. Workforce reduction payments, primarily severance, were largely complete in fiscal year 2010. Lease payments should primarily be complete by the end of fiscal 2014. Foreign Currency Our revenues, costs and expenses, and monetary assets and liabilities are exposed to changes in foreign currency exchange rates as a result of our global operating and financing activities. We hedge revenues, expenses and balance sheet exposures that are not denominated in the functional currencies 44 Table of Contents of our subsidiaries on a short term and anticipated basis. We do experience some fluctuations within individual lines of the consolidated statement of operations and balance sheet because our hedging program is not designed to offset the currency movements in each category of revenues, expenses, monetary assets and liabilities. Our hedging program is designed to hedge currency movements on a relatively short-term basis (rolling twelve month period). Therefore, we are exposed to currency fluctuations over the longer term. Results from Operations Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 % Change 2010 over 2009 % Change 2011 2010 2009 (in millions) Orders $ 6,769 $ 5,744 $ 4,486 18 % 28 % Net revenue: Products $ 5,482 $ 4,464 $ 3,566 23 % 25 % Services and other $ 1,133 $ 980 $ 915 16 % 7 % Total net revenue $ 6,615 $ 5,444 $ 4,481 22 % 21 % Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 Ppts Change 2010 over 2009 Ppts Change 2011 2010 2009 % of total net revenue: Products 83 % 82 % 80 % 1 2 Services and other 17 % 18 % 20 % (1 ) (2 ) Total 100 % 100 % 100 % Agilent's total orders in 2011 were $6,769 million, an increase of 18 percent when compared to 2010. The increase in orders associated with the Varian acquisition less the orders attributable to divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) accounted for 5 percentage points of order growth for the year ended October 31, 2011 when compared to 2010. Due to the close date of the Varian acquisition, which occurred on May 14, 2010, we have excluded orders related to Varian for the period November 1, 2010 to May 14, 2011 when we compare periods without the Varian acquisition. The increase in orders in the year ended October 31, 2011 compared with last year was attributable to improvement in many of our instrument platforms, consumables and services. Agilent's total orders in 2010 increased 28 percent when compared to 2009. The increase in orders associated with the Varian acquisition less the orders attributable to our divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) accounted for 3 percentage points of order growth for the year ended October 31, 2010 when compared to 2009. The increase in orders in the year ended October 31, 2010 compared with the prior year was due to a strong performance in new products and service and support businesses. Agilent's net revenue of $6,615 million increased 22 percent when compared to 2010. The revenue increase associated with the Varian acquisition less the revenue attributable to our divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) accounted for approximately 5 percentage points of the revenue increase for the year ended October 31, 2011 when compared to 2010. Due to the close date of the Varian acquisition, which occurred on May 14, 2010, we have excluded revenue related to Varian for the period November 1, 2010 to May 14, 2011 when we compare periods without the Varian acquisition. Excluding the Varian acquisition and Hycor divestiture, growth in demand for 45 Table of Contents life sciences products increased in all markets led by sales into the pharmaceutical and biotechnology end-market for the year ended October 31, 2011, when compared to the prior year. Excluding the Varian acquisition, sales to all end-markets grew across the chemical analysis business, in particular the petrochemical market, for the year ended October 31, 2011 when compared to 2010. Within electronic measurement, general purpose end-markets improved in 2011 when compared to the prior year as a result of the recovery in the electronics and semiconductor businesses. Also within electronic measurement, the communications test businesses improved in the year ended October 31, 2011 when compared to the prior year with wireless manufacturing reporting good revenue growth in the year. Agilent's total net revenue in 2010 increased 21 percent when compared to 2009. The revenue increase associated with the Varian acquisition less the revenue attributable to our divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) accounted for 3 percentage points of revenue increase for the year ended October 31, 2010 when compared to 2009. Note 21, "Segment Information" shows a reconciliation between segment revenue and net revenue. Services and other revenue include revenue generated from servicing our installed base of products, warranty extensions and consulting. Services and other revenue increased 16 percent in 2011 as compared to 2010. The increase in services and other revenue associated with the Varian acquisition less the revenue attributable to the network solutions divestiture accounted for 2 percentage point of revenue increase in 2011. Services and other revenue increased 7 percent in 2010 as compared to 2009. The increase in services and other revenue associated with the Varian acquisition less the revenue attributable to the network solutions divestiture accounted for 1 percentage point of revenue increase in 2010. The service and other revenue growth is lower than product revenue growth due to only a proportion of product sales attracting service contracts, the recognition of warranty revenue over an extended period and a portion of the revenue being driven more by the previously installed base than current period product sales. Backlog On October 31, 2011, our unfilled orders for the life sciences business were approximately $430 million, as compared to approximately $350 million at October 31, 2010. On October 31, 2011, our unfilled orders for the chemical analysis business were approximately $320 million, as compared to approximately $250 million at October 31, 2010. On October 31, 2011, our unfilled orders for the electronic measurement business were approximately $810 million, as compared to $830 million at October 31, 2010. We expect that a large majority of the unfilled orders for all three businesses will be delivered to customers within six months. On average, our unfilled orders represent approximately three months' worth of revenues. In light of this experience, backlog on any particular date, while indicative of short-term revenue performance, is not necessarily a reliable indicator of medium or long-term revenue performance. Costs and Expenses Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 Change 2010 over 2009 Change 2011 2010 2009 Gross margin on products 54.9 % 55.7 % 52.6 % (1) ppt 3 ppts Gross margin on services and other 45.9 % 45.1 % 45.7 % 1 ppt (1) ppt Total gross margin 53.3 % 53.8 % 51.1 % (1) ppt 3 ppts Operating margin 16.2 % 10.3 % 1.0 % 6 ppts 9 ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 649 $ 612 $ 642 6% (5)% Selling, general and administrative $ 1,809 $ 1,752 $ 1,603 3% 9% 46 Table of Contents In 2011, total gross margin decreased 1 percentage point in comparison to 2010. The unfavorable impact of the Varian acquisition (including fair value adjustments) and higher variable and incentive pay were largely offset by the benefits of favorable volume impacts, decreased business and infrastructure programs and lower restructuring costs. Operating margins in 2011 increased 6 percentage points as compared to 2010 due to higher volume partly offset by increased variable and incentive pay. In 2010, total gross margin increased 3 percentage points in comparison to 2009 and operating margins in 2010 increased 9 percentage points as compared to 2009. The benefits of business and infrastructure programs, lower restructuring costs, together with favorable volume impacts offset the unfavorable impact of the Varian acquisition (including fair value adjustments), wage restoration and higher variable and incentive pay. Research and development expenditures increased 6 percent in 2011 compared to 2010. Increased expenditure was due to our continued investment in new product development, the Varian acquisition and higher variable and incentive pay. These increases were partly offset by the impact of the divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) and decreased restructuring expenses. Research and development expenditures decreased 5 percent in 2010 compared to 2009. Increases in expenses due to the Varian acquisition, wage restoration, higher variable and incentive pay were more than offset by the impact of the divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses) and decreased restructuring expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 3 percent in 2011 compared to 2010. Increased expenditure was due to the Varian acquisition and higher variable and incentive pay offset by the impact of decreased restructuring expenses and the costs associated with the divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses). Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 9 percent in 2010 compared to 2009. Increased expenditure was due to the Varian acquisition, higher variable and incentive pay and wage restoration offset by the impact of decreased restructuring expenses and the divested businesses (the network solutions and Hycor businesses). Gross inventory charges were $30 million in 2011 and 2010 and $54 million in 2009. Sales of previously written down inventory were $5 million in 2011 and 2010 and $8 million in 2009. Our research and development efforts focus on potential new products and product improvements covering a wide variety of technologies, none of which is individually significant to our operations. We conduct five types of research and development: basic research, foundation technologies, communications, life sciences and measurement. Our research seeks to improve on various technical competencies in electronics, software, systems and solutions, life sciences and photonics. In each of these research fields, we conduct research that is focused on specific product development for release in the short-term as well as other research that is intended to be the foundation for future products over a longer time-horizon. Some of our product development research is designed to improve on the more than 20,000 products already in production, focus on major new product releases, and develop new product segments for the future. Due to the breadth of research and development projects across all of our businesses, there are a number of drivers of this expense. We remain committed to invest about 10 percent of revenues in research and development and have focused our development efforts on key strategic opportunities to align our business with available markets and position ourselves to capture market share. For the year ended October 31, 2010 we recorded a $132 million gain on the sale of our network solutions business and $54 million of income in respect of a tax sharing settlement with Hewlett Packard Company. 47 Table of Contents At October 31, 2011, our headcount was approximately 18,700 compared to 18,500 in 2010 and 16,800 in 2009. The increase in our headcount in 2010, compared to 2009, was due to the Varian acquisition. Provision for Income Taxes Years Ended October 31, 2011 2010 2009 (in millions) Provision for income taxes $ 20 $ 8 $ 38 Agilent enjoys tax holidays in several different jurisdictions, most significantly in Singapore, and Malaysia. The tax holidays provide lower rates of taxation on certain classes of income and require various thresholds of investments and employment or specific types of income in those jurisdictions. The tax holidays are due for renewal between 2015 and 2023. As a result of the incentives, the impact of the tax holidays decreased income taxes by $127 million, $62 million and $14 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The benefit of the tax holidays on net income (loss) per share (diluted) was approximately $0.36, $0.18 and $0.04 in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. For 2011, the effective tax rate was 2 percent. The 2 percent effective tax rate reflects tax on earnings in jurisdictions that have low effective tax rates and includes a $97 million net tax benefit primarily associated with a refund in Canada and the recognition of previously unrecognized tax benefits and the reversal of the related interest accruals due to the reassessment of certain uncertain tax positions. The income tax provision also includes a $26 million out of period adjustment to reduce the carrying value of certain U.K. deferred tax assets for which the majority was recorded in the quarter ended April 30, 2011. The overstatement of these deferred tax assets resulted in an overstatement of the U.K. valuation allowance release in the fourth quarter of 2010. For the full year, this out of period adjustment was substantially offset by other out of period adjustments. The net impact of all out of period adjustments on the effective tax rate was immaterial. Without considering interest and penalties, the effective rate reflects taxes in all jurisdictions except the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions in which income tax expense or benefit continues to be offset by adjustments to valuation allowances. We intend to maintain valuation allowances in these jurisdictions until sufficient positive evidence exists to support its reversal. For 2010, the effective tax rate was 1 percent. The 1 percent effective tax rate includes a $101 million beneficial release of the U.K. valuation allowance, a $32 million current year increase in prior year tax reserves, and tax on earnings in jurisdictions that have low effective tax rates. Also included is a $17 million tax benefit related to a $54 million non-taxable settlement payment received in connection with a tax sharing agreement between Agilent and Hewlett Packard Company. Without considering interest and penalties, the effective rate reflects taxes in all jurisdictions except the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions in which income tax expense or benefit continues to be offset by adjustments to valuation allowances. We intend to maintain a valuation allowance in these jurisdictions until sufficient positive evidence exists to support its reversal. For 2009, the effective tax rate was 543 percent. The 543 percent effective tax rate reflects that our structure has a fixed component that results in unusual tax results on reduced levels of profitability. The tax rate also includes tax on earnings in jurisdictions that have low effective tax rates. In addition, net tax benefits totaling $71 million relating primarily to the lapses of statutes of limitations and tax settlements in foreign jurisdictions are incorporated in the rate. Without considering interest and penalties, the rate reflects taxes in all jurisdictions except the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions where we have recorded valuation allowances. 48 Table of Contents During 2003, we established a valuation allowance for the deferred tax assets of the U.S. and certain entities in foreign jurisdictions. The valuation allowance requires an assessment of both positive and negative evidence when determining whether it is more likely than not that deferred tax assets are recoverable. Such assessment is required on a jurisdiction by jurisdiction basis. During 2009, 2010, and 2011, we continued to maintain valuation allowance for U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets until sufficient positive evidence exists to support its reversal. We currently have a valuation allowance of $369 million of which $308 million relates to U.S. jurisdictions. The reduction to the valuation allowance in 2011 is primarily due to the reduction in the deferred taxes relating to pension and post retirement medical benefits and the utilization of tax credits associated with the repatriation of foreign earnings. Due to improvements in the U.S. operating results over the past three years, management believes a reasonable possibility exists that, within the next year, sufficient positive evidence may become available to reach a conclusion that the U.S. valuation allowance will no longer be needed. In 2010 after consideration of all the available positive and negative evidence, we concluded that it is more likely than not that all of the U.K. deferred tax assets will be realized and reversed the entire U.K. valuation allowance. In accordance with the guidance on the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, for all U.S. and other tax jurisdictions, we recognize potential liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes and interest will be due. If our estimate of income tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, a further charge to expense would be required. If events occur and the payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be unnecessary, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary. We include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for income taxes on the consolidated statements of operations. On August 31, 2010 we reached an agreement with the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") for tax years 2000 through 2002. The adjustments were offset by applying available net operating losses and had no material impact on our statement of operations. In December 2010, we reached an agreement with the IRS for tax years 2003-2005. In addition, Agilent and the IRS reached an agreement on transfer pricing issues covering years 2003-2007. Tax adjustments resulting from these agreements will be offset with net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Agilent's U.S. federal income tax returns for 2006 through 2007 are currently under audit by the IRS. Primarily as a result of these agreements with the IRS and agreements with other tax jurisdictions, unrecognized tax benefits were reduced from $656 million at October 31, 2010 to $469 million at October 31, 2011. Segment Overview Agilent is a measurement company providing core bio-analytical and electronic measurement solutions to the life sciences, chemical analysis, communications and electronics industries. Agilent has three primary businesses focused on the life sciences market, the chemical analysis market and the electronic measurement market. Life Sciences Our life sciences business provides application-focused solutions that include instruments, software, consumables, and services that enable customers to identify, quantify and analyze the physical and biological properties of substances and products. Key product categories in life sciences include: DNA and RNA microarrays and associated scanner, software, and reagents; microfluidics-based sample analysis systems; liquid chromatography (LC) systems, columns and components; liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS) systems; capillary electrophoresis systems; laboratory software and informatics systems; bio-reagents and related products; laboratory automation and 49 Table of Contents robotic systems, dissolution testing; Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) systems along with X-Ray crystallography, and services and support for the aforementioned products. Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 Change 2010 over 2009 Change 2011 2010 2009 (in millions) Orders $ 1,875 $ 1,526 $ 1,234 23% 24% Net revenue from products $ 1,424 $ 1,179 $ 964 21% 22% Net revenue from services and other 368 300 255 23% 18% Total net revenue $ 1,792 $ 1,479 $ 1,219 21% 21% Life sciences orders in 2011 increased 23 percent compared to 2010. Excluding the impact of the Varian acquisition, the Hycor divestiture and our recent acquisitions of Biocius and Lab901, orders grew 13 percent year over year. Due to the close date of the Varian acquisition which occurred on May 14, 2010, we have excluded the period from November 1, 2010 to May 14, 2011 when we compare periods without the Varian acquisition. Order results were led by strength in the LC-MS, automation, informatics, genomics, consumables, and services portfolios. We saw solid performance in key products, such as the 1200 Infinity LC Series, LC/Triple Quadrupole (QQQ) system, SureSelect Complete, and OpenLAB software suite. Geographically, excluding the impact of acquisitions and the Hycor divestiture, orders grew 7 percent in the Americas, 15 percent in Europe, 4 percent in Japan, and 21 percent in other Asia Pacific during 2011 when compared to 2010. Outstanding performance of LC-MS instrument systems in China contributed to Asia Pacific regional growth. Life sciences orders in 2010 increased 24 percent compared to 2009. Excluding acquisitions and the Hycor divestiture, life sciences orders in 2010 increased 15 percent compared to 2009, driven by strength in the LC, microarray, and automation portfolios, along with consumables and services. Life sciences net revenue in 2011 increased 21 percent compared to 2010. Excluding the impact of the Varian acquisition, the Hycor divestiture and other recent acquisitions, revenue grew 13 percent year over year. In addition, foreign currency movements for 2011 had a favorable impact of 3 percentage points compared to 2010. Revenue growth was led by the LC, LC-MS, automation, genomics, and services portfolios, along with Research Products including NMR and MRI. The automation business continues to scale globally through increased market penetration and new product introductions, while SureSelect Complete remains a key performer for the genomics business. Geographically, excluding the impact of acquisitions and the Hycor divestiture, revenues grew 11 percent in the Americas, 7 percent in Europe, 16 percent in Japan, and 23 percent in other Asia Pacific during 2011 when compared to 2010. Growth in the Americas was helped by an expanded sales channel selling a broader portfolio of products to our customers, while China growth remains strong. Life sciences revenues in 2010 increased 21 percent compared to 2009. Excluding acquisitions and the Hycor divestiture, life sciences revenues in 2010 increased 14 percent compared to 2009, with growth in all regional markets, especially the Americas, Japan, and other Asia Pacific regions. During this fiscal year, solid revenue growth was present in the pharmaceutical and biotech, academic and government markets, as well as in other applied markets such as petrochemical. However, we saw a slowdown in growth from the pharmaceutical market toward the end of the fiscal year. Despite budget restrictions in most large pharmaceutical companies, technology refresh programs continue to drive traditional replacement business to move to the latest technologies. In the 50 Table of Contents academic market, next generation sequencing continues to be very active. The petrochemical and food safety applied markets remain strong. Looking forward, we expect reasonable momentum in our markets to drive further demand in our instruments and application solutions. The life sciences business also remains focused on expanding our application portfolio. The Lab901 acquisition will allow us to address the demand for higher automation and throughput for DNA and protein analysis. With the acquisition of Biocius Life Sciences and its RapidFire high-throughput mass spectrometry drug-screening technology platform, we are well positioned to expand our reach within the pharmaceutical market. The life sciences channel is specifically adding capabilities to address life science applications expertise, an area of critical need. We will also focus on investments related to emerging countries and emerging markets. In addition, our strategic focus is to complete the successful integration of the Varian expanded life sciences product portfolio, including complementary products in liquid chromatography, mass spectrometry, consumables, new offerings in dissolution testing, and magnetic resonance (NMR, MRI). We are focusing on improving the Research Product Division growth and profitability. Progress has been made in filling service and sales positions, as well as redefining teams internally. Additionally, supply chain and manufacturing support have been added and factories are being modified to meet future growth and cost goals. Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the life sciences business' margins, expenses and income from operations for 2011 versus 2010, and 2010 versus 2009. Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 Change 2010 over 2009 Change 2011 2010 2009 Total gross margin 52.0 % 53.5 % 54.2 % (2) ppts (1) ppt Operating margin 13.2 % 15.0 % 14.3 % (2) ppts 1 ppt (in millions) Research and development $ 174 $ 142 $ 131 22% 9% Selling, general and administrative $ 522 $ 427 $ 356 22% 20% Income from operations $ 237 $ 221 $ 174 7% 27% Gross margins declined by 2 percentage points in 2011 compared to 2010. Changes in 2011 were due to the impact of the Varian portfolio, higher logistics costs, and higher consumables costs partially offset by favorable volume impact. Gross margins declined by 1 percentage point in 2010 compared to 2009 mainly due to the addition of the Varian portfolio. Research and development expenses increased 22 percent in 2011 compared to 2010. Increase was due to our acquisitions (Varian, Lab901, and Biocius) and continued investments in new product development. Research and development expenses increased 9 percent in 2010 compared to 2009, mostly driven by the Varian acquisition and selective investments in new product introductions partially offset by the Hycor divestiture. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 22 percent in 2011 compared to 2010. Increase was due to acquisitions (Varian, Lab901, and Biocius), higher commissions, and investments in sales channel coverage partially offset by lower discretionary spending. As we grew our installed base, investments in emerging markets and sales support capabilities also had an impact on these expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 20 percent in 2010 compared to 51 Table of Contents 2009. The increase was mostly driven by the Varian acquisition and establishment and staffing of the dedicated life sciences sales channel partially offset by the Hycor divestiture. Operating margins declined by 2 percentage points in 2011 compared to 2010. Operating margins improved by 1 percentage point in 2010 compared to 2009. Factors which led to operating margin variances for these periods are collectively highlighted in the above discussions on gross margins, research and development expenses, and selling, general and administrative expenses. Income from Operations Income from operations in 2011 increased by $16 million or 7 percent on a revenue increase of $313 million, a 5 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental. Income from operations in 2010 increased by $47 million or 27 percent compared to 2009 on a revenue increase of $260 million, an 18 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental. Chemical Analysis Our chemical analysis business provides application-focused solutions that include instruments, software, consumables, and services that enable customers to identify, quantify and analyze the physical and biological properties of substances and products. Key product categories in chemical analysis include: gas chromatography (GC) systems, columns and components; gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) systems; inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) instruments; atomic absorption (AA) instruments; inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) instruments; software and data systems; vacuum pumps and measurement technologies; services and support for our products. Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 Change 2010 over 2009 Change 2011 2010 2009 (in millions) Orders $ 1,589 $ 1,224 $ 853 30% 43% Net revenue from products $ 1,194 $ 954 $ 653 25% 46% Net revenue from services and other 324 246 191 32% 29% Total net revenue $ 1,518 $ 1,200 $ 844 27% 42% Chemical analysis orders in 2011 increased 30 percent compared to 2010. Excluding the impact of the Varian and A2 Technologies acquisitions, orders grew 11 percent year over year. Due to the close date of the Varian acquisition which occurred on May 14, 2010, we have excluded the period from November 1, 2010 to the May 14, 2011 when we compare periods without the Varian acquisition. Order results were led by solid performance in the GC, GC-MS, and ICP-MS instruments, along with consumables and services. Growth in the services and support business was driven by strength in compliance and preventive maintenance services. Replacement cycle purchasing remains strong, driving solid order performance in instruments such as the 7890A GC, autosampler and 5975 series GC-MS. Geographically, excluding the impact of the Varian and A2 Technologies acquisitions, orders grew 3 percent in the Americas, 10 percent in Europe, 3 percent in Japan, and 24 percent in other Asia Pacific during 2011 when compared to 2010. China continues to be a major growth driver as government investments to upgrade lab capabilities and capacities remain strong. Chemical analysis orders in 2010 increased 43 percent compared to 2009. Excluding acquisitions, chemical analysis orders in 2010 increased 17 percent compared to 2009, driven by strength in the GC, GC-MS, ICPMS, and vacuum pump portfolios, along with consumables and services. 52 Table of Contents Chemical analysis net revenue in 2011 increased 27 percent compared to 2010. Excluding the impact of the Varian and A2 Technologies acquisitions, revenues grew 8 percent year over year. In addition, foreign currency movements for 2011 had a favorable impact of 3 percentage points compared to 2010. Revenue growth was led by the GC, GC-MS, and ICP-MS instruments, along with services. Geographically, excluding the impact of the Varian and A2 Technologies acquisitions, revenues grew 1 percent in the Americas, 2 percent in Europe, 4 percent in Japan, and 26 percent in other Asia Pacific during 2011 when compared to 2010. Unexpectedly strong results in the United States last year due to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill remediation efforts and weakness in government spending in the current year negatively impacted year over year comparisons for the Americas. Chemical analysis revenues in 2010 increased 42 percent compared to 2009. Excluding acquisitions, chemical analysis revenues in 2010 increased 15 percent compared to 2009, with growth in all regional markets, especially the Americas, Japan, and other Asia Pacific regions. Growth in core end markets continues. The energy, chemical, and food markets remain strong overall, while the environmental and food markets are particularly strong in China. In the petrochemical market, the replacement of aging equipment remains robust worldwide and new investment to expand refining capacity continues in Asia. In the food market, the demand to export safe and high quality food in emerging markets, especially China, remains robust. Globalization of the food supply generates business risk for food producers, and our instruments help mitigate that risk. New food safety laws in the United States, India, and China are increasing demand for chemical measurement. The demand continues to drive increased testing capacity and instrument purchases in all product categories, consumables, and services. In the environmental market, discovery of emerging contaminates continues to be important research to protect the public health in mature geographies while demand for safe drinking water is strong in emerging economies. Both factors drive increased instrument purchases, especially high end mass spectrometry instruments. Looking forward, we seek to capitalize on sales opportunities arising from a wide range of new product introductions during the last quarter of this fiscal year. We will also look to complete the successful integration of Varian. With Varian, our chemical analysis product portfolio has new offerings in spectroscopy and vacuum technologies, complementary mass spectrometry products, and an expanded consumables portfolio which are being leveraged globally with an integrated sales team. We are focusing on improvements in profitability of the Varian portfolio by refreshing products and leveraging our Asia supply chain. In addition to driving value from our acquisitions, we continue to focus on expanding our core offerings, especially opportunities in consumables and services. We will also focus on expanding our leadership position in developing countries and emerging markets. Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the chemical analysis business's margins, expenses and income from operations for 2011 versus 2010, and 2010 versus 2009. Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 Change 2010 over 2009 Change 2011 2010 2009 Total gross margin 51.1 % 53.5 % 54.4 % (2) ppts (1) ppt Operating margin 20.6 % 23.3 % 25.6 % (3) ppts (2) ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 92 $ 68 $ 50 35% 36% Selling, general and administrative $ 371 $ 294 $ 193 26% 52% Income from operations $ 313 $ 279 $ 216 12% 29% 53 Table of Contents Gross margins declined by 2 percentage points in 2011 compared to 2010. Changes in 2011 were due to the impact of the Varian portfolio and higher logistics costs. Gross margins declined by 1 percentage point in 2010 compared to 2009 mainly due to the addition of the Varian portfolio. Research and development expenses increased 35 percent in 2011 compared to 2010. Increase was due to the Varian acquisition and investments in product R&D to support ongoing portfolio enhancement and expansion. Research and development expenses increased 36 percent in 2010 compared to 2009, primarily driven by the Varian acquisition. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 26 percent in 2011 compared to 2010. Increase was due primarily to the Varian and A2 Technologies acquisitions, higher commissions, and investments in sales channel coverage partially offset by lower discretionary spending. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 52 percent in 2010 compared to 2009, primarily driven by the Varian acquisition. Operating margins declined by 3 percentage points in 2011 compared to 2010. Operating margins declined by 2 percentage points in 2010 compared to 2009. Factors which led to operating margin variances for these periods are collectively highlighted in the above discussions on gross margins, research and development expenses, and selling, general and administrative expenses. Income from Operations Income from operations in 2011 increased by $34 million or 12 percent on a revenue increase of $318 million, an 11 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental. Income from operations in 2010 increased by $63 million or 29 percent compared to 2009 on a revenue increase of $356 million, an 18 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental. Electronic Measurement Our electronic measurement business provides electronic measurement instruments and systems, software design tools and related services that are used in the design, development, manufacture, installation, deployment and operation of electronics equipment, and microscopy products. Related services include start-up assistance, instrument productivity and application services and instrument calibration and repair. We also offer customization, consulting and optimization services throughout the customer's product lifecycle. Orders and Net Revenue Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 Change 2010 over 2009 Change 2011 2010 2009 (in millions) Orders $ 3,305 $ 2,994 $ 2,399 10% 25% Net revenue from products $ 2,875 $ 2,345 $ 1,949 23% 20% Net revenue from services and other 441 439 469 0% (6)% Total net revenue $ 3,316 $ 2,784 $ 2,418 19% 15% Electronic measurement orders increased 10 percent in 2011 compared to 2010. Foreign currency movements had a slightly favorable impact on the year-over-year growth rate. Key contributors to the year-over-year growth included strength in wireless manufacturing and digital test that was partially offset by a decline in network monitoring orders associated with the divestiture of the network solutions business. Order growth associated with component manufacturers, semiconductor 54 Table of Contents companies, and service and support was solid year-over-year. On a geographic basis, 2011 orders increased 3 percent in the Americas, 3 percent in Europe, 20 percent in Japan, and 21 percent in Asia Pacific excluding Japan. Electronic measurement orders increased 25 percent in 2010 compared to 2009, reflecting broad-based economic recovery with strength in industrial and wireless R&D and manufacturing demand partially offset by a decline in network monitoring orders relating to the divestiture of the network solutions business. Electronic measurement revenues increased 19 percent in 2011 compared to 2010 due to strength in both general purpose and communications test markets. Revenue growth exceeded order growth year-over-year due to backlog build in 2010 with orders higher than revenue and a slight decrease in backlog in 2011. Foreign currency movements were slightly favorable, contributing to year-over-year growth. Regionally, revenues from the Americas increased 17 percent, Europe grew 15 percent, Japan improved 30 percent reflecting strong wireless test business, and Asia Pacific excluding Japan increased 20 percent compared to 2010 due to strong semiconductor business earlier in the fiscal year and ongoing wireless test demand. Revenue from products increased 23 percent year-over-year while service related revenue was flat due to the divestiture of the network solutions business. Electronic measurement revenues increased 15 percent in 2010 compared to 2009 due to strong growth across all key markets, particularly industrial and wireless manufacturing demand, partially offset by a decrease in network monitoring associated with the divestiture of the network solutions business. General purpose test revenues, representing approximately 63 percent of electronic measurement revenues, reflected strong demand from industrial, computers, and semiconductor customers and moderating growth in aerospace and defense. Overall improvement in economic conditions supported greater demand from customers with industrial or general purpose applications. Growth in the computers and semiconductor business reflected strong demand for digital test driven in part by the proliferation of high speed data transmission and strength in semiconductor test due to growth in end user markets, including smartphones. Aerospace and defense business was solid, reflecting strong demand for information management and surveillance applications moderated by the general funding uncertainty in the United States for the Department of Defense. In 2010, general purpose test represented 64 percent of electronic measurement revenues, reflecting strong computers and semiconductor business and solid industrial and aerospace and defense related demand. Communications test revenues, representing approximately 37 percent of electronic measurement, experienced growth in wireless R&D and manufacturing and other communications test, partly offset by a decline in network monitoring revenues due to the divestiture of the network solutions business. Solid growth in wireless R&D reflected more favorable market conditions and targeted investments in high data rate applications, including long-term evolution ("LTE"), an emerging wireless, standard that is in the early stages of adoption. Strength in wireless manufacturing was driven by growth in smartphones and continued 3G expansion. Strong growth in other communications test reflected the expansion of broadband technologies driven by the evolution to data-driven services. In 2010, communications test represented 36 percent of electronic measurement revenues, reflecting a broad recovery in communications markets with growth in all sub-markets except for the decline in network monitoring revenues due to the divestiture of the network solutions business. Looking forward, we expect moderating growth rates as a result of comparisons to strong 2011 results. We anticipate the communications test business to remain solid, driven by growth in smartphones, continuing 3G expansion, and further adoption of the new wireless standard, LTE. We expect moderating demand in our general purpose segment in the near term, reflecting a cautious spending environment given the global economic uncertainty and relatively flat aerospace and defense business in the U.S. 55 Table of Contents Gross Margin and Operating Margin The following table shows the electronic measurement business's margins, expenses and income from operations for 2011 versus 2010 and 2010 versus 2009. Years Ended October 31, 2011 over 2010 Change 2010 over 2009 Change 2011 2010 2009 Total gross margin 58.4 % 58.4 % 53.5 % 5 ppts Operating margin 22.9 % 15.7 % % 7 ppts 16 ppts (in millions) Research and development $ 379 $ 391 $ 425 (3)% (8)% Selling, general and administrative $ 798 $ 798 $ 869 (8)% Income from operations $ 760 $ 438 $ 1 74% 100% Gross margins for products and services were flat in 2011 compared to 2010 on an absolute basis and slightly lower on a volume-adjusted basis. Changes in gross margins reflected the favorable impact of higher volume offset by the unfavorable impact of currency movements, unfavorable mix with a higher proportion of lower gross margin wireless manufacturing business, increased variable and incentive pay, and higher infrastructure costs. In 2010, gross margins improved 5 percentage points compared to 2009 primarily due to higher volume and a lower cost structure. Research and development expenses declined 3 percent in 2011 compared to 2010. The decline was driven primarily by lower infrastructure costs and spending reductions of which a portion related to the network solutions business divestiture that were partially offset by higher variable and incentive pay and the unfavorable impact of currency movements. Research and development expenses declined 8 percent in 2010 compared to 2009, reflecting savings from restructuring programs, lower infrastructure costs, and spending reductions partially offset by wage restoration, higher variable and incentive pay, and the unfavorable impact of currency movements. Selling, general and administrative expenses were flat in 2011 compared to 2010. Similar to R&D, year-over-year changes included lower infrastructure costs and spending reductions partly related to the network solutions divestiture offset by the unfavorable impact of currency movements and higher variable and incentive pay. Selling, general and administrative expenses declined 8 percent in 2010 compared to 2009, reflecting savings from restructuring programs, lower infrastructure costs, and reduced spending partly offset by wage restoration, higher variable pay and commissions, and unfavorable impact of currency movements. Operating margins improved by 7 percentage points in 2011 compared to 2010 due to the combination of higher revenue volume and lower infrastructure costs partly offset by increased variable and incentive pay and the unfavorable impact of currency movements. Operating margins increased 16 percentage points in 2010 compared to 2009, reflecting higher revenue volume and structural and operational expense reductions. Income from Operations Income from operations in 2011 increased by $322 million or 74 percent compared to 2010 on a revenue increase of $532 million, a 61 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental that reflected the benefits of higher revenue volume and limited expense growth. Going forward, the year-over-year operating margin incremental is expected to moderate as compares are made against relatively stronger 2011 results. Income from operations in 2010 increased by $437 million or 100 percent compared to 2009 on a revenue increase of $366 million, a 119 percent year-over-year operating margin incremental that included the benefit of structural and operational expense reductions. 56 Table of Contents Financial Condition Liquidity and Capital Resources As of October 31, 2011, approximately $3.4 billion of our cash and cash equivalents is held outside of the U.S. in our foreign subsidiaries. Most of the amounts held outside of the U.S. could be repatriated to the U.S. but, under current law, would be subject to U.S. federal and state income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Agilent has accrued for U.S. federal and state tax liabilities on the earnings of its foreign subsidiaries except when the earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the U.S. Repatriation could result in additional material U.S. federal and state income tax payments in future years. We utilize a variety of funding strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. Our financial position as of October 31, 2011 consisted of cash and cash equivalents of $3,527 million as compared to $2,649 million as of October 31, 2010. Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,260 million in 2011 as compared to $718 million provided in 2010 mainly due to improved operating results. We also received $65 million in interest rate swap proceeds and $61 million in respect of a tax sharing settlement with Hewlett Packard Company during the year ended October 31, 2011. We paid approximately net $22 million in taxes in 2011 as compared to net $48 million in the same period in 2010. In 2009, we generated $408 million in net cash provided by operating activities. In 2011, accounts receivable provided cash of $11 million as compared to cash used of $166 million in 2010. Days' sales outstanding were 45 days in 2011 as compared to 50 days in 2010. Accounts payable used cash of $35 million in 2011 as compared to cash provided of $113 million in 2010. Cash used in inventory was $208 million in 2011 compared to cash used of $51 million in 2010. Inventory day's on-hand increased to 100 days in 2011 compared to 87 days in 2010. We contributed $33 million and $30 million to our U.S. defined benefit plans in 2011 and 2010, respectively. We contributed $59 million and $47 million to our non-U.S. defined benefit plans in 2011 and 2010, respectively. We contributed zero and $1 million to our U.S. post-retirement benefit plans in 2011 and 2010, respectively. Our non-U.S. defined benefit plans are generally funded ratably throughout the year. Total contributions in 2011 were $14 million or 18% percent more than 2010. Our annual contributions are highly dependent on the relative performance of our assets versus our projected liabilities, among other factors. We expect to contribute approximately $82 million to our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit plans during 2012. Net Cash Provided by/Used in Investing Activities Net cash provided in investing activities in 2011 was $1,294 million compared to $1,174 million used in 2010. In 2009, we used $14 million of net cash in the investing activities of operations. Investments in property, plant and equipment were $188 million in 2011 and $121 million in 2010. Proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment were $18 million in 2011 as compared to $7 million in 2010. In 2011, we invested $98 million in acquisitions of businesses and intangible assets compared to $1,313 million in 2010 which was primarily related to our acquisition of Varian. Restricted cash decreased $1,545 million mostly due to the reclassification of restricted cash to cash and cash equivalents following the December 10, 2010 settlement of the World Trade repurchase obligation. In 2009, we invested $2 million in acquisitions of businesses and purchase of intangible assets. Proceeds from the sale of investment securities in 2011 were $16 million as compared to 57 Table of Contents $38 million in 2010. Proceeds from divestitures were $1 million in 2011, compared to $205 million in 2010. Net Cash Provided by/Used in Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities in 2011 was $1,693 million compared to $601 million and $657 million net cash provided in 2010 and 2009, respectively. We satisfied the $1,500 million financing obligation of World Trade in its entirety on December 10, 2010. Treasury stock repurchases On November 19, 2009 our Board of Directors approved a share-repurchase program to reduce or eliminate dilution of basic outstanding shares in connection with issuances of stock under the company's equity incentive plans. The share-repurchase program does not require the company to acquire a specific number of shares and may be suspended or discontinued at any time. There is no fixed termination date for the new share-repurchase program. For the year ended October 31, 2011 we repurchased approximately 12 million shares for $497 million. For the year ended October 31, 2010 we repurchased 13 million shares for $411 million. Credit Facility On October 20, 2011, we entered into a five-year credit agreement, which provides for a $400 million unsecured credit facility that will expire on October 20, 2016. The company may use amounts borrowed under the facility for general corporate purposes. As of October 31, 2011 the company has no borrowings outstanding under the facility. The Credit Agreement replaced the Company's prior Five-Year Credit Agreement dated as of May 11, 2007, which was terminated upon the execution of the Credit Agreement. We were in compliance with the covenants for the credit facilities during the year ended October 31, 2011. Short-term debt On September 9, 2009, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $250 million in senior notes maturing in 2012 ("2012 notes"). The 2012 notes were issued at 99.91% of their principal amount, bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.45% per annum, and mature on September 14, 2012. Interest is payable semi-annually on March 14th and September 14th of each year, and payments commenced on March 14, 2010. Upon the closing of the offering of the 2012 senior notes, we entered into interest rate swaps with an aggregate notional amount of $250 million. Under the interest rate swaps, we will receive fixed-rate interest payments and will make payments based on the U.S. dollar LIBOR plus 258 basis points with respect to the 2012 senior notes. The economic effect of these swaps will be to convert the fixed-rate interest expense on the senior notes to a variable LIBOR-based interest rate. The hedging relationship qualifies for the shortcut method of assessing hedge effectiveness, and consequently we do not expect any ineffectiveness during the life of the swap and any movement in the value of the swap would be reflected in the movement in fair value of the senior notes. At October 31, 2011, the fair value of the swaps on 2012 senior notes was an asset of $3 million, with a corresponding increase in the carrying value of 2012 senior notes. We satisfied the financing obligation of World Trade in its entirety on December 10, 2010 using the proceeds of our senior notes issued in July 2010 and existing cash on our balance sheet. 58 Table of Contents Long-term debt On October 24, 2007, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $600 million in senior notes maturing in 2017 ("2017 notes"). The 2017 senior notes were issued at 99.60% of their principal amount, bear interest at a fixed rate of 6.50% per annum, and mature on November 1, 2017. Interest is payable semi-annually on May 1 st and November 1 st of each year and payments commenced on May 1, 2008. On November 25, 2008, we terminated two interest rate swap contracts associated with our 2017 senior notes that represented the notional amount of $400 million. The asset value, including interest receivable, upon termination was approximately $43 million and the amount to be amortized at October 31, 2011 was $31 million. The gain is being deferred and amortized to interest expense over the remaining life of the 2017 senior notes. On September 9, 2009, the company issued an aggregate principal amount of $500 million in senior notes maturing in 2015 ("2015 notes"). The 2015 notes were issued at 99.69% of their principal amount, bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.50% per annum, and mature on September 14, 2015. Interest is payable semi-annually on March 14th and September 14th of each year, and payments commenced on March 14, 2010. On June 6, 2011, we terminated our interest rate swap contracts related to our 2015 senior notes that represented the notional amount of $500 million. The asset value, including interest receivable, upon termination for these contracts was approximately $31 million and the amount to be amortized at October 31, 2011 was $24 million. The gain is being deferred and amortized to interest expense over the remaining life of the 2015 senior notes. On July 13, 2010, Agilent issued two tranches of senior notes with an aggregate principal amount of $750 million, a $250 million tranche maturing in 2013 ("2013 notes") and a $500 million tranche maturing in 2020 ("2020 notes"). The 2013 notes were issued at 99.82% of their principal amount, bear interest at a fixed rate of 2.50% per annum and mature on July 15, 2013. The 2020 notes were issued at 99.54% of their principal amount, bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.00% per annum, and mature on July 15, 2020. Interest on both tranches is payable semi-annually on January 15th and July 15th of each year, payments commenced on January 15, 2011. On August 9, 2011, we terminated our interest rate swap contracts related to our 2020 senior notes that represented the notional amount of $500 million. The asset value, including interest receivable, upon termination for these contracts was approximately $34 million and the amount to be amortized at October 31, 2011 was $32 million. The gain is being deferred and amortized to interest expense over the remaining life of the 2020 senior notes. Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Other We have contractual commitments for non-cancelable operating leases. See Note 17 "Commitments and Contingencies", to our consolidated financial statements for further information on our non-cancelable operating leases. Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which are based on normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from fluctuations related to global economics and markets. Our cash balances are generated and held in many locations throughout the world. Local government regulations may restrict our ability to move cash balances to meet cash needs under certain circumstances. We do not currently expect such regulations and restrictions to impact our ability to pay vendors and conduct operations throughout our global organization. 59 Table of Contents Contractual Commitments Our cash flows from operations are dependent on a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax and other payments. As a result, the impact of contractual obligations on our liquidity and capital resources in future periods should be analyzed in conjunction with such factors. The following table summarizes our total contractual obligations at October 31, 2011 for operations and excludes amounts recorded in our consolidated balance sheet (in millions): Less than one year One to three years Three to five years More than five years Operating leases $ 51 $ 71 $ 31 $ 12 Commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers 799 3 Other purchase commitments 62 Retirement plans 82 Total $ 994 $ 74 $ 31 $ 12 Operating leases. Commitments under operating leases relate primarily to leasehold property, see Note 17, "Commitments and Contingencies". Commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers. We purchase components from a variety of suppliers and use several contract manufacturers to provide manufacturing services for our products. During the normal course of business, we issue purchase orders with estimates of our requirements several months ahead of the delivery dates. However, our agreements with these suppliers usually provide us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to firm orders being placed. Typically purchase orders outstanding with delivery dates within 30 days are non-cancelable. Therefore, only approximately 48 percent of our reported purchase commitments arising from these agreements are firm, non-cancelable, and unconditional commitments. We expect to fulfill almost all purchase commitments for inventory within one year. In addition to the above mentioned commitments to contract manufacturers and suppliers, we record a liability for firm, non-cancelable, and unconditional purchase commitments for quantities in excess of our future demand forecasts consistent with our policy relating to excess inventory. As of October 31, 2011, the liability for our firm, non-cancelable and unconditional purchase commitments was $5 million, compared to $4 million as of October 31, 2010. These amounts are included in other accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet. Other purchase commitments. We have categorized "other purchase commitments" as contracts with professional services suppliers. Typically we can cancel these contracts within 90 days without penalties. For those contracts that are not cancelable within 90 days without penalties, we are disclosing the amounts we are obligated to pay to a supplier under each contract in that period before such contract can be cancelled. Our contractual obligations with these suppliers under "other purchase commitments" were approximately $62 million for the next year. Retirement Plans. Commitments under the retirement plans relate to expected contributions to be made to our U.S. and non U.S. defined benefit plans and to our post-retirement medical plans. 60 Table of Contents We had no material off-balance sheet arrangements as of October 31, 2011 or October 31, 2010. On Balance Sheet Arrangements The following table summarizes our total contractual obligations recorded in our consolidated balance sheet pertaining to our short-term and long-term debt as of October 31, 2011(in millions): Less than one year One to three years Three to five years More than five years Senior notes $ 250 $ 250 $ 500 $ 1,100 We have contractual obligations for interest payments on the above debts. Interest rates and payment dates are detailed in "Net Cash Provided by/Used in Financing Activities". Other long-term liabilities include $356 million and $430 million of liabilities for uncertain tax positions as of October 31, 2011 and October 31, 2010, respectively. We are unable to accurately predict when these amounts will be realized or released. 61 Table of Contents 
