CIK: 1111711
Company Name: NISOURCE INC DE
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2019-02-20


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (continued) N I S OURCE I NC . In January 2017, we changed the method used to estimate the service and interest components of net periodic benefit cost for pension and other postretirement benefits. This change, compared to the previous method, resulted in a decrease in the actuarially-determined service and interest cost components. Historically, we estimated service and interest cost utilizing a single weighted-average discount rate derived from the yield curve used to measure the benefit obligation at the beginning of the period. For fiscal 2017 and beyond, we now utilize a full yield curve approach to estimate these components by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used in the determination of the benefit obligation to the relevant projected cash flows. For further discussion of our pension and other postretirement benefits, see Note 11 , Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Goodwill. We have seven goodwill reporting units, comprised of the seven state operating companies within the Gas Distribution Operations reportable segment. Our goodwill assets at December 31, 2018 were $1,690.7 million , most of which resulted from the acquisition of Columbia on November 1, 2000. As required by GAAP, we test for impairment of goodwill on an annual basis and on an interim basis when events or circumstances indicate that a potential impairment may exist. Our annual goodwill test takes place in the second quarter of each year and was most recently finalized as of May 1, 2018. In the third quarter of 2018, we determined the Greater Lawrence Incident represented a triggering event that required an impairment analysis of goodwill. The incident specifically impacts our Columbia of Massachusetts reporting unit. The quantitative impairment analysis as of September 30, 2018 determined the fair value of Columbia of Massachusetts reporting unit continued to exceed its carrying value. For additional information, refer to Note 6, "Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. We completed a quantitative ("step 1") fair value measurement of our reporting units during the May 1, 2016 goodwill test. Consistent with our historical impairment testing of goodwill, fair value of the reporting units was determined based on a weighting of income and market approaches. These approaches require significant judgments including appropriate long-term growth rates and discount rates for the income approach and appropriate multiples of earnings for peer companies and control premiums for the market approach. A qualitative ("step 0") test was completed on May 1, 2018. We assessed various assumptions, events and circumstances that would have affected the estimated fair value of the reporting units in our baseline May 1, 2016 test. The results of this assessment indicated that it is not more likely than not that its reporting unit fair values are less than the reporting unit carrying values and no impairments are necessary. The discount rates were derived using peer company data compiled with the assistance of a third party valuation services firm. The discount rates used are subject to change based on changes in tax rates at both the state and federal level, debt and equity ratios at each reporting unit and general economic conditions. The long-term growth rate was derived by evaluating historic growth rates, new business and investment opportunities beyond the near term horizon. The long-term growth rate is subject to change depending on inflationary impacts to the U.S. economy and the individual business environments in which each reporting unit operates. The May 1, 2016 test indicated the fair value of each of the reporting units that carry or are allocated goodwill exceeded their carrying values, indicating that no impairment existed under the step 1 annual impairment test. If the estimates of free cash flow used in this step 1 analysis had been 10% lower, the resulting fair values would have still been greater than the carrying value for each of the reporting units tested, holding all other assumptions constant. Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recorded as products and services are delivered. Utility revenues are billed to customers monthly on a cycle basis. Revenues are recorded on the accrual basis and include estimates for electricity and gas delivered but not billed. We adopted the provisions of ASC 606 beginning on January 1, 2018 using a modified retrospective method, which was applied to all contracts. No material adjustments were made to January 1, 2018 opening balances and no material changes in the amount or timing of future revenue recognition occurred as a result of the adoption of ASC 606. Refer to Note 3 "Revenue Recognition," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements Refer to Note 2 , "Recent Accounting Pronouncements," in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. 
