CIK: 1120193
Company Name: NASDAQ INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2016-02-26


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Non-GAAP adjustments related to operating income for the year ended December 31, 2015 related to the following: restructuring charges of $172 million. See Note 3, Restructuring Charges, to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion; merger and strategic initiatives costs of $10 million primarily related to certain strategic initiatives and our acquisition of DWA; amortization expense of acquired intangible assets of $62 million. S ince management does not consider intangible asset amortization expense for the purpose of evaluating the performance of the business or its managers or when making decisions to allocate resources, such expenses have been shown as a non-GAAP adjustment; and reversal of previously recorded VAT receivables no longer deemed collectible of $12 million . See Other Tax Matter, of Note 10, Income Taxes , to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the VAT receivables . 54 Table Of Contents Non-GAAP adjustments related to operating income for the year ended December 31, 2014 related to the following: merger and strategic initiatives costs of $81 million primarily related to our acquisition of the TR Corporate businesses in May 2013 and eSpeed in June 2013 and a charge of $23 million related to the reversal of a receivable under a tax sharing agreement with an unrelated party; special legal expense of $2 million; sublease loss reserve charge of $11 million on space we currently occupy due to excess capacity; loss on extinguishment of debt of $11 million reflecting $9 million related to the early extinguishment of our 4.00% notes in June 2014 and $2 million related to the refinancing of our 2011 credit facility ; and amortization expense of acquired intangible assets of $69 million. S ince management does not consider intangible asset amortization expense for the purpose of evaluating the performance of the business or its managers or when making decisions to allocate resources, such expenses have been shown as a non-GAAP adjustment. Our primary exposure to foreign currency denominated revenues less transaction-based expenses, operating income, and non-GAAP operating income for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 is presented in the following tables: Euro Swedish Krona Other Foreign Currencies U.S. Dollar Total (in millions, except currency rate) Year Ended December 31, 2015 Average foreign currency rate to the U.S. dollar 1.1097 0.1186 # N/A N/A Percentage of revenues less transaction-based expenses 10.4% 8.5% 4.4% 76.7% 100.0% Percentage of operating income 20.3% (18.3)% (8.1)% 106.1% 100.0% Impact of a 10% adverse currency fluctuation on revenues less transaction-based expenses $ (22) $ (18) $ (9) $ - $ (49) Impact of a 10% adverse currency fluctuation on operating income $ (15) $ (13) $ (6) $ - $ (34) Reconciliation between U.S. GAAP operating income and non-GAAP operating income: Operating income (loss) $ 146 $ (132) $ (58) $ 764 $ 720 Non-GAAP adjustments: Restructuring charges 5 135 7 25 172 Merger and strategic initiatives - - 1 9 10 Amortization expense of acquired intangible assets 3 12 8 39 62 Reversal of value added tax refund - 12 - - 12 Non-GAAP operating income (loss) $ 154 $ 27 $ (42) $ 837 $ 976 Percentage of non-GAAP operating income 15.8% 2.8% (4.3)% 85.7% 100.0% Impact of a 10% adverse currency fluctuation on non-GAAP operating income $ (15) $ (3) $ (4) $ - $ (22) Euro Swedish Krona Other Foreign Currencies U.S. Dollar Total (in millions, except currency rate) Year Ended December 31, 2014 Average foreign currency rate to the U.S. dollar 1.3267 0.1457 # N/A N/A Percentage of revenues less transaction-based expenses 12.4% 9.7% 5.3% 72.6% 100.0% Percentage of operating income 23.5% (0.7)% (10.1)% 87.3% 100.0% Impact of a 10% adverse currency fluctuation on revenues less transaction-based expenses $ (26) $ (20) $ (11) $ - $ (57) Impact of a 10% adverse currency fluctuation on operating income $ (17) $ (1) $ (8) $ - $ (26) Reconciliation between U.S. GAAP operating income and non-GAAP operating income: Operating income (loss) $ 177 $ (5) $ (76) $ 658 $ 754 55 Table Of Contents Non-GAAP adjustments: Merger and strategic initiatives 2 5 13 61 81 Special legal expenses - - - 2 2 Sublease loss reserve - - - 11 11 Extinguishment of debt - - - 11 11 Amortization expense of acquired intangible assets 3 15 9 42 69 Other - - - 2 2 Non-GAAP operating income (loss) $ 182 $ 15 $ (54) $ 787 $ 930 Percentage of non-GAAP operating income 19.6% 1.6% (5.8)% 84.6% 100.0% Impact of a 10% adverse currency fluctuation on non-GAAP operating income $ (18) $ (2) $ (5) $ - $ (25) # Represents multiple foreign currency rates. N/A Not applicable. Our investments in foreign subsidiaries are exposed to volatility in currency exchange rates through translation of the foreign subsidiaries net assets or equity to U.S. dollars. Substantially all of our foreign subsidiaries operate in functional currencies other than the U.S. dollar. Fluctuations in currency exchange rates may create volatility in our results of operations as we are required to translate the balance sheets and operational results of these foreign currency denominated subsidiaries into U.S. dollars for consolidated reporting. The translation of foreign subsidiaries non-U.S. dollar balance sheets into U.S. dollars for consolidated reporting results in a cumulative translation adjustment which is recorded in accumulated other comprehensive loss within stockholders equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Our primary exposure to net assets in foreign currencies as of December 31, 2015 is presented in the following table: Net Assets Impact of a 10% Adverse Currency Fluctuation (in millions) Swedish Krona (1) $ 3,334 $ (333) Norwegian Krone 179 (18) British Pound 131 (13) Euro 135 (14) Australian Dollar 74 (7) (1) Includes goodwill of $ 2,588 million and intangible assets, net of $ 644 million. Credit Risk Credit risk is the potential loss due to the default or deterioration in credit quality of customers or counterparties. We are exposed to credit risk from third parties, including customers, counterparties and clearing agents. These parties may default on their obligations to us due to bankruptcy, lack of liquidity, operational failure or other reasons. We limit our exposure to credit risk by rigorously evaluating the counterparties with which we make investments and execute agreements. The financial investment portfolio objective is to invest in securities to preserve principal while maximizing yields, without significantly increasing risk. Credit risk associated with investments is minimized substantially by ensuring that these financial assets are placed with governments which have investment grade ratings, well-capitalized financial institutions and other creditworthy counterparties. Our subsidiary Nasdaq Execution Services may be exposed to credit risk, due to the default of trading counterparties, in connection with the routing services it provides for our trading customers. System trades in cash equities routed to other market centers for members of our cash equity exchanges are routed by Nasdaq Execution Services for clearing to the National Securities Clearing Corporation, or NSCC. In this function, Nasdaq Execution Services is to be neutral by the end of the trading day, but may be exposed to intraday risk if a trade extends beyond the trading day and into the next day, thereby leaving Nasdaq Execution Services susceptible to counterparty risk in the period between accepting the trade and routing it to the clearinghouse. In this interim period, Nasdaq Execution Services is not novating like a clearing broker but instead is subject to the short-term risk of counterparty failure before the clearinghouse enters the transaction. Once the clearinghouse officially accepts the trade for novation, Nasdaq Execution Services is legally removed from trade execution risk. However, Nasdaq has membership obligations to NSCC independent of Nasdaq Execution Services arrangements. Pursuant to the rules of the NSCC and Nasdaq Execution Services clearing agreement, Nasdaq Execution Services is liable for any losses incurred due to a counterparty or a clearing agent failure to satisfy its contractual obligations, either by making payment or delivering securities. Adverse movements in the prices of securities that are subject to these transactions can increase our credit 56 Table Of Contents risk. However, we believe that the risk of material loss is limited, as Nasdaq Execution Services customers are not permitted to trade on margin and NSCC rules limit counterparty risk on self-cleared transactions by establishing credit limits and capital deposit requirements for all brokers that clear with NSCC. Historically, Nasdaq Execution Services has never incurred a liability due to a customer failure to satisfy its contractual obligations as counterparty to a system trade. Credit difficulties or insolvency, or the perceived possibility of credit difficulties or insolvency, of one or more larger or visible market participants could also result in market-wide credit difficulties or other market disruptions. Execution Access is an introducing broker which operates the eSpeed trading platform for U.S. Treasury securities. Execution Access has a clearing arrangement with Cantor Fitzgerald. As of December 31, 2015, we have contributed $19 million of clearing deposits to Cantor Fitzgerald in connection with this clearing arrangement. These deposits are recorded in other current assets in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Some of the trading activity in Execution Access is cleared by Cantor Fitzgerald through the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation. Execution Access assumes the counterparty risk of clients that do not clear through the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation. Counterparty risk of clients exists for Execution Access between the trade date and settlement date of the individual transactions, which is one business day. All of Execution Access obligations under the clearing arrangement with Cantor Fitzgerald are guaranteed by Nasdaq. Counterparties that do not clear through the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation are subject to a credit due diligence process and may be required to post collateral, provide principal letters, or provide other forms of credit enhancement to Execution Access for the purpose of mitigating counterparty risk. We are exposed to credit risk through our clearing operations with Nasdaq Clearing. See Note 16, Clearing Operations, to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion. We also have credit risk related to transaction and subscription-based revenues that are billed to customers on a monthly or quarterly basis, in arrears. Our potential exposure to credit losses on these transactions is represented by the receivable balances in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. On an ongoing basis, we review and evaluate changes in the status of our counterparties creditworthiness. Credit losses such as those described above could adversely affect our consolidated financial position and results of operations. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The accounting policies described below are significantly affected by critical accounting estimates. Such accounting policies require significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements, and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies . Revenue Recognition Listing Services Revenues Listing s ervices revenues primarily include annual renewal fees, initial listing fees, and listing of additional shares fees. Annual renewal fees do not require any judgments or assumptions by management as these amounts are recognized ratably over the following 12-month period. However, listing of additional shares fees and initial listing fees are recognized on a straight-line basis over estimated service periods, which are four and six years, respectively, based on our historical listing experience and projected future listing duration. Unamortized balances are recorded as deferred revenue in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Technology Solutions Revenues Market Technology Revenues For most technology solutions, we enter into multiple-element sales arrangements to develop technology solutions, license the right to use software, and provide post-contract support and other services to our customers. In order to recognize revenues associated with each individual element of a multiple-element sales arrangement separately, we are required to establish the existence of vendor specific objective evidence of fair value , or VSOE, for each element. When VSOE for individual elements of an arrangement cannot be established, revenue is generally deferred and recognized over either the final element of the arrangement or the entire term of the arrangement for which the services will be delivered. Goodwill and Related Impairment Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the value assigned to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets of a business acquired. Goodwill is allocated to our reporting units based on the assignment of the fair values of each reporting unit of the acquired company. We test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level annually, or in interim periods if certain events occur 57 Table Of Contents indicating that the carrying amount may be impaired, such as changes in the business climate, poor indicators of operating performance or the sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit. For purposes of performing our goodwill impairment test, our five reporting units are the Market Services segment, the Listing Services segment, the Information Services segment , and the two businesses comprising the Technology Solutions segment: Corporate Solutions and Market Technology. We test for impairment during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year using carrying amounts as of October 1. In conducting the 2015 annual impairment test for goodwill, we first performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit was less than the carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it was necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill impairment test described in Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 350, Intangibles Goodwill and Other, or ASC Topic 350. The more-likely-than-not threshold is defined as having a likelihood of more than 50 percent. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then the two-step quantitative test for goodwill impairment is performed for the appropriate reporting units. Otherwise, we conclude that no impairment is indicated and the two-step quantitative test for goodwill impairment is not performed. In conducting the qualitative assessment, we analyzed actual and projected growth trends for each reporting unit, as well as historical performance versus plan and the results of prior quantitative tests performed. Additionally, each reporting unit assesses critical areas that may impact their business, including macroeconomic conditions and the related impact, market related exposures, competitive changes, new or discontinued products, changes in key personnel, and other potential risks to their projected financial results. If required, the quantitative goodwill impairment test is a two-step process performed at the reporting unit level. First, the fair value of each reporting unit is compared to its corresponding carrying amount, including goodwill. The fair value of each reporting unit is estimated using a combination of discounted cash flow valuation, which incorporates assumptions regarding future growth rates, terminal values, and discount rates, as well as guideline public company valuations, incorporating relevant trading multiples of comparable companies and other factors. The estimates and assumptions used consider historical performance and are consistent with the assumptions used in determining future profit plans for each reporting unit, which are approved by our board of directors. If the first step results in the carrying amount exceeding the fair value of the reporting unit, then a second step must be completed in order to determine the amount of goodwill impairment that should be recorded, if any. In the second step, the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is determined by allocating the reporting unit fair value to all of its assets and liabilities other than goodwill in a manner similar to a purchase price allocation. The implied fair value of the goodwill that results from the application of this second step is then compared to the carrying amount of the goodwill and an impairment charge is recorded for any difference. For our annual test of goodwill impairment in 2015 , we considered the results of prior quantitative test s p erformed on our reportable segments and also considered future financial projections, current market conditions, and any changes in the carrying amount of the reporting units. At the time of our 2015 annual impairment test, our goodwill balance was $ 5 , 421 million, of which $ 2 , 9 60 million was attributable to our Market Services segment, $ 1 06 million was attributable to our L isting Services segment, $ 1 , 8 32 million was attributable to our Information Services segment and $ 5 23 million was attributable to our Technology Solutions segment. We utilized the qualitative screen for our Listing Services, Information Services and Market Technology reporting units, as the excesses of their fair values over their respective carrying amounts at the time of the last quantitative test in 2013 were significant. In conducting the qualitative assessment for these three reporting units, we evaluated the performance of these reporting units since these last quantitative test, as well as future financial projections to determine if there were any changes in the key inputs used to determine the fair values of each reporting unit. We also considered the qualitative factors in ASC Topic 350, as well as other relevant events and circumstances. Based on the results of the qualitative assessment for each reporting unit, we concluded based on a preponderance of positive indicators and the weight of such indicators that the fair values of our Listing Services, Information Services and Market Technology reporting units are more likely than not greater than their respective carrying amounts and as a result, quantitative analyses were not needed. Therefore, no further testing of goodwill for impairment was performed for these reporting units for the year ended December 31, 2015 . Although the fair values of our Market Services and Corporate Solutions reporting units also exceeded their carrying amounts by more than 10% in our 2014 annual goodwill impairment test, since the fair values of these reporting units exceeded their carrying amounts by less than 10.0% in our 2013 annual goodwill impairment test, we bypassed the qualitative assessment for these reporting units. We performed step one of the quantitative goodwill impairment test for both of these reporting units and determined that the fair values of our Market Services and Corporate Solutions reporting units exceeded their carrying amounts by more than 10 .0 %. As a result, no goodwill impairment was recorded. The fair value of our Market Services and Corporate Solutions reporting units was determined using a combination of two equally weighted valuation methods, a market approach and an income approach. The market approach estimates fair value by applying revenues, earnings and cash flow multiples to the Market Services and Corporate Solutions reporting units operating performance. The multiples are derived from comparable publicly-traded companies with similar operating and investment characteristics to our Market Services and Corporate Solutions reporting units. The market approach requires management judgment to determine several valuation input s, including the selection of comparable companies and control premium. 58 Table Of Contents The control premium is based on recent transactions in the marketplace. Under the income approach, we estimated future cash flows of our Market Services and Corporate Solutions reporting units based on internally generated forecasts of future financial performance. We determined a long-term growth rate for the terminal year period based on historical and expected inflation rates as well as management estimate of the long-term growth of the business. We then discounted the projected cash flows using the appropriate weighted average cost of capital for each reporting unit . Although we believe our estimates of fair value are reasonable, the determination of certain valuation inputs is subject to management judgment. Changes in these inputs could materially affect the results of our impairment review. If our forecasts of cash flows generated by our Market Services and Corporate Solutions reporting units or other key inputs are negatively revised in the future, the estimated fair value of the Market Services and Corporate Solutions reporting units would be adversely impacted, potentially leading to an impairment in the future that could materially affect our operating results. Subsequent to our annual impairment test, no indications of an impairment were identified. Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Related Impairment Intangible assets deemed to have indefinite useful lives are not amortized but instead are tested for impairment at least annually and more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the asset may be less than its carrying amount. The fair value of indefinite-lived intangible assets is primarily determined on the basis of estimated discounted value, using the relief from royalty approach or excess earnings approach for trade names and the Greenfield Approach for exchange and clearing registrations and licenses, both of which incorporate assumptions rega rding future revenue projections and discount rates. Similar to goodwill impairment testing, we test for impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year using carrying amounts as of October 1. In conducting the 2015 annual impairment test for indefinite-lived intangible assets, we first performed a qualitative assessment to determine whether it was more likely than not that the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset was less than the carrying amount as a basis for determining whether it was necessary to perform the quantitative impairment test described in ASC Topic 350. The more-likely-than-not threshold is defined as having a likelihood of more than 50 percent. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair va lue of an indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount, then the quantitative test for indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment is performed for the appropriate intangible assets. If the carrying amount of the indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its fair value, an impairment charge is recorded for the difference. The eSpeed business operated in a market environment that became increasingly challenging during 2015 and, as a result, has experienced a decline in operating performance. As such, in the fourth quarter of 2015, we concluded that a quantitative impairment test was required for the eSpeed trade name indefinite-lived intangible asset. As of December 31, 2015, the carrying amount of the eSpeed trade name was $578 million. We performed a valuation of the trade name using a discounted cash flow analysis, which included assumptions regarding the discount rate, management projections of future operating performance and expectations regarding the future market environment, including government debt issuances and changes in interest rates. The fair value determined in this valuation exceeded the carrying amount of the trade name as of December 31, 2015, and therefore, no impairment charge was recorded . If the market environment for the eSpeed business remains challenging for a prolonged period of time, if market conditions deteriorate further or if operating performance over time is below management projections, we will reevaluate the eSpeed trade name for potential impairment. As of December 31, 2015, the fair value exceeded the carrying amount by more than 10.0%. As discussed in Intangible Asset Impairment Charges, of Note 5, Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets, to the consolidated financial statements , in connection with our global rebranding initiative, we decided to change our company name from The NASDAQ OMX Group, Inc. to Nasdaq, Inc., which became effective in the third quarter of 2015. In connection with this action, we decided to discontinue the use of the OMX trade name and recorded a pre-tax, non-cash impairment charge of $119 million in March 2015 because we no longer attribute any material value to the trade name. The impairment charge did not impact the company's consolidated cash flows, liquidity, or capital resources. There was no other impairment of indefinite -lived intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013. Other Long-Lived Assets and Related Impairment We review our other long-lived assets, such as finite-lived intangible assets, equity and cost method investments, as well as property and equipment for potential impairment when there is evidence that events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recover able . The carrying amount of a n asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. We evaluate our equity and cost method investments for other-than-temporary declines in value by considering a variety of factors such as the earnings capacity of the investment and the fair value of the investment compared to its carrying amount. In addition, for investments where the market value is readily determinable, we consider the underlying stock price as an additional factor. Any required impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value and is recorded as a reduction in the carrying amount of the related asset and a charge to operating results. Among our finite-lived intangible assets, we performed an undiscounted cash flow analysis to test whether the eSpeed customer relationship intangible asset was recoverable as we concluded that indicators of impairment were present in the current year as 59 Table Of Contents discussed above under Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Related Impairment. As of December 31, 2015, the eSpeed customer relationship intangible asset had a remaining net book value of $66 million. The results of the recoverability test indicated that the estimated future undiscounted cash flows exceeded the carrying amount of the asset by a significant amount. Therefore, no impairment charge was recorded in 2015. As further discussed above under Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Related Impairment, we continue to monitor potential triggering events in our eSpeed business. Any changes in these factors could result in further testing for recoverability, and, if it is determined that the carrying amount of the asset is not recoverable, an impairment of the asset would then be recorded. During 2014, we recorded intangible asset impairment charges of $38 million and recorded intangible asset impairment charges of $14 million in 2013. See Intangible Asset Impairment Charges, of Note 5, Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets, for further discussion of impairment charges recorded on our finite-lived intangible assets . Amortization Periods of Intangible Assets with Finite-Lives Intangible assets, net, primarily include exchange and clearing registrations, customer relationships, trade names, licenses and technology. Intangible assets with finite-lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their average estimated useful lives as follows: Technology: 2 5 years Customer relationships: 9 30 years O ther: 2 10 years The estimated useful life of developed and new technology is based on the likely duration of benefits to be derived from the technology. We consider such factors as the migration cycle for re-platforming existing technologies and the development of future generations of technology. We also give consideration to the pace of the technological changes in the industries in which we sell our products. The estimated useful life of customer relationships is determined based on an analysis of the historical attrition rates of customers and an analysis of the legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic, or other factors that limit the useful life of customer relationships. See Note 4, Acquisitions, and Note 5, Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets, to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of intangible assets. Income Taxes Estimates and judgments are required in the calculation of certain tax liabilities and in the determination of the recoverability of certain deferred tax assets, which arise from net operating loss carryforwards, tax credit carryforwards and temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. Our deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized in future periods. Management is required to determine whether a tax position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. Once it is determined that a position meets the recognition thresholds, the position is measured to determine the amount of benefit to be recognized in the consolidated financial statements. Interest and/or penalties related to income tax matters are recognized in income tax expense. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent fiscal years, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves uncertainties in the application of tax regulations in the U.S. and other tax jurisdictions. We recognize potential liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues in such jurisdictions based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes and interest may be due. While we believe that our tax liabilities reflect the probable outcome of identified tax uncertainties, it is reasonably possible that the ultimate resolution of any tax matter may be greater or less than the amount accrued. If events occur and the payment of these amounts ultimately proves unnecessary, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary. If our estimate of tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, a further charge to expense would result. Software Costs We capitalize and amortize significant purchased application software and operational software that are an integral part of computer hardware on the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, generally five years. We expense other purchased software as incurred. 60 Table Of Contents Certain costs incurred in connection with developing or obtaining internal use software are capitalized. These costs include both internal and third party costs. Under our Technology Solutions segment, certain costs of computer software to be sold, leased, or otherwise marketed as a separate product or as part of a product or process are capitalized beginning when a product s technological feasibility has been established and ending when a product is available for general release . Technological feasibility is established upon completion of a detail program design or, in its absence, completion. Prior to reaching technological feasibility, all costs are charged to expense. Capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the remaining estimated economic life of the product and are included in depreciation and amortization expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Recent Accounting Pronouncements See Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements , and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements , of Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of recently adopted and recently issued accounting pronouncements that are applicable to Nasdaq. Summarized Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited) 1st Qtr 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr 4th Qtr 2015 2015 2015 2015 (in millions, except per share amounts) Total revenues $ 858 $ 807 $ 871 $ 865 Transaction-based expenses (351) (289) (342) (329) Revenues less transaction-based expenses 507 518 529 536 Total operating expenses 480 301 298 290 Operating income 27 217 231 246 Net income attributable to Nasdaq $ 9 $ 133 $ 138 $ 148 Basic earnings per share $ 0.05 $ 0.79 $ 0.83 $ 0.90 Diluted earnings per share $ 0.05 $ 0.77 $ 0.80 $ 0.88 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 0.15 $ 0.25 $ 0.25 $ 0.25 1st Qtr 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr 4th Qtr 2014 2014 2014 2014 (in millions, except per share amounts) Total revenues $ 898 $ 865 $ 818 $ 919 Transaction-based expenses (369) (342) (321) (402) Revenues less transaction-based expenses 529 523 497 517 Total operating expenses 345 332 290 344 Operating income 184 191 207 173 Net income attributable to Nasdaq $ 103 $ 101 $ 123 $ 87 Basic earnings per share $ 0.61 $ 0.60 $ 0.73 $ 0.52 Diluted earnings per share $ 0.59 $ 0.59 $ 0.71 $ 0.50 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 0.28 $ - $ 0.15 $ 0.15 
