CIK: 1164727
Company Name: NEWMONT MINING CORP DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2016-02-17


Item 7, Management Discussion and Analysis of Consolidated Financial Condition and Results of Consolidated Operations and Foreign Currency Exchange Rates sections in to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, see Costs applicable to sales the amount of proven and probable reserves in the applicable foreign country could be reduced. The extent of any such reduction would be dependent on a variety of factors including the length of time of any such weakening of the U.S. dollar, and management long-term view of the applicable exchange rate. For information concerning the sensitivity of our /or owever, if a sustained weakening of the U.S. dollar in relation to the Australian dollar, and/or to other foreign currencies that impact our cost structure, were not mitigated by offsetting increases in the U.S. dollar gold price or by other factors, profitability, cash flows and probable reserves in the past; h , as measured in U.S. dollars. Foreign currency exchange rates in relation to the U.S. dollar have not had a material impact on our determination of proven and Costs applicable to sales to the extent costs are paid in local currency at foreign operations. The Australian dollar/U.S. dollar exchange rate has had the greatest impact on our /pound per ounce Costs applicable to sales Changes in the foreign currency exchange rates in relation to the U.S. dollar may affect our profitability and cash flow. Foreign currency exchange rates can fluctuate widely due to numerous factors, such as supply and demand for foreign and U.S. currencies and U.S. and foreign country economic conditions. In addition to our operations in the United States, we have assets or operations in Australia, Peru, Indonesia, Ghana and Suriname. All of our operations sell their metal production based on U.S. dollar gold and copper prices. Fluctuations in the local currency exchange rates in relation to the U.S. dollar can increase or decrease profit margins and Foreign Currency The NRV measurement involves the use of estimates and assumptions unique to each mining operation regarding current and future operating and capital costs, metal recoveries, production levels, commodity prices, proven and probable reserve quantities, engineering data and other factors. A high degree of judgment is involved in determining such assumptions and estimates and no assurance can be given that actual results will not differ significantly from those estimates and assumptions. Decreases in the market price of gold and copper can also significantly affect the value of our product inventory, stockpiles and leach pads, and it may be necessary to record a write-down to the NRV. NRV represents the estimated future sales price based on short-term and long-term metals prices, less estimated costs to complete production and bring the product to sale. The primary factors that influence the need to record write-downs of stockpiles, leach pads, and product inventory include short-term and long-term metals prices and costs for production inputs such as labor, fuel and energy, materials and supplies, as well as realized ore grades and recovery rates. The significant assumptions in determining the stockpile, leach pad and product inventory adjustments for each mine site reporting unit at December 31, 2015 included production cost and capitalized expenditure assumptions unique to each operation, a short-term and long-term gold price of $1,106 and $1,300 per ounce, respectively, a short-term and long-term copper price of $2.22 and $3.00 per pound, respectively, and an Australian to U.S. dollar long-term exchange rate of $0.80. Changes in the market price of gold significantly affect our profitability and cash flow. Gold prices can fluctuate widely due to numerous factors, such as demand; forward selling by producers; central bank sales, purchases and lending; investor sentiment; the strength of the U.S. dollar; inflation, deflation, or other general price instability and global mine production levels. Changes in the market price of copper also affect our profitability and cash flow. Copper is traded on established international exchanges and copper prices generally reflect market supply and demand, but can also be influenced by speculative trading in the commodity or by currency exchange rates. Metal Prices (dollars in millions, except per ounce and per pound amounts). K ABOUT MARKET RIS ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES Table of Contents 
