CIK: 1260221
Company Name: TRANSDIGM GROUP INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-11-28


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with Selected Consolidated Financial Data and TD Group consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this report. References to TransDigm , the Company , we , us , our and similar references refer to TD Group, TransDigm Inc. and TransDigm Inc. subsidiaries, unless the context otherwise indicates. The following discussion may contain predictions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under the heading entitled Risk Factors and elsewhere in this report. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from any future performance suggested below. Overview We believe we are a leading global designer, producer and supplier of highly engineered aircraft components for use on nearly all commercial and military aircraft in service today. Our business is well diversified due to the broad range of products we offer to our customers. Some of our more significant product offerings, substantially all of which are ultimately provided to end-users in the aerospace industry, include ignition systems and components, gear pumps, mechanical/electro-mechanical actuators and controls, NiCad batteries/chargers, power conditioning devices, hold-open rods and locking devices, engineered connectors, engineered latches and cockpit security devices, lavatory hardware and components, specialized AC/DC electric motors and specialized valving. Each of these product offerings consists of many individual products that are typically customized to meet the needs of a particular aircraft platform or customer. For fiscal year 2006, we generated net sales of $435.2 million and net income of $25.1 million. In addition, for fiscal year 2006, our EBITDA was $134.3 million, or 30.9% of net sales, our EBITDA As Defined was $194.4 million, or 44.7% of net sales, and our capital expenditures were $8.3 million, or 1.9% of net sales. See EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined below for certain information regarding EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined, including a reconciliation of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined to net income. We estimate that over 90% of our net sales for fiscal year 2006 were generated by proprietary products for which we own the design. These products are generally approved and certified by airframe manufacturers (who often certify only one manufacturer component design for a specific application on an aircraft), government agencies and/or the FAA and similar entities or agencies. In addition, for fiscal year 2006, we estimate that we generated approximately 75% of our net sales from products for which we are the sole source provider. Most of our products generate significant aftermarket revenue. Once our parts are designed into and sold as original equipment on an aircraft, we generate net sales from recurring aftermarket consumption over the life of that aircraft. This installed base and our sole source provider position generate a long-term stream of aftermarket revenues over the estimated 30-year life of an individual aircraft. We estimate that approximately 60% of our net sales in fiscal year 2006 were generated from aftermarket sales, the vast majority of which come from the commercial and military aftermarkets. These aftermarket revenues have historically produced a higher gross margin and been more stable than sales to OEMs. In fiscal year 2006, our top two customers accounted for approximately 19% of our net sales, and during this same period our top ten customers accounted for approximately 48% of our net sales. However, our components are ultimately used on a large, diverse installed base of aircraft and, therefore, we are not overly dependent on any single airframe produced by any of our customers or other ultimate end-users of our products. 25 Table of Contents In the commercial aerospace sector, which generated approximately 72% of our net sales for fiscal year 2006, we sell to distributors of aftermarket components, as well as directly to commercial airlines, aircraft maintenance facilities, systems suppliers, and aircraft and engine OEMs. In addition, for fiscal year 2006, approximately 24% of our net sales were attributable to the defense aerospace sector, with approximately 7% of our overall net sales for this period being attributable to various agencies and buying organizations of the U.S. Government. Net sales to the defense sector are generated primarily through sales to the United States and foreign militaries, brokers, distributors and defense OEMs. The remaining portion of our net sales in fiscal year 2006, or approximately 4% of our net sales during this period, were derived from industries with similar niche engineered product characteristics such as the mining, military ground vehicle and power generation industries. Recent Developments Financing Transaction and Intercompany Merger On May 25, 2006, we commenced a tender offer to purchase for cash any and all of our outstanding 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes and, in connection therewith, we solicited consents to amend the indenture governing such notes to, among other things, eliminate substantially all of the restrictive covenants and eliminate or modify certain events of default. On June 23, 2006, we closed the tender offer and consent solicitation for the 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes. In connection with the closing, we purchased all of the issued and outstanding 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes that were validly tendered, totaling $399.7 million in aggregate principal amount. On August 7, 2006, we redeemed all of the 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes that remained outstanding after the consummation of the tender offer. In addition, simultaneously with the closing of the tender offer and consent solicitation for the 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes, we entered into the New Senior Secured Credit Facility, which consists of a $650 million term loan facility, all of which was funded at the closing of such financing transaction, and a revolving loan facility with a total borrowing availability of $150 million, none of which was drawn at the closing of such financing transaction. On June 23, 2006, simultaneously with the consummation of the other transactions described above, we consummated the offering and sale of the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes. We used the net proceeds from the offering and sale of the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes, together with the initial borrowings under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility and a portion of our existing cash balances, to fund (1) the repayment of the entire $288.4 million of principal amount outstanding under our former senior secured credit facility, (2) the repayment of the entire $200 million of principal amount outstanding under the TD Group outstanding loan facility, (3) the purchase of all of our 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes that were tendered in connection with the tender offer for such notes totaling $399.7 million, (4) the payment of accrued and unpaid interest on all such indebtedness and (5) the payment of all premiums and transaction expenses associated therewith. In an effort to simplify our organizational structure, on June 23, 2006, TD Finance Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of TransDigm Inc., was merged with and into TransDigm Inc., with TransDigm Inc. continuing as the surviving corporation. TD Finance Corporation did not conduct any operations and did not have assets other than an intercompany note receivable from TransDigm Holdings. In addition, on June 26, 2006, TransDigm Holdings was merged with and into TransDigm Inc., with TransDigm Inc. continuing as the surviving corporation. TransDigm Holdings did not conduct any operations and did not have any significant assets other than its ownership interest in TransDigm Inc. Accordingly, TransDigm Inc. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of TD Group. TD Group Initial Public Offering On March 20, 2006, certain stockholders of TD Group and certain members of our management sold an aggregate of 12,597,756 shares of TD Group common stock in the Initial Public Offering at a price of $21.00 per share. TD Group did not offer any shares of its common stock for sale in the Initial Public Offering and TD 26 Table of Contents Group did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of such shares by the selling stockholders. As a result of the Initial Public Offering, TD Group common stock is publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol TDG. Dividend and Bonus Payments On November 10, 2005, TD Group closed on a $200 million loan facility. In connection with the closing of that loan facility, TransDigm Inc. paid a cash dividend of approximately $98.0 million to TransDigm Holdings and made bonus payments of approximately $6.2 million to certain members of our management (which bonus payments were in addition to amounts paid to certain members of our management under our deferred compensation plans, as described below). TransDigm Holdings used all of the proceeds received from TransDigm Inc. to pay a cash dividend to TD Group. On November 10, 2005, TD Group used the net proceeds received from its loan facility of approximately $193.8 million, together with substantially all of the proceeds received from the dividend payment from TransDigm Holdings, to: prepay the entire outstanding principal amount and all accrued and unpaid interest on its 12% senior unsecured promissory notes issued in connection with its acquisition of TransDigm Holdings in July 2003, with all such payments totaling approximately $262.7 million; make distributions to certain members of our management who participated in the TD Holding Corporation 2003 Rollover Deferred Compensation and Phantom Stock Unit Plan, or the Rollover Deferred Compensation Plan, of their vested deferred compensation account balances, with all such distributions totaling approximately $23.0 million; and make distributions to certain members of our management and one of our directors who participated in the TD Holding Corporation 2003 Management Deferred Compensation and Phantom Stock Unit Plan, or the Management Deferred Compensation Plan, of their vested and a portion of their unvested deferred compensation account balances, with all such distributions totaling approximately $3.0 million (with approximately $1.8 million of such distributions being attributable to vested deferred compensation account balances and approximately $1.2 million being attributable to unvested deferred compensation account balances). In connection with the distributions under the Rollover Deferred Compensation Plan, the Board of Directors of TD Group approved the termination of the Rollover Deferred Compensation Plan, with such termination becoming effective on November 10, 2005. The Management Deferred Compensation Plan was terminated effective as of December 16, 2005 in connection with our adoption of a new deferred compensation plan, which is described in more detail elsewhere in this report. Government Pricing Review Certain parts sold by five of our divisions and subsidiaries to the DOD through various buying agencies of the Defense Logistics Agency have been the subject of a pricing review by the DOD Office of Inspector General. The pricing review examined whether the various buying offices within the Defense Logistics Agency had negotiated fair and reasonable prices for certain sole source spare parts purchased from those divisions and subsidiaries during fiscal years 2002 through 2004. On February 28, 2006, we received a copy of the Inspector General final report dated February 23, 2006, and on April 19, 2006, the Inspector General made public a redacted version thereof. The report recommends (i) that the Defense Logistics Agency request that those five subsidiaries and divisions voluntarily refund, in the aggregate, approximately $2.6 million for allegedly overpriced parts, and (ii) that Defense Logistics Agency contracting officers reevaluate their procedures for determining the reasonableness of pricing for sole source spare parts purchased from those divisions and subsidiaries and seek to develop Strategic Supplier Alliances with those divisions and subsidiaries. We believe that the pricing review is part of a continuing effort by the Inspector General to monitor and evaluate prices paid to defense contractors for sole source spare parts. The report is consistent with reports issued with respect to sole source spare parts supplied by other companies, and, like those other reports, it advocates the 27 Table of Contents negotiation of Strategic Supplier Alliances incorporating prices for parts based on cost, rather than based on prices of comparable commercial parts or other methods. We believe that our pricing of spare parts comports with the regulations applicable to contracts with agencies of the Federal government. Nonetheless, the report recommends that the Defense Logistics Agency request that the applicable divisions and subsidiaries of TransDigm Inc. voluntarily refund, in the aggregate, approximately $2.6 million for allegedly overpriced parts and negotiate Strategic Supplier Alliances incorporating cost-based prices for future Defense Logistics Agency purchases of sole source spare parts. The Company position has been, and continues to be, that our pricing has been fair and reasonable and that there is no legal basis for the amount suggested as a refund by the Inspector General in its report. In response to the report, we offered reasons why we disagree with the Inspector General overall analysis. The Defense Logistics Agency has requested additional information from the Company and the Company position on the voluntary refund. The Company has responded to such request. In February 2006, the Defense Logistics Agency made a request to initiate discussions regarding future pricing and develop an acquisition strategy that will mutually strengthen TransDigm and the Defense Logistics Agency business relationship. The parties have discussed and are considering future purchasing approaches but negotiations with the Defense Logistics Agency regarding Strategic Supplier Alliances or any specific approach have not yet commenced, but may occur at a later date. As a result of those negotiations, it is possible that the divisions and subsidiaries subject to the pricing review will enter into Strategic Supplier Alliances with the Defense Logistics Agency. It is likely in connection with any Strategic Supplier Alliance, the Defense Logistics Agency will seek prices for parts based on cost or may seek volume discounts or other favorable pricing and/or the applicable division or subsidiary may agree to cost or pricing justification or appropriate discounts. It is also possible that the DOD may seek alternative sources of supply for such parts. The entry into Strategic Supplier Alliances or a decision by the DOD to pursue alternative sources of supply for our sole source parts could reduce the amount of revenue we derive from, and the profitability of certain of our supply arrangements with, certain agencies and buying organizations of the U.S. Government. While management believes that the entry into Strategic Supplier Alliances with the Defense Logistics Agency will not have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, liquidity or capital resources, there is no means to determine the outcome of any future negotiations or discussions at this time. Certain Acquisitions CDA Acquisition On October 3, 2006, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the issued and outstanding capital stock of CDA for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $45 million. CDA designs and manufactures specialized controllable drive actuators, motors, transducers and gearing. CDA products are used on a range of defense, space and commercial aircraft applications. The proprietary nature, established positions and aftermarket content of CDA products fit well with our overall business direction. Sweeney Acquisition On June 12, 2006, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Sweeney for approximately $25.5 million in cash. Sweeney designs and manufactures specialized aerospace valving used primarily in fuel, environmental control and de-icing applications. Sweeney products are used on a range of defense and commercial aircraft applications. Sweeney product characteristics and market position fit well with our existing valving business. The acquired business was consolidated into our AeroControlex business in Painesville, Ohio during the first quarter of fiscal 2007. 28 Table of Contents Electra-Motion Acquisition On May 1, 2006, Skurka, our wholly-owned subsidiary, acquired certain assets and assumed certain liabilities of Electra-Motion. The acquired business designs and manufactures specialized AC/DC motors for a broad range of aerospace applications. The acquired business was consolidated into Skurka existing aerospace motor business in Camarillo, California. Motor Product Line Acquisition On June 30, 2005, Skurka, our wholly-owned subsidiary, acquired an aerospace motor product line from Eaton Corporation for $9.6 million in cash. The acquired Eaton business has been a long-time supplier of aerospace motors and related products. The motor products are used on a range of commercial aircraft, as well as military programs. The proprietary products, market position and aftermarket content of the acquired business fit well with our overall direction. The acquired product line has been consolidated into Skurka existing aerospace motor business in Camarillo, California. Fluid Regulators Acquisition On January 28, 2005, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Fluid Regulators from Esterline Technologies Corporation for $23.5 million in cash, net of a purchase price adjustment of $0.5 million received in April 2005. Fluid Regulators designs and manufactures highly engineered flight control and pressure valves used in hydraulic, fuel, lubrication and related applications. The products are used on a wide range of commercial and regional aircraft as well as many corporate and military aircraft. Fluid Regulators product characteristics and market position fit well with our overall direction. In addition, in an attempt to reduce the combined operating costs of Fluid Regulators and the AeroControlex division of TransDigm Inc., Fluid Regulators was merged into TransDigm Inc. on September 30, 2005. Skurka Acquisition On December 31, 2004, Skurka, our wholly-owned subsidiary, acquired certain assets and assumed certain liabilities of Skurka Engineering Company for $30.7 million in cash. The acquired business designs and manufactures engineered aerospace components, consisting primarily of AC/DC electric motors and transducers. The products are used on a wide range of commercial and military aircraft, ships and ground vehicles. The product characteristics and market position of the acquired business fit well with our overall direction. 29 Table of Contents EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined The following table sets forth the calculation of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined. Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2006 2005 (in millions) Net Income $ 25.1 $ 34.7 Adjustments: Depreciation and amortization expense 16.1 16.9 Interest expense, net 76.8 80.3 Income tax provision 16.3 22.6 EBITDA (1) 134.3 154.5 Adjustments: Acquisition related costs (2) 1.6 2.9 Non-cash compensation and deferred compensation costs (3) 1.0 6.8 One-time special bonus (4) 6.2 Refinancing costs (5) 48.6 Non-recurring IPO costs (6) 2.7 EBITDA As Defined (7)(8) $ 194.4 $ 164.2 (1) EBITDA represents earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. (2) Represents costs incurred to integrate acquired businesses into TD Group operations, purchase accounting adjustments to inventory that were charged to cost of sales when the inventory was sold and acquisition earnout costs. The amount recognized for the potential earnout payment to Howard Skurka is pursuant to the terms of the retention agreement entered into with him in connection with our acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Skurka in December 2004. (3) Represents the expenses recognized by the Company under our stock and deferred compensation plans. The amount reflected above for fiscal 2006 includes (i) a reversal of previously recorded amounts charged to expense of $3.8 million resulting from the termination of two of our deferred compensation plans during fiscal 2006 and (ii) expense recognized by us under a new deferred compensation plan adopted by us in December 2005. (4) Represents the aggregate amount of one-time special bonuses paid on November 10, 2005 to certain members of management. On November 10, 2005, we entered into an amendment to our former senior secured credit facility pursuant to which the lenders thereunder agreed to exclude these one-time special bonus payments from the calculation of EBITDA As Defined. (5) Represents costs associated with refinancing the debt structure of TD Group, including the premium of $25.6 million paid to redeem our 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes, the write off of debt issue costs of $22.9 million, and other expenses of $0.1 million. (6) Represents non-recurring costs and expenses incurred by TD Group related to the Initial Public Offering. (7) EBITDA As Defined represents EBITDA plus, as applicable for the relevant period, inventory purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition integration costs, non-cash compensation and deferred compensation costs, certain non-recurring expenses incurred in connection with the Mergers, one-time special bonus payments made to members of our management and certain acquisition earnout costs, and as more fully described below, for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006, any and all expenses or charges incurred by us in connection with equity offerings, permitted investments, acquisitions, dispositions, recapitalizations or permitted debt transactions, including all of the expenses or charges relating to the refinancing. Our management uses EBITDA As Defined to review and assess our operating performance and management team in connection with our employee incentive programs and the preparation of our annual budget and our financial projections. In addition, the revolving credit facility under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility requires compliance, on a pro forma basis, with a first lien leverage ratio, which is measured based on our Consolidated EBITDA (as defined therein). The New Senior Secured Credit Facility defines Consolidated 30 Table of Contents EBITDA in a manner equal to how we defined EBITDA As Defined for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. This financial covenant is a material term of the New Senior Secured Credit Facility as failure to comply with such financial covenant could result in an event of default in respect of the revolving credit facility under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility (and, in turn, such an event of default could result in an event of default under the Indenture). In addition, our former senior secured credit facility required compliance, on a pro forma basis, with a leverage ratio, a fixed charge coverage ratio and an interest coverage ratio, all of which were measured based on our Consolidated EBITDA (as defined therein). The former senior secured credit facility defined Consolidated EBITDA in a manner equal to how we defined EBITDA As Defined for the periods presented prior to fiscal 2006, and such historical definition was substantially similar to the definition of Consolidated EBITDA under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility, except that for purposes of computing Consolidated EBITDA under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility, we are permitted to add back to net income, any and all expenses or charges incurred by us in connection with equity offerings, permitted investments, acquisitions, dispositions, recapitalizations or permitted debt transactions, including all of the expenses or charges related to the refinancing. (8) Although we use EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined as measures to assess the performance of our business and for the other purposes set forth above, the use of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined as an analytical tool has limitations, and you should not consider either of them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations as reported in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations are: neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined reflects the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest payments, on our indebtedness; although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined reflects any cash requirements for such replacements; the omission of the substantial amortization expense associated with our intangible assets further limits the usefulness of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined; neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined includes the payment of taxes, which is a necessary element of our operations; and EBITDA As Defined excludes the cash expense we have incurred to integrate acquired businesses into our operations, which is a necessary element of certain of our acquisitions. Because of these limitations, EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. Management compensates for these limitations by not viewing EBITDA or EBITDA As Defined in isolation, and specifically by using other GAAP measures, such as net income, net sales and operating profit, to measure our operating performance. Neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined is a measurement of financial performance under GAAP and neither should be considered as an alternative to net income or cash flow from operations determined in accordance with GAAP, and our calculation of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined may not be comparable to the calculation of similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Trend Information The commercial aerospace industry is impacted by the health of the global economy and geo-political events around the world. The commercial aerospace industry suffered after the events of September 11, 2001 and the subsequent downturn in the global economy, the SARS epidemic and, more recently, from rising fuel prices and the conflicts in the Middle East. Recently, the industry has shown signs of strengthening with increases in RPMs, although rising fuel prices, conflicts in the Middle East, major airline financial distress and the risk of additional terrorist activity have tempered the recovery. Our presence in both the commercial transport and military sectors of the aerospace industry may mitigate the impact on our business of any specific industry risk. We service a diversified customer base in the commercial and military aerospace industry, and we provide components to a diverse installed base of aircraft, which mitigates our exposure to any individual airframe platform. At times, declines in sales in any one sector 31 Table of Contents have been offset by increased sales in another. For example, the commercial transport sector that we serve was adversely affected by the events of September 11, 2001, but the downturn in that market was partially offset by an increase in military aircraft spending that resulted from the military engagements in Afghanistan and Iraq and the war on terrorism. There is industry consensus that conditions in the commercial transport market sector have improved recently. We are experiencing increased activity in the large commercial OEM sector (aircraft with 100 or more seats) driven by order announcements by The Boeing Company and Airbus S.A.S. We expect this level of activity to continue in the near future. RPMs are recovering to pre-September 11, 2001 levels or higher, and absent any disruptive events, we are hopeful our aftermarket business will continue to follow this trend. In recent years, defense spending has reached historic highs, due in part to the military engagements in Afghanistan and Iraq and the war on terrorism. After several recent quarters of continued growth, we have recently seen our military business level off. Our military business fluctuates from year to year, and is dependent, to a degree, on government budget constraints, the timing of orders and the extent of global conflicts. We anticipate that military related sales of our types of products will experience modest, if any, growth over the current high levels. The aerospace industry is cyclical and fragmented. There are many short-term factors (including inventory corrections, unannounced changes in order patterns and mergers and acquisitions) that can cause short-term disruptions in our weekly, monthly and quarterly shipment patterns as compared to previous quarters and the same periods in prior years. To normalize for short-term fluctuations, we tend to look at our performance over several quarters or years of activity rather than discreet short-term periods. As such, it can be difficult to determine longer-term trends in our business based on quarterly comparisons. There are also fluctuations in OEM and aftermarket ordering and delivery requests from quarter-to-quarter. Due to the differences between the profitability of our products sold to OEM and aftermarket customers, variation in product mix can cause short-term swings in gross margins. Again, in many instances these are timing events between quarters and must be balanced with macro aerospace industry indicators. We believe that The Boeing Company and Airbus S.A.S. are in a period of increased production and we think we are well positioned on the new aircraft platforms recently announced. Having significant content on these new aircraft platforms could negatively impact our margin over the near term, given that OEM revenues tend to produce lower gross margins than aftermarket revenues, but should positively impact our business in future years as replacement aftermarket parts will be required to service these new aircrafts. Although the aerospace industry is in a cycle of increased production, our business would be adversely affected by significant changes in the U.S. or global economy. Historically, aircraft travel, as measured by RPMs, generally correlates to economic conditions and a reduction in aircraft travel would result in a decrease in the need for aftermarket parts, which in turn would adversely affect our business. Critical Accounting Policies Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP, which often requires the judgment of management in the selection and application of certain accounting principles and methods. Management believes that the quality and reasonableness of our most critical policies enable the fair presentation of our financial position and results of operations. However, investors are cautioned that the sensitivity of financial statements to these methods, assumptions and estimates could create materially different results under different conditions or using different assumptions. 32 Table of Contents We have identified the following as the most critical accounting policies upon which our financial status depends. These critical policies were determined by considering accounting policies that involve the most complex or subjective decisions or assessments. Our most critical accounting policies are as follows: Revenue Recognition and Related Allowances: Substantially all of our revenues are recognized based upon shipment of products to the customer, at which time title and risk of loss passes to the customer. Substantially all sales are made pursuant to firm, fixed-price purchase orders received from customers. Provisions for returns, uncollectible accounts and the cost of repairs under contract warranty provisions are provided for in the same period as the related revenues are recorded and are principally based on historical results modified, as appropriate, by the most current information available. We have a history of making reasonably dependable estimates of such allowances; however, due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that actual results may vary from the estimates and the differences could be material. Management estimates the allowance for doubtful accounts based on the aging of the accounts receivable and customer creditworthiness. The allowance also incorporates a provision for the estimated impact of disputes with customers. Management estimate of the allowance amounts that are necessary includes amounts for specifically identified losses and a general amount for estimated losses based on historical information. The determination of the amount of the allowance for doubtful accounts is subject to significant levels of judgment and estimation by management. If circumstances change or economic conditions deteriorate, management may need to increase the allowance for doubtful accounts. The Company provides limited warranties in connection with the sale of its products. The warranty period for products sold varies throughout the Company operations, ranging from 90 days to five years; however, the warranty period for the majority of the Company sales generally does not exceed one year. In addition, certain contracts with distributors contain right of return provisions. The Company accrues for estimated returns and warranty claims based on knowledge of product performance issues and excess inventories provided by its customers and industry sources. The Company also provides a general amount based on historical results. Historically, actual product returns and warranty claims have not differed materially from the estimates originally established. Inventories: Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost of inventories is determined by the average cost and the first-in, first-out (FIFO) methods. Because the Company sells products that are installed on airframes that can be in-service for 30 or more years, it must keep a supply of such products on hand while the airframes are in use. Provision for potentially obsolete or slow-moving inventory is made based on our analysis of inventory levels, past usage and future sales forecasts. Although management believes that the Company estimates of obsolete and slow-moving inventory are reasonable, actual results may differ materially from the estimates and additional provisions may be required in the future. In addition, in accordance with industry practice, all inventories are classified as current assets as all inventories are available and necessary to support current sales, even though a portion of the inventories may not be sold within one year. Intangible Assets: The Mergers and other acquisitions have resulted in significant amounts of identifiable intangible assets and goodwill. Intangible assets other than goodwill are recognized if the benefit of the intangible asset is obtained through contractual or other legal rights, or if the intangible asset can be sold, transferred, licensed or exchanged, regardless of the Company intent to do so. Goodwill and identifiable intangible assets are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition and, under Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets ( SFAS 142 ), are reviewed at least annually for impairment based on cash flow projections and fair value estimates. The determination of undiscounted cash flows is based on the Company strategic plans and long-range planning forecasts. The revenue growth rates included in the plans are based on industry and Company specific data. The profit margin assumptions included in the plans are projected based on the current cost structure and anticipated cost changes. If different assumptions were used in these plans, the related undiscounted cash flows used in measuring impairment could be different and the recognition of an impairment loss might be required. Intangible assets, such as goodwill, trademarks and trade names that have an indefinite useful life are not amortized. All other intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives. 33 Table of Contents Stock Options and Deferred Compensation Plans: Effective with the consummation of the Mergers, the Company adopted the provisions of SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation , which requires the measurement of compensation expense under the stock option plan to be based on the estimated fair values of the awards under the plan on the grant dates and amortizes the expense over the options vesting periods. In addition, the Company accounts for the cost of the deferred compensation plans of TD Group in accordance with Opinion No. 12 of the Accounting Principles Board, which requires the cost of deferred compensation arrangements to be accrued over the service period of the related employees in a systematic and rational manner. Purchase accounting: Mergers and acquisitions are accounted for using the purchase method. Accordingly, fair value adjustments to the Company assets and liabilities are recognized and the results of operations of the acquired business are included in its consolidated financial statements from the effective date of merger or acquisition. We generally use third-party appraisals to assist us in determining the fair value adjustments. Results of Operations The following tables set forth, for the periods indicated, certain operating data of the Company, including presentation of the amounts as a percentage of net sales, (amounts in thousands): Fiscal Years Ended 2006 2005 2004 Net sales $ 435,164 $ 374,253 $ 300,703 Cost of sales 213,874 189,983 164,198 Selling and administrative 48,309 38,943 31,201 Amortization of intangibles 6,197 7,747 10,325 Refinancing costs 48,617 Income from operations 118,167 137,580 94,979 Interest expense, net 76,732 80,266 74,675 Income tax provision 16,318 22,627 6,682 Net income $ 25,117 $ 34,687 $ 13,622 Fiscal Years Ended 2006 2005 2004 Net sales 100 % 100 % 100 % Cost of sales 49 51 55 Selling and administrative 11 10 10 Amortization of intangibles 2 2 3 Refinancing costs 11 Income from operations 27 37 32 Interest expense, net 17 22 25 Income tax provision 4 6 2 Net income 6 % 9 % 5 % Fiscal year ended September 30, 2006 compared with fiscal year ended September 30, 2005 Net Sales. Net sales increased by $60.9 million, or 16.3%, to $435.2 million for fiscal year 2006 from $374.3 million for fiscal year 2005. Sales growth excluding acquisitions was $40.0 million and represented a 10.7% increase over the prior year. The organic sales growth was primarily due to: (i) an increase of $20.9 million of commercial aftermarket sales resulting from the continuing recovery in the commercial aerospace market and the strength of our proprietary products and market position, as well as new business initiatives; and 34 Table of Contents (ii) an increase of $17.2 million of commercial OEM sales primarily resulting from the increase in production rates for The Boeing Company and Airbus S.A.S. and related OEM system suppliers as well as the business jet market. Partially offsetting the increase in organic sales was a slight decrease in military sales. The remaining $20.9 million increase resulted from the acquisitions of Skurka, Fluid Regulators, and a motor product line in fiscal 2005 and Electra-Motion and Sweeney in fiscal 2006. Cost of Sales . Cost of sales increased by $23.9 million, or 12.6%, to $213.9 million for fiscal year 2006 from $190.0 from fiscal year 2005. Cost of sales as a percentage of sales decreased approximately 1.7 percentage points to 49.1% for fiscal year 2006 from 50.8% for fiscal year 2005. The increase in cost of sales was primarily due to increase volume associated with the higher net sales of $60.9 million discussed above, partially offset by a reduction in acquisition related costs of $1.6 million, or 0.6% of net sales. The decrease in cost of sales as a percentage of sales was primarily due to productivity improvements and the reduction in acquisition related costs partially offset by negative product mix from higher OEM sales. Selling and Administrative Expenses. Selling and administrative expenses increased by $9.4 million or 24.1%, to $48.3 million for fiscal year 2006 from $38.9 million for fiscal year 2005. The increase was due to (i) a one-time special bonus of $6.2 million, or 1.4% of net sales, paid to certain members of management, (ii) the costs associated with higher net sales discussed above, and (iii) non-recurring Initial Public Offing costs of $2.7 million, or 0.6% of net sales. These increases were partially offset by (i) reversal of previously recorded charges of $3.8 million, or 0.9% of net sales, resulting from the termination in fiscal 2006 of the Rollover Deferred Compensation Plan and Management Deferred Compensation Plan, and (ii) the decrease of $3.2 million due to lower compensation expense recorded under the new management deferred compensation plan adopted in December 2005. Selling and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales increased to 11.1% for fiscal year 2006 from 10.4% for the comparable period last year, primarily due to the factors described above. Amortization of Intangibles. Amortization of intangibles decreased by $1.6 million to $6.2 million for fiscal year 2006 from $7.8 million for fiscal year 2005. The decrease was primarily due to order backlog that was recorded in accounting for acquisitions made in fiscal 2005 that was subsequently fully amortized in fiscal 2006. Refinancing Costs. Refinancing costs represent a one-time charge that was recorded in June 2006 as a result of the refinancing of TransDigm entire debt structure. The charge of $48.6 million consisted of the premium of $25.6 million paid to redeem our 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes and the write-off of $22.9 million of debt issue costs associated with our former senior credit facility, our 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes and the TD Group Loan Facility and other expenses of $0.1 million. Income from Operations. Operating income decreased by $19.4 million, or 14.1%, to $118.2 million for fiscal year 2006 from $137.6 million for fiscal year 2005, primarily due to the refinancing costs of $48.6 million, partially offset by other factors described above. Interest Expense . Interest expense decreased $3.5 million, or 4.4%, to $76.7 million for fiscal year 2006 from $80.3 million for fiscal year 2005. The net decrease was primarily the result of our refinancing of our debt structure during fiscal 2006. As a result of the refinancing, despite an increase in our average level of outstanding borrowings to approximately $904 million during fiscal 2006 from $891 million during fiscal 2005, the average interest rate decreased to 8.2% during fiscal 2006 from 8.6% during fiscal 2005 (see Liquidity and Capital Resources below). Income Taxes . Income tax expense as a percentage of income before income taxes was 39.4% for fiscal year 2006 and was comparable to 39.5% for fiscal year 2005. Net Income. Net income decreased $9.6 million, or 27.6%, to $25.1 million for fiscal year 2006 compared to $34.7 million for fiscal year 2005, primarily as a result of the refinancing and other factors referred to above. 35 Table of Contents Fiscal year ended September 30, 2005 compared with fiscal year ended September 30, 2004 Net Sales. Net sales increased by $73.6 million, or 24.5%, to $374.3 million for fiscal year 2005 from $300.7 million for fiscal year 2004. The increase is due to: (i) net sales attributable to the acquisition of Avionic in July 2004, Skurka in December 2004, Fluid Regulators in January 2005 and a motor product line in June 2005, which we refer to collectively as the Acquisitions, totaling $40.0 million; (ii) an increase in commercial OEM net sales of $14.5 million resulting from the higher production rates for The Boeing Company, Airbus S.A.S. and regional and business jet markets; (iii) an increase in military shipments of $9.5 million primarily due to the continued spending by the U.S. Government resulting in part from the conflicts in the Middle East; and (iv) an increase in commercial aftermarket sales of $9.6 million due to the continuing recovery of the commercial aerospace market. Cost of Sales. Cost of sales increased by $25.8 million, or 15.7%, to $190.0 million for fiscal year 2005 from $164.2 million for fiscal year 2004. The increase was primarily attributable to the cost of the higher net sales of $73.6 discussed previously, partially offset by the $18.5 million charge, or 6.1% of net sales, that was recorded in fiscal year 2004 that resulted in increased cost of sales due to inventory purchase price accounting charges pertaining to the write-up of inventory associated with the Mergers that occurred in fiscal year 2003. The improvement in cost of sales as a percentage of total net sales in fiscal year 2005 when compared to fiscal year 2004 was primarily due to the $18.5 million charge recorded in fiscal year 2004 that is discussed above, partially offset by less favorable product mix (i.e., higher OEM shipments) in fiscal year 2005 and the impact of lower margin revenues from the Acquisitions. Selling and Administrative Expenses. Selling and administrative expenses increased by $7.7 million, or 24.8%, to $38.9 million for fiscal year 2005 from $31.2 million for fiscal year 2004 primarily due to the higher net sales discussed above. Selling and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales were the same for both fiscal years. Amortization of Intangibles. Amortization of intangibles decreased by $2.6 million to $7.7 million for fiscal year 2005 from $10.3 million for fiscal year 2004. The decrease was primarily due to the reduction of $3.1 million in order backlog amortization during fiscal year 2005. During fiscal year 2004, $5.4 million of order backlog that was recorded in accounting for the Mergers was fully amortized. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in amortization expense of approximately $0.5 million on the additional identifiable intangible assets recognized in connection with the Acquisitions. Interest Expense. Interest expense increased by $5.6 million, or 7.5%, to $80.3 million for fiscal year 2005 from $74.7 million for fiscal year 2004 due to (i) an increase of $3.1 million in interest expense on the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes resulting from the semi-annual compounding of the accrued and unpaid interest on such notes since July 2003 and (ii) an increase in the interest rates on borrowings under the former senior secured credit facility, resulting in an additional $3.4 million of interest expense in fiscal year 2005. This increase was offset by certain other items, which resulted in a reduction in interest expense of $0.9 million. Income Tax Provision. Income tax provision as a percentage of income before income taxes was 39.5% for fiscal year 2005 compared to 32.9% for fiscal year 2004. The increase in the income tax provision as a percentage of income before income taxes is largely due to two items: (i) the reduction in the benefit from foreign sales; and (ii) a change in the Ohio tax law. The reduction in the foreign sales benefit was due to higher income before income taxes in fiscal year 2005 and a change in the federal extraterritorial law that phases out the foreign sales deduction by 2007. Our reduced benefit from foreign sales increased our effective tax rate by 4.4%. The change in the Ohio tax law became effective on July 1, 2005 and replaced the income tax with a commercial activity tax by 2010. As a result of this law change, our ability to utilize net operating loss carryforwards was limited; therefore, adjustments were made to non-current deferred income tax assets and liabilities. These adjustments resulted in a charge to income tax expense of $1.3 million, or a 2.3% increase to the effective tax rate. Net Income. Net income increased $21.1 million, or 154.6%, to $34.7 million for fiscal year 2005 compared to net income of $13.6 million for fiscal year 2004. 36 Table of Contents Backlog As of September 30, 2006, the Company estimated its sales order backlog at $251.3 million compared to an estimated sales order backlog of $200.0 million as of September 30, 2005. This increase in backlog of $51.3 million is due in part to the acquisitions of Sweeney and Electra-Motion discussed above totaling approximately $11.2 million. The balance of the increase in sales order backlog is due to increases in orders across existing product lines in both the OEM and aftermarket segments. The majority of the purchase orders outstanding as of September 30, 2006 are scheduled for delivery within the next twelve months. Purchase orders may be subject to cancellation by the customer prior to shipment. The level of unfilled purchase orders at any given date during the year will be materially affected by the timing of the Company receipt of purchase orders and the speed with which those orders are filled. Accordingly, the Company backlog as of September 30, 2006 may not necessarily represent the actual amount of shipments or sales for any future period. Foreign Operations Although the Company manufactures all of its products in the United States, some components are purchased from foreign suppliers and a portion of the Company products are resold to foreign end-users. The Company direct sales to foreign customers were approximately $102.7 million, $81.5 million, and $69.9 million in fiscal 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. Sales to foreign customers are subject to numerous additional risks, including the impact of foreign government regulations, currency fluctuations, political uncertainties and differences in business practices. There can be no assurance that foreign governments will not adopt regulations or take other action that would have a direct or indirect adverse impact on the business or market opportunities of the Company within such governments countries. Furthermore, there can be no assurance that the political, cultural and economic climate outside the United States will be favorable to the Company operations and growth strategy. Inflation Many of the Company raw materials and operating expenses are sensitive to the effects of inflation, which could result in changing operating costs. The effects of inflation on the Company businesses during the fiscal years 2006, 2005 and 2004 were not significant. Liquidity and Capital Resources Operating Activities. The Company generated $3.1 million of cash from operating activities during fiscal 2006 compared to $80.7 million generated during fiscal 2005. The decrease of $77.6 million is primarily due to (i) the payment of accrued interest of $62.7 million relating to the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes and $12.3 million relating to the TD Group Loan Facility, (ii) the distributions to participants in our deferred compensation plans totaling approximately $26.0 million (in connection with the distributions under the deferred compensation plans, our Board of Directors approved the termination of the plans during the first quarter of fiscal 2006), and (iii) the payment of a one-time special bonus to certain members of management of $6.2 million. These decreases are partially offset by a $29.6 million increase in operating cash flows as a result of an increase in net sales and other factors described in Changes in Results of Operations above. We generated $80.7 million of cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2005 compared to $111.1 million of cash generated from operating activities in fiscal year 2004. The decrease of $30.4 million in fiscal year 2005 is primarily due to the receipt of income tax refunds of $37.1 million during fiscal year 2004 resulting from the merger charge in the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2003. Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities increased to $35.3 million during fiscal 2006 from $20.5 million in fiscal 2005. The cash used in fiscal 2006 was for the acquisitions of Electra Motion and Sweeney for $27.0 million and capital expenditures of $8.3 million. 37 Table of Contents Cash used in investing activities decreased to $20.5 million during fiscal year 2005 compared to $77.6 million of cash used in investing activities during fiscal year 2004. The cash used in fiscal year 2005 was primarily for (i) the Acquisitions discussed previously of $63.2 million, offset by the sale of marketable securities (net of purchases) of $50.6 million, and (ii) capital expenditures of $8.0 million. The cash used in investing activities in fiscal year 2004 was primarily for the net purchase of marketable securities of $50.7 million and the acquisition of Avionic for $21.5 million. Financing Activities. The Company used $10.7 million of cash during fiscal 2006 compared to using $4.4 million of cash during fiscal 2005. The increase during fiscal 2006 is due to: (i) the use of $4.5 million associated with the refinancing of the Company entire debt structure in June 2006 (see Impact of Refinancing below) and (ii) the use of $200 million of cash in connection with the repayment of the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes in November 2005. Partially offsetting these increases was the borrowing under the TD Group Loan Facility of $193.8 million. The Company used $3.9 million of cash from financing activities during fiscal year 2004 primarily for the repayment of term loans and a license agreement. Impact of Refinancing In June 2006 TransDigm refinanced its entire debt structure. In connection with the refinancing, TransDigm Inc. obtained a New Senior Secured Credit Facility. The New Senior Secured Credit Facility consists of a $650 million term loan facility, which was fully drawn at closing, and a $150 million revolving loan facility, of which $148.8 million was available as of September 30, 2006. The term loan facility will mature in July 2013 and will not be subject to interim scheduled amortization, but will be subject to certain prepayments requirements. Subject to exceptions, commencing 90 days after the end of fiscal year 2007, TransDigm Inc. will be obligated to make mandatory prepayments of the term loans based on certain percentages of excess cash flows. In addition, subject to exceptions (including in respect of reinvestment in productive assets), TransDigm Inc. will be required to offer to prepay the term loans with the net proceeds of certain asset sales. The revolving loan facility will mature and the commitments thereunder will terminate in July 2012. Under the terms of the New Senior Secured Credit Facility, TransDigm Inc. has the right to request (but no lender is committed to provide) additional term loans of up to $250 million, subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions, including pro forma compliance with the financial covenants contained in the New Senior Secured Credit Facility after giving effect to any such incremental term loan borrowings. The New Senior Secured Credit Facility is guaranteed by TD Group and all of TransDigm Inc. current and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, and is secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the existing and future property and assets of TransDigm Inc. and all of TransDigm Inc. existing and future domestic restricted subsidiaries, and a first priority pledge of the capital stock of TransDigm Inc. and TransDigm Inc. domestic subsidiaries and 65% of the voting capital stock of TransDigm Inc. foreign subsidiary. The interest rates per annum applicable to loans, other than swingline loans, under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility are, at the Company option, equal to either an alternate base rate or an adjusted LIBO rate for one, two, three or six-month (or to the extent available to each lender, nine or twelve month) interest periods chosen by TransDigm Inc., in each case, plus an applicable margin percentage. The alternate base rate is the greater of (1) Credit Suisse First Boston prime rate or (2) 50 basis points over the weighted average rates on overnight Federal funds as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The adjusted LIBO rate is determined by reference to settlement rates established for deposits in dollars in the London interbank market for a period equal to the interest period of the loan as adjusted for the maximum reserve percentages established by the Board of Governors of the United States Federal Reserve. The applicable margin percentage is a percentage per annum equal to (1) 1.00% for alternate base rate term loans, (2) 2.00% for adjusted LIBO rate term loans, (3) in the case of alternate base rate revolving loans and adjusted LIBO rate revolving loans, a percentage which varies based on the consolidated leverage ratio of TransDigm Inc. as of the relevant date of determination. 38 Table of Contents All borrowings under the new revolving loan facility are subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions, including absence of a default and accuracy of representations and warranties. TransDigm Inc. entered into a three year interest rate swap with Credit Suisse for an initial notional amount of $187 million at a fixed rate of 7.63%. The notional amount will decrease to $170 million on September 23, 2007 and to $150 million on September 23, 2008. As a result of the interest rate swap, the interest rates on TransDigm total debt are approximately 50% variable and 50% fixed. The decrease in the notional amounts is to maintain the approximate mix between fixed and variable interest rates. In connection with the refinancing, TransDigm Inc. also issued $275 million aggregate principal amount of 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes. Such notes do not require principal payments prior to their maturity in July 2014. The notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally and on an unsecured senior subordinated basis, by TransDigm Group and all of our existing domestic subsidiaries. Upon the closing of the refinancing, the entire term loan facility, together with the net proceeds from the $275 million from the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes and a portion of our existing cash balances, was drawn to fund (i) the repayment of the entire $288.4 million of principal amount outstanding under the former senior secured credit facility, (ii) the repayment of the entire $200 million of principal amount outstanding under the TD Group Loan Facility, (iii) the purchase of substantially all of the $400 million of aggregate principal amount of our 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes that were tendered in connection with our tender offer for such notes, (iv) the payment of accrued and unpaid interest on all such indebtedness, and (v) the payment of premiums and transaction expenses associated therewith. TD Group Loan Facility On November 10, 2005, certain lenders made loans to TD Group in an aggregate principal amount of $200 million, and on such date and after giving effect to the fees and expenses paid in connection with the consummation of such transactions, TD Group received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $193.8 million. On November 10, 2005, TD Group used the net proceeds received from TD Group loan facility, or the TD Group Loan Facility, together with substantially all of the proceeds received from the dividend payment from TransDigm Holdings described above to (i) prepay the entire outstanding principal amount and all accrued and unpaid interest on the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes, with all such payments totaling approximately $262.7 million, and (ii) make certain distributions under the Rollover Deferred Compensation Plan and the Management Deferred Compensation Plan, with the aggregate distributions that were made under such deferred compensation plans totaling approximately $26.0 million. The TD Group Loan Facility was to mature in November 2011. The principal amount of the indebtedness outstanding under the TD Group Loan Facility was not amortized and, therefore, the entire balance thereof would have been payable upon maturity in November 2011, subject to certain required prepayment events. Upon consummation of the refinancing in June 2006, the entire $200 million outstanding under the TD Group Loan Facility, together with all accrued and unpaid interest thereon and all other amounts payable thereunder, was repaid. 12% Senior Unsecured Promissory Notes In connection with the Mergers, TD Group issued the senior unsecured promissory notes, or the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes, in an aggregate principal amount of approximately $200 million. The 12% senior unsecured promissory notes were unsecured and were not guaranteed by any of TD Group direct or indirect subsidiaries, including TransDigm Inc. The 12% senior unsecured promissory notes were scheduled to mature in July 2008. The principal amount of the indebtedness outstanding under the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes was not amortized and, therefore, the entire balance thereof was payable upon maturity in July 2008, subject to certain required prepayment events. The 12% senior unsecured promissory notes accrued interest at a 39 Table of Contents rate per annum equal to 12%, compounded semi-annually, with all interest being payable upon maturity or the earlier repayment of the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes. As described above, on November 10, 2005, TD Group elected to optionally prepay the entire outstanding principal amount and all accrued and unpaid interest in respect to the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes. The total amount paid to the holders of the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes in full satisfaction of TD Group obligations thereunder was approximately $262.7 million. Former Senior Secured Credit Facility In connection with the Mergers, all of TransDigm Inc. borrowings (term loans) under its previous senior secured credit facility were repaid and a new senior secured credit facility was obtained. On April 1, 2004, TransDigm Inc. senior secured credit facility, or the former senior secured credit facility, was amended and restated to refinance approximately $294 million of term loans then outstanding. The former senior secured credit facility totaled $394 million, which consisted of (1) a $100 million revolving credit line maturing in July 2009 and (2) a $294 million term loan facility maturing in July 2010. In connection with the June 2006 refinancing, the entire $288.4 million outstanding under our former senior secured credit facility, together with all accrued and unpaid interest thereon and all other amounts payable thereunder, was repaid. 8 3 / 8 % Senior Subordinated Notes In connection with the Mergers, TransDigm Inc. (as successor by merger to TD Funding Corporation) also issued $400 million aggregate principal amount of 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes, which did not require principal payments prior to their maturity in July 2011. In May 2006, TransDigm Inc. commenced a tender offer to purchase for cash any and all of our outstanding 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes, and, in connection therewith, we solicited consents to amend the indenture governing such notes to, among other things, eliminate substantially all of the restrictive covenants and eliminate or modify certain events of default. On June 23, 2006, we closed the tender offer and consent solicitation for the 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes. In connection with the closing of the refinancing, we purchased all of the issued and outstanding 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes that were validly tendered, totaling $399,670,000 in aggregate principal amount. On August 7, 2006, we redeemed all of the 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes that remained outstanding after the consummation of the tender offer for such notes. Funding of the Mergers and Related Transactions Also in connection with the Mergers, Warburg Pincus and certain other institutional investors made an investment in TD Group of approximately $471.3 million, with approximately $200 million of such investment being attributable to the 12% senior unsecured promissory notes described above. TD Group contributed such funds as equity to TD Acquisition Corporation, which, as described elsewhere in this report, was merged with and into TransDigm Holdings. TD Acquisition Corporation then contributed the funds as equity to TD Funding Corporation (which, as described elsewhere in this report, was merged into TransDigm Inc.), which lent a portion of such proceeds together with a portion of the proceeds it received from the issuance of the 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes and from borrowings under its then effective senior secured credit facilities, to TD Acquisition Corporation. TD Acquisition Corporation used the proceeds of such intercompany loan to pay all amounts due to the equity holders of TransDigm Holdings under the terms of the merger agreement that totaled approximately $759.7 million. In connection with the Mergers, certain employees also rolled over options with a net value of approximately $35.7 million. Using a portion of the proceeds from the 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes, the borrowings under its then effective senior secured credit facilities, the cash investment by Warburg Pincus and certain other institutional investors and existing cash balances, TransDigm Inc. repaid or defeased all of its long-term indebtedness that was outstanding immediately prior to the consummation of the Mergers and acquisition fees and expenses of approximately $34.7 million. The repaid indebtedness included all amounts outstanding under TransDigm Inc. 40 Table of Contents then existing credit facilities. TransDigm Inc. also completed a tender offer to repurchase its 10 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes. Approximately $197.8 million aggregate principal amount of the $200 million aggregate principal amount of outstanding 10 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes were tendered in the tender offer. TransDigm Inc. defeased the remaining $2.2 million aggregate principal amount of 10 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes not tendered and accepted for payment in the tender offer and, in December 2003, redeemed such notes. Certain Restrictive Covenants in Our Debt Documents Both the New Senior Secured Credit Facility and the indenture governing the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes contain restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit the incurrence of additional indebtedness, the payment of dividends, transactions with affiliates, asset sales, acquisitions, mergers and consolidations, liens and encumbrances, and prepayments of other indebtedness. In addition, the revolving loan facility under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility requires TransDigm Inc. to comply with a first lien leverage ratio. A breach of any of the covenants or an inability to comply with the required leverage ratio could result in a default under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility or the indenture governing the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes. If any such default occurs, the lenders under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility and the holders of the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes may elect to declare all outstanding borrowings, together with accrued interest and other amounts payable thereunder, to be immediately due and payable. The lenders under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility also have the right in these circumstances to terminate any commitments they have to provide further borrowings In addition, following an event of default under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility, the lenders thereunder will have the right to proceed against the collateral granted to them to secure the debt, which includes our available cash and they will also have the right to prevent us from making debt service payments on the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes. Contractual Obligations The following is a summary of contractual cash obligations as of September 30, 2006 (in millions): 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 and thereafter Total New Senior Secured Credit Facility (1) $ $ $ $ $ $ 650.0 $ 650.0 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes due 2014 275.0 275.0 Scheduled Interest Payments (2) 72.0 70.7 70.7 70.4 70.4 143.9 498.1 TD Group Deferred Compensation Plans 6.5 6.5 Operating Leases 2.3 1.7 1.6 1.1 0.9 1.1 8.7 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 74.3 $ 72.4 $ 78.8 $ 71.5 $ 71.3 $ 1,070.0 $ 1,438.3 (1) The New Senior Secured Credit Facility will mature on June 23, 2013 (in the case of the term loan facility) and June 23, 2012 (in the case of the revolving credit facility), and will not be subject to interim scheduled amortization. However, under the terms of the New Senior Secured Credit Facility, commencing 90 days after the end of fiscal 2007 and each fiscal year thereafter, TransDigm Inc. is required to prepay outstanding term loans in a principal amount equal to 50% of Excess Cash Flow (as defined); provided, that the amount of the prepayment will be reduced to 25% of Excess Cash Flow if the Consolidated Leverage Ratio (as defined) at the end of the applicable fiscal year is less than 5.00 to 1.00, but greater than 4.50 to 1.00, and TransDigm Inc. will not be required to prepay any of the term loan if the Consolidated Leverage Ratio as of the end of the applicable fiscal year is equal to or less than 4.50 to 1.00 or if the term loan achieves certain minimum credit ratings at the end of such fiscal year. (2) Assumes that the variable interest rate on our borrowings under our New Senior Secured Credit Facility remains constant at 7.45%. In addition to the contractual obligations set forth above, the Company incurs capital expenditures for the purpose of maintaining and replacing existing equipment and facilities and, from time to time, for facility expansion. Capital expenditures totaled approximately $8.3 million, $8.0 million and $5.4 million during fiscal 2006, 2005, and fiscal 2004, respectively. The Company expects its capital expenditures in fiscal 2007 to be approximately $15 million and such expenditures are projected to increase moderately thereafter. 41 Table of Contents The Company intends to pursue acquisitions that present opportunities consistent with the Company business direction. The Company regularly engages in discussions with respect to potential acquisitions and investments. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to consummate an agreement with respect to any future acquisition. The Company acquisition strategy may require substantial capital, and no assurance can be given that the Company will be able to raise any necessary funds on acceptable terms or at all. If the Company incurs additional debt to finance acquisitions, total interest expense will increase. If the Company has excess cash, it may consider methods by which it can provide cash to its debt or equity holders through a dividend, pre-payment of indebtedness, repurchase of stock, or other means. Such activities will depend on prevailing market conditions, the Company liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material. In addition, the Company may issue additional debt if prevailing market conditions are favorable to doing so. The Company ability to make scheduled interest payments on, or to refinance, the Company indebtedness, or to fund non-acquisition related capital expenditures and research and development efforts, will depend on the Company ability to generate cash in the future. This is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond its control. Based on its current levels of operations and anticipated cost savings and operating improvements and absent any disruptive events, management believes that internally generated funds and borrowings available under our revolving loan facility should provide sufficient resources to finance its operations, non-acquisition related capital expenditures, research and development efforts and long-term indebtedness obligations through at least fiscal 2007. There can be no assurance, however, that the Company business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations, that currently anticipated cost savings and operating improvements will be realized on schedule or at all or that future borrowings will be available to the Company under the New Senior Secured Credit Facility in an amount sufficient to enable it to pay its indebtedness or to fund its other liquidity needs. The Company may need to refinance all or a portion of its indebtedness on or before maturity. Also, to the extent the Company accelerates its growth plans, consummates acquisitions or has lower than anticipated sales or increases in expenses, the Company may also need to raise additional capital. In particular, increased working capital needs occur whenever the Company consummates acquisitions or experiences strong incremental demand. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional capital on commercially reasonable terms or at all. New Accounting Standards In September 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 158, Employer Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans-an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R) (SFAS 158). This statement requires balance sheet recognition of the overfunded or underfunded status of pension and postretirement benefit plans. Under SFAS 158, actuarial gains and losses, prior service costs or credits, and any remaining transition assets or obligations that have not been recognized under previous accounting standards must be recognized in Accumulated Other Non-Shareowners Changes in Equity, net of tax effects, until they are amortized as a component of net periodic benefit cost. In addition, the measurement date, the date at which plan assets and the benefit obligation are measured, is required to be the company fiscal year end. Presently, we use a September 30 measurement date for a majority of our pension and postretirement benefit plans. SFAS 158 is effective for publicly-held companies for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2006, except for the measurement date provisions, which are effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2008. We anticipate that the adoption of this pronouncement will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial position or results of operations. In September 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( the FASB ) issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157, Fair Value Measurements which is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and for interim periods within those years. This statement defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands the related disclosure requirements. We are currently evaluating the potential impact of this statement. 42 Table of Contents In July 2006, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 ( FIN 48 ). FIN 48 prescribes the minimum accounting and disclosure requirements of uncertain tax positions. FIN 48 also provides guidance on the derecognition, measurement, classification, interest and penalties, and transition of uncertain tax positions. FIN 48 is effective for fiscal periods after December 15, 2006. We are currently analyzing the expected impact of adoption of FIN 48 on our financial statements. During December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS 123(R), Share Based Payments , which requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the financial statements based on their fair values. The Company will adopt this pronouncement effective October 1, 2006. We anticipate that the adoption of this pronouncement will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial position or results of operations. In June 2005, the FASB issued SFAS No. 154, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections A Replacement of APB Opinion No. 20 and FASB Statement No. 3 ( SFAS 154 ). This Statement requires that a voluntary change in accounting principle be applied retroactively with all prior period financial statements presented on the basis of the new accounting principle, unless it is impracticable to do so. SFAS 154 also provides that (1) a change in method of depreciating or amortizing a long-lived non-financial asset be accounted for as a change in estimate (prospectively) that was effected by a change in accounting principle, and (2) correction of errors in previously issued financial statements should be termed a restatement . The new standard is effective for accounting changes and a correction of errors made in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2005. Early adoption of this standard is permitted for accounting changes and correction of errors made in fiscal years beginning after June 1, 2005. We do not anticipate that the adoption of this statement will have a material impact on our results of operation or financial condition. Additional Disclosure Required by Indenture Separate financial statements of TransDigm Inc. are not presented since TD Group has no operations or assets separate from its investment in TransDigm Inc. and since the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes are guaranteed by TD Group and all direct and indirect domestic restricted subsidiaries of TransDigm Inc. As of September 30, 2005, the only subsidiary of TransDigm that is not obligated to guarantee the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes is one wholly owned, foreign subsidiary that has inconsequential assets, liabilities and equity. 
