CIK: 1260221
Company Name: TRANSDIGM GROUP INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-11-15


ITEM 7 MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 25 ITEM 7A QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK 41 ITEM 8 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 41 ITEM 9 CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 41 ITEM 9A CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 42 ITEM 9B OTHER INFORMATION 44 PART III ITEM 10 DIRECTORS , EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 44 ITEM 11 EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 46 ITEM 12 SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS 46 ITEM 13 CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS 47 ITEM 14 PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES 47 PART IV ITEM 15 EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES 48 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA F-1 Table of Contents Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements This report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act ), and 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Discussions containing such forward-looking statements may be found in Items 1,1A, 2, 3, 5 and 7 hereof and elsewhere within this Report generally. In addition, when used in this Report, the words believes, anticipates, expects, should and similar words or expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Although the Company (as defined below) believes that its plans, intentions and expectations reflected in or suggested by such forward-looking statements are reasonable, such forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements made in this Report. The more important of such risks and uncertainties are set forth under the caption Risk Factors and elsewhere in this Report. Many such factors are outside the control of the Company. Consequently, such forward-looking statements should be regarded solely as our current plans, estimates and beliefs. We do not undertake, and specifically decline any obligation, to publicly release the results of any revisions to these forward-looking statements that may be made to reflect any future events or circumstances after the date of such statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events. All forward-looking statements attributable to the Company or persons acting on its behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by these cautionary statements. In this report, the term TD Group refers to TransDigm Group Incorporated, which holds all of the outstanding capital stock of TransDigm Inc. The terms Company, TransDigm, we, us, our and similar terms refer to TD Group, together with TransDigm Inc. and its direct and indirect subsidiaries. References to fiscal year mean the year ending or ended September 30. For example, fiscal year 2010 or fiscal 2010 means the period from October 1, 2009 to September 30, 2010. PART I ITEM 1. BUSINESS The Company TransDigm Inc. was formed in July 1993 in connection with the acquisition of certain businesses from IMO Industries Inc. TransDigm Group Incorporated ( TD Group ) was formed in July 2003 at the direction of Warburg Pincus Private Equity VIII, L.P. ( Warburg Pincus ) to facilitate the acquisition of TransDigm, Inc. In March 2006 and May 2007, certain stockholders of TD Group and certain members of our management sold shares of TD Group common stock in underwritten public offerings. TD Group did not offer any shares of common stock for sale in the offerings and TD Group did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of shares by the selling stockholders. As a result of the initial public offering in 2006, TD Group common stock is publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol TDG. As a result of the follow on offering in 2007, TD Group was no longer a controlled company for the purposes of the NYSE listing requirements. We believe we are a leading global designer, producer and supplier of highly engineered aircraft components for use on nearly all commercial and military aircraft in service today. Our business is well diversified due to the broad range of products we offer to our customers. We estimate that over 95% of our net sales for fiscal year 2010 were generated by proprietary products. In addition, for fiscal year 2010, we estimate that we generated approximately 80% of our net sales from products for which we are the sole source provider. Most of our products generate significant aftermarket revenue. Once our parts are designed into and sold on a new aircraft, we generate net sales from aftermarket consumption over the life of that aircraft, which is generally estimated to be approximately 30 years. We estimate that approximately 60% of our net sales in fiscal year 2010 were generated from aftermarket sales, the vast majority of which come from the commercial and military aftermarkets. These aftermarket revenues have historically produced a higher gross margin and been more stable than sales to original equipment manufacturers, or OEMs. 1 Table of Contents On September 25, 2010, we entered into a definitive agreement (the Purchase Agreement ) with McKechnie Holdings LLC to purchase all of the outstanding stock of McKechnie Aerospace Holdings, Inc. ( McKechnie ), a privately owned supplier of innovative aerospace products controlled by JLL Partners Inc., for a total purchase price on a cash-free, debt-free basis of approximately $1,265 million in cash. The Purchase Agreement contains representations, warranties, covenants and conditions that we believe are customary for a transaction of this size and type, as well as indemnification provisions subject to specified limitations. The closing of the McKechnie acquisition is subject to several conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals, and there can be no assurance that the McKechnie acquisition will be consummated as contemplated, or at all. We intend to finance the McKechnie acquisition and concurrently refinance a portion of our existing indebtedness through a combination of senior subordinated notes and borrowings under a new senior secured credit facility. Products We primarily design, produce and supply highly-engineered proprietary aerospace components (and certain systems/subsystems) with significant aftermarket content. We seek to develop highly customized products to solve specific needs for aircraft operators and manufacturers. We attempt to differentiate ourselves based on engineering, service and manufacturing capabilities. We typically choose not to compete for non-proprietary build to print business because it frequently offers lower margins than proprietary products. We believe that our products have strong brand names within the industry and that we have a reputation for high quality, reliability and customer support. Our business is well diversified due to the broad range of products that we offer to our customers. Some of our more significant product offerings, substantially all of which are ultimately provided to end-users in the aerospace industry, include mechanical/electro-mechanical actuators and controls, ignition systems and engine technology, specialized pumps and valves, power conditioning devices, specialized AC/DC electric motors and generators, aircraft audio systems, specialized cockpit displays, engineered latching and locking devices, specialized lavatory components, engineered connectors and elastomers, rods and locking devices, NiCad batteries/chargers, and lighting and control technology. Sales and Marketing Consistent with our overall strategy, our sales and marketing organization is structured to continually develop technical solutions that meet customer needs. In particular, we attempt to focus on products and programs that will lead to high-margin, repeatable sales in the aftermarket. We have structured our sales efforts along our major product offerings, assigning a product manager to certain products. Each product manager is expected to grow the sales and profitability of the products for which he or she is responsible and to achieve the targeted annual level of bookings, sales, new business and profitability for such products. The product managers are assisted by account managers and sales engineers who are responsible for covering major OEM and aftermarket accounts. Account managers and sales engineers are expected to be familiar with the personnel, organization and needs of specific customers, to achieve total bookings and new business goals at each account and, together with the product managers, to determine when additional resources are required at customer locations. Most of our sales personnel are compensated, in part, on their bookings and their ability to identify and obtain new business opportunities. Though typically performed by employees, the account manager function may be performed by independent representatives depending on the specific customer, product and geographic location. We also use a number of distributors to provide logistical support as well as primary customer contact with certain smaller accounts. Our major distributors are Aviall, Inc. (a subsidiary of The Boeing Company) and Satair A/S (a Danish public company on whose Board of Directors Mr. Howley, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, serves). 2 Table of Contents Manufacturing and Engineering We maintain eighteen principal manufacturing facilities. Each manufacturing facility comprises manufacturing, distribution and engineering as well as administrative functions, including management, sales and finance. We continually strive to improve productivity and reduce costs, including rationalization of operations, developing improved control systems that allow for accurate product profit and loss accounting, investing in equipment, tooling, information systems and implementing broad-based employee training programs. Management believes that our manufacturing systems and equipment contribute to our ability to compete by permitting us to meet the rigorous tolerances and cost sensitive price structure of aircraft component customers. We attempt to differentiate ourselves from our competitors by producing uniquely engineered products with high quality and timely delivery. Our engineering costs are recorded in Cost of Sales and in Selling and Administrative captions in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Total engineering expense represents approximately 9% of our operating units aggregate costs, or approximately 5% of our consolidated net sales. Our proprietary products, and particularly our new product initiatives, are designed by our engineers and are intended to serve the needs of the aircraft component industry. These proprietary designs must withstand the extraordinary conditions and stresses that will be endured by products during use and meet the rigorous demands of our customers tolerance and quality requirements. We use sophisticated equipment and procedures to comply with quality requirements, specifications and Federal Aviation Administration (the FAA ) and OEM requirements. We perform a variety of testing procedures, including testing under different temperature, humidity and altitude levels, shock and vibration testing and X-ray fluorescent measurement. These procedures, together with other customer approved techniques for document, process and quality control, are used throughout our manufacturing facilities. Customers Our customers include: (1) distributors of aerospace components; (2) worldwide commercial airlines, including national and regional airlines; (3) large commercial transport and regional and business aircraft OEMs; (4) various armed forces of the United States and friendly foreign governments; (5) defense OEMs; (6) system suppliers; and (7) various other industrial customers. For the year ended September 30, 2010, Boeing (which includes Aviall, Inc., a distributor of commercial aftermarket parts to airlines throughout the world) accounted for approximately 14% of our net sales. Our top ten customers for fiscal year 2010 accounted for approximately 48% of our net sales. Products supplied to many of our customers are used on multiple platforms. Active commercial production programs include the Boeing 737, 747, 767 and 777, the Airbus A319/20/21, A330/A340 and A380, the Bombardier CRJ and Challenger, the Embraer RJ s, the Cessna Citation family, the Raytheon Premier and Hawker and most Gulfstream airframes. Military platforms include aircraft such as the Boeing C-17, F-15 and F-18, the Lockheed Martin C-130J and F-16, the Northrop Grumman E2C (Hawkeye), the Joint Strikefighter and the Blackhawk, Chinook and Apache helicopters. TransDigm has been awarded numerous contracts for the development of engineered products for production on the Boeing 787 and Airbus A350XWB and A400M programs. We believe that we have strong customer relationships with almost all large commercial transport, regional, general aviation and military OEMs. The demand for our aftermarket parts and services depends on, among other things, the breadth of our installed OEM base, revenue passenger miles ( RPMs ), the size and age of the worldwide aircraft fleet and, to a lesser extent, airline profitability. We believe that we are also a leading supplier of components used on U.S. designed military aircraft, including components that are used on a variety of fighter aircraft, military freighters and military helicopters. Competition The niche markets within the aerospace industry that we serve are relatively fragmented and we face several competitors for many of the products and services we provide. Due to the global nature of the commercial 3 Table of Contents aircraft industry, competition in these categories comes from both U.S. and foreign companies. Competitors in our product offerings range in size from divisions of large public corporations that have significantly greater financial, technological and marketing resources than we do, to small privately-held entities, with only one or two components in their entire product portfolios. We compete on the basis of engineering, manufacturing and marketing high quality products, which we believe meet or exceed the performance and maintenance requirements of our customers, consistent and timely delivery, and superior customer service and support. The industry stringent regulatory, certification and technical requirements, and the investments necessary in the development and certification of products, create barriers to entry for potential new competitors. As long as customers receive products that meet or exceed expectations and performance standards, we believe that they will have a reduced incentive to certify another supplier because of the cost and time of the technical design and testing certification process. In addition, we believe that concerns about safety and flight delays if products are unavailable or undependable are reasons for our customers to continue long-term supplier relationships. Government Contracts Companies engaged in supplying defense-related equipment and services to U.S. Government agencies are subject to business risks specific to the defense industry. These risks include the ability of the U.S. Government to unilaterally: (1) suspend us from receiving new contracts pending resolution of alleged violations of procurement laws or regulations; (2) terminate existing contracts; (3) reduce the value of existing contracts; (4) audit our contract-related costs and fees, including allocated indirect costs; and (5) control and potentially prohibit the export of our products. Governmental Regulation The commercial aircraft component industry is highly regulated by both the FAA in the United States and by the Joint Aviation Authorities in Europe and other agencies throughout the world, while the military aircraft component industry is governed by military quality specifications. We, and the components we manufacture, are required to be certified by one or more of these entities or agencies, and, in many cases, by individual OEMs, in order to engineer and service parts and components used in specific aircraft models. We must also satisfy the requirements of our customers, including OEMs and airlines that are subject to FAA regulations, and provide these customers with products and services that comply with the government regulations applicable to commercial flight operations. In addition, the FAA requires that various maintenance routines be performed on aircraft components. We believe that we currently satisfy or exceed these maintenance standards in our repair and overhaul services. We also maintain several FAA approved repair stations. In addition, sales of many of our products that will be used on aircraft owned by non-U.S. entities are subject to compliance with U.S. export control laws. Our operations are also subject to a variety of worker and community safety laws. The Occupational Safety and Health Act ( OSHA ), mandates general requirements for safe workplaces for all employees. In addition, OSHA provides special procedures and measures for the handling of certain hazardous and toxic substances. Raw Materials We require the use of various raw materials in our manufacturing processes. We also purchase a variety of manufactured component parts from various suppliers. At times, we concentrate our orders among a few suppliers in order to strengthen our supplier relationships. Raw materials and component parts are generally available from multiple suppliers at competitive prices. 4 Table of Contents Intellectual Property We have various trade secrets, proprietary information, trademarks, trade names, patents, copyrights and other intellectual property rights, which we believe, in the aggregate but not individually, are important to our business. Backlog As of September 30, 2010, the Company estimated its sales order backlog at $467 million compared to an estimated sales order backlog of $402 million as of September 30, 2009. The increase in backlog is due to the acquisitions of Dukes Aerospace and Semco, discussed below, totaling approximately $35 million and an increase in orders across existing product lines in both OEM and aftermarket channels, reflecting the apparent beginning of a long awaited upturn in global air traffic. The majority of the purchase orders outstanding as of September 30, 2010 are scheduled for delivery within the next twelve months. Purchase orders may be subject to cancellation or deferral by the customer prior to shipment. The level of unfilled purchase orders at any given date during the year will be materially affected by the timing of the Company receipt of purchase orders and the speed with which those orders are filled. Accordingly, the Company backlog as of September 30, 2010 may not necessarily represent the actual amount of shipments or sales for any future period. Foreign Operations Although we manufacture substantially all of our products in the United States, we manufacture some products in Malaysia through our wholly-owned Malaysian subsidiary and some products in Mexico through a maquiladora relationship with a third party. We sell our products in the United States, as well as in foreign countries. Substantially all of our foreign sales are transacted in U.S. dollars and, therefore, we have no material exposure to fluctuations in the rate of exchange between foreign currencies and the U.S. dollar as a result of foreign sales. In addition, the amount of components or other raw materials or supplies that we purchase from foreign suppliers, including our Malaysian manufacturing subsidiary, are not material, with substantially all such transactions being made in U.S. dollars. Accordingly, we have no material exposure to currency fluctuations in the rate of exchange between foreign currencies and the U.S. dollar arising from these transactions. Our direct sales to foreign customers were approximately $170.6 million, $150.4 million, and $144.3 million for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Sales to foreign customers are subject to numerous additional risks, including the impact of foreign government regulations, political uncertainties and differences in business practices. There can be no assurance that foreign governments will not adopt regulations or take other action that would have a direct or indirect adverse impact on the business or market opportunities of the Company within such governments countries. Furthermore, there can be no assurance that the political, cultural and economic climate outside the United States will be favorable to our operations and growth strategy. Environmental Matters Our operations and facilities are subject to federal, state, local and foreign environmental laws and regulations governing, among other matters, the emission, discharge, generation, management, transportation and disposal of hazardous materials, wastes and pollutants, the investigation and remediation of contaminated sites, the health and safety of our employees, and permits required in connection with our operations. Although management believes that our operations and facilities are in material compliance with applicable environmental laws, management cannot provide assurance that future changes in such laws, or the regulations or requirements thereunder, or in the nature of our operations will not require us to make significant additional expenditures to ensure compliance in the future. Further, we could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs, fines and sanctions, and third party property damage or personal injury claims as a result of violations of or liabilities under environmental laws, relevant common law, or the environmental permits required for our operations. Changes in environmental, health and safety laws or regulations or other or new regulations could increase our cost of doing business or impact the demand for our products. 5 Table of Contents Under some environmental laws, a current or previous owner or operator of a contaminated site may be held liable for the entire cost of investigation, removal or remediation of hazardous materials at such property, whether or not the owner or operator knew of, or was responsible for, the presence of such hazardous materials. Persons who arrange for disposal or treatment of hazardous materials also may be liable for the costs of investigation, removal or remediation of those substances at a disposal or treatment site, regardless of whether the affected site is owned or operated by them. Because we own and/or operate a number of facilities that have a history of industrial or commercial use and because we arrange for the disposal of hazardous materials at many disposal sites, we may and do incur costs for investigation, removal and remediation. Contaminants have been detected at some of our present and former sites, principally in connection with historical operations, and investigations and/or clean-ups have been undertaken by us or by former owners of the sites. We receive inquiries and notices of potential liability with respect to offsite disposal facilities from time to time. Although we have not incurred any material investigation or cleanup costs to date and investigation and cleanup costs are not expected to be material in the future for existing operations of TD Group, the discovery of additional contaminants or the imposition of additional cleanup obligations at these or other sites, the failure of any other potentially liable party to meet its obligations, or the initiation of suits for personal injury or damages to property or natural resources could result in significant liability for us. Employees As of September 30, 2010, we had approximately 2,400 employees. Approximately 3% of our employees were represented by the United Steelworkers Union, approximately 2% were represented by the United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America and approximately 3% were represented by the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. Collective bargaining agreements between us and these labor unions expire in April 2011, November 2012 and May 2013, respectively. We consider our relationship with our employees generally to be satisfactory. Legal Proceedings We are from time to time subject to, and are presently involved in, litigation or other legal proceedings arising in the ordinary course of business. Based upon information currently known to us, we believe the outcome of such proceedings will not have, individually or in the aggregate, a material adverse effect on our business, our financial condition or results of operations. Available Information TD Group Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K, including any amendments, will be made available free of charge on the Company website, www.transdigm.com, as soon as reasonably practicable, following the filing of the reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission. ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS Set forth below are important risks and uncertainties that could negatively affect our business and financial condition and could cause our actual results to differ materially from those expressed in forward-looking statements contained in this report. Our business is sensitive to the number of flight hours that our customers planes spend aloft, the size and age of the worldwide aircraft fleet and our customers profitability. These items are, in turn, affected by general economic conditions. Our business is directly affected by, among other factors, changes in revenue passenger miles (RPMs), the size and age of the worldwide aircraft fleet and, to a lesser extent, changes in the profitability of the commercial 6 Table of Contents airline industry. RPMs and airline profitability have historically been correlated with the general economic environment, although national and international events also play a key role. For example, in recent years, the airline industry has been severely affected by the downturn in the global economy, higher fuel prices, the increased security concerns among airline customers following the events of September 11, 2001, the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, or SARS, epidemic and the conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq. In addition, recent global market and economic conditions have been unprecedented and challenging with continued turbulence in the U.S. and international markets and economies and have prolonged declines in business and consumer spending. As a result of the substantial reduction in airline traffic resulting from these events, the airline industry incurred, and some in the industry continue to incur, large losses and financial difficulties. Some carriers have also parked or retired a portion of their fleets and have reduced workforces and flights. During periods of reduced airline profitability, some airlines may delay purchases of spare parts, preferring instead to deplete existing inventories. If demand for new aircraft and spare parts decreases, there would be a decrease in demand for certain of our products. Future terrorist attacks may have a material adverse impact on our business. Following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, passenger traffic on commercial flights was significantly lower than prior to the attacks and many commercial airlines reduced their operating schedules. Overall, the terrorist attacks resulted in billions of dollars in losses to the airline industry. Any future acts of terrorism and any military response to such acts could result in further acts of terrorism and additional hostilities, including possible retaliatory attacks on sovereign nations, as well as financial, economic and political instability. While the precise effects of any such terrorist attack, military response or instability on our industry and our business is difficult to determine, it could result in further reductions in the use of commercial aircraft. If demand for new aircraft and spare parts decreases, demand for certain of our products would also decrease. Our sales to manufacturers of aircraft are cyclical, and a downturn in sales to these manufacturers may adversely affect us. Our sales to manufacturers of large commercial aircraft, such as The Boeing Company, Airbus S.A.S, and related OEM suppliers, as well as manufacturers of business jets, which accounted for approximately 20% of our net sales in fiscal year 2010, have historically experienced periodic downturns. In the past, these sales have been affected by airline profitability, which is impacted by, among other things, fuel and labor costs, price competition, downturns in the global economy and national and international events, such as the events of September 11, 2001. In addition, sales of our products to manufacturers of business jets are impacted by, among other things, downturns in the global economy. Prior downturns have adversely affected our net sales, gross margin and net income. We rely heavily on certain customers for much of our sales. Our largest customer for fiscal year 2010 was The Boeing Company (which includes Aviall, Inc., a distributor of commercial aftermarket parts to airlines throughout the world). Boeing accounted for approximately 14% of our net sales in fiscal year 2010. Our top ten customers for fiscal year 2010 accounted for approximately 48% of our net sales. A reduction in purchasing by one of our larger customers for any reason, such as economic downturn, decreased production or strike, could have a material adverse effect on our net sales, gross margin and net income. We generally do not have guaranteed future sales of our products. Further, when we enter into fixed price contracts with some of our customers, we take the risk for cost overruns. As is customary in our business, we do not generally have long-term contracts with most of our aftermarket customers and, therefore, do not have guaranteed future sales. Although we have long-term contracts with many of our OEM customers, many of those customers may terminate the contracts on short notice and, in most cases, 7 Table of Contents our customers have not committed to buy any minimum quantity of our products. In addition, in certain cases, we must anticipate the future volume of orders based upon the historic purchasing patterns of customers and upon our discussions with customers as to their anticipated future requirements, and this anticipated future volume of orders may not materialize. We also have entered into multi-year, fixed-price contracts with some of our customers, pursuant to which we have agreed to perform the work for a fixed price and, accordingly, realize all the benefit or detriment resulting from any decreases or increases in the costs of making these products. Sometimes we accept a fixed-price contract for a product that we have not yet produced, and this increases the risk of cost overruns or delays in the completion of the design and manufacturing of the product. Most of our contracts do not permit us to recover increases in raw material prices, taxes or labor costs. U.S. military spending is dependent upon the U.S. defense budget. The military and defense market is significantly dependent upon government budget trends, particularly the U.S. Department of Defense (the DOD ) budget. In addition to normal business risks, our supply of products to the United States Government is subject to unique risks largely beyond our control. Future DOD budgets could be negatively impacted by several factors, including, but not limited to, a change in defense spending policy by the current presidential administration, the U.S. Government budget deficits, spending priorities, the cost of sustaining the U.S. military presence in Iraq and Afghanistan and possible political pressure to reduce U.S. Government military spending, each of which could cause the DOD budget to remain unchanged or to decline. A significant decline in U.S. military expenditures in the future could result in a reduction in the amount of our products sold to the various agencies and buying organizations of the U.S. Government. We intend to pursue future acquisitions. Our business may be adversely affected if we cannot consummate acquisitions on satisfactory terms, or if we cannot effectively integrate acquired operations. A significant portion of our growth has occurred through acquisitions. Any future growth through acquisitions will be partially dependent upon the continued availability of suitable acquisition candidates at favorable prices and upon advantageous terms and conditions. We intend to pursue acquisitions that we believe will present opportunities consistent with our overall business strategy. However, we may not be able to find suitable acquisition candidates to purchase or may be unable to acquire desired businesses or assets on economically acceptable terms. In addition, we may not be able to raise the capital necessary to fund future acquisitions. In addition, acquisitions involve risks that the businesses acquired will not perform in accordance with expectations and that business judgments concerning the value, strengths and weaknesses of businesses acquired will prove incorrect. We regularly engage in discussions with respect to potential acquisition and investment opportunities. If we consummate an acquisition, our capitalization and results of operations may change significantly. Future acquisitions could likely (and, if the McKechnie acquisition is consummated, would) result in the incurrence of additional debt and contingent liabilities and an increase in interest and amortization expenses or periodic impairment charges related to goodwill and other intangible assets as well as significant charges relating to integration costs. In addition, we may not be able to successfully integrate any business we acquire (including, potentially, the McKechnie business) into our existing business. The successful integration of new businesses depends on our ability to manage these new businesses and cut excess costs. The successful integration of future acquisitions may (and if the McKechnie acquisition is consummated, will) also require substantial attention from our senior management and the management of the acquired business, which could decrease the time that they have to service, attract customers and develop new products and services or attend to other acquisition opportunities. Furthermore, if the McKechnie acquisition is consummated, the integration of McKechnie into our operations will require significant one-time costs. In addition, because we may actively pursue a number of opportunities 8 Table of Contents simultaneously, we may encounter unforeseen expenses, complications and delays, including difficulties in employing sufficient staff and maintaining operational and management oversight. Assuming consummation of the McKechnie acquisition, if we have difficulties in integrating the acquisition or if the benefits we expect to achieve from the acquisition do not materialize, our substantial indebtedness incurred to fund the acquisition and/or the substantial attention required from our management could result in our having to forego other opportunities. We are subject to certain unique business risks as a result of supplying equipment and services to the U.S. Government. Companies engaged in supplying defense-related equipment and services to U.S. Government agencies are subject to business risks specific to the defense industry. These risks include the ability of the U.S. Government to unilaterally: suspend us from receiving new contracts pending resolution of alleged violations of procurement laws or regulations; terminate existing contracts; reduce the value of existing contracts; and audit our contract-related costs and fees, including allocated indirect costs. Most of our U.S. Government contracts can be terminated by the U.S. Government for its convenience. Termination for convenience provisions provide only for our recovery of costs incurred or committed, settlement expenses and profit on the work completed prior to termination. On contracts where the price is based on cost, the U.S. Government may review our costs and performance, as well as our accounting and general business practices. Based on the results of such audits, the U.S. Government may adjust our contract-related costs and fees, including allocated indirect costs. In addition, under U.S. Government purchasing regulations, some of our costs, including most financing costs, amortization of intangible assets, portions of research and development costs, and certain marketing expenses may not be subject to reimbursement. In addition, even where the price is not based on cost, the U.S. Government may seek to review our costs to determine whether our pricing is fair and reasonable. Five of our subsidiaries and divisions were subject to such a pricing review for years 2002 through 2004 and it is possible that we will be subject to a similar pricing review in the future. Such a review could be costly and time consuming for our management and could distract from our ability to effectively manage the business. As a result of such a review, we could be subject to providing a refund to the U.S. Government or we could be asked to enter into an arrangement whereby our prices would be based on cost or the DOD could seek to pursue alternative sources of supply for our parts. Any of those occurrences could lead to a reduction in our revenue from, or the profitability of certain of our supply arrangements with, certain agencies and buying organizations of the U.S. Government. Our business may be adversely affected if we would lose our government or industry approvals or if more stringent government regulations are enacted or if industry oversight is increased. The aerospace industry is highly regulated in the United States and in other countries. In order to sell our components, we and the components we manufacture must be certified by the FAA, the DOD and similar agencies in foreign countries and by individual manufacturers. If new and more stringent government regulations are adopted or if industry oversight increases, we might incur significant expenses to comply with any new regulations or heightened industry oversight. In addition, if material authorizations or approvals were revoked or suspended, our business would be adversely affected. 9 Table of Contents In addition to the aviation approvals, we are at times required to obtain approval from U.S. Government agencies to export our products. Additionally, we are not permitted to export some of our products. A determination by the U.S. Government that we failed to receive required approvals or licenses could eliminate or restrict our ability to sell our products outside the United States, and the penalties that could be imposed by the U.S. Government for failure to comply with these laws could be significant. Our substantial indebtedness could adversely affect our financial health and could harm our ability to react to changes to our business and prevent us from fulfilling our obligations under our indebtedness. We have a significant amount of indebtedness. As of September 30, 2010, our total indebtedness was approximately $1,771.6 million (including discount or premium, net of amortization, in connection with the issuance of the original notes), which was approximately 74.9% of our total capitalization. If we consummate the McKechnie acquisition, we expect to add approximately $1,300 million of indebtedness. Accordingly, we expect that indebtedness would represent approximately 84% of our total capitalization as of September 30, 2010 on a pro forma basis. In addition, we may be able to incur substantial additional indebtedness in the future. For example, as of September 30, 2010, we had approximately $198.0 million of unused commitments under our revolving loan facility. If we consummate the McKechnie acquisition, we expect to obtain a new revolving loan facility with available borrowings of up to $300 million. Although our senior secured credit facility, the indentures (the Indentures ) governing the 7 3 / 4 % senior subordinated notes issued in June 2006, February 2007 and October 2009 (the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes ) contain restrictions on the incurrence of additional indebtedness, these restrictions are subject to a number of significant qualifications and exceptions, and the indebtedness incurred in compliance with these qualifications and exceptions could be substantial. If we incur additional debt, the risks associated with our substantial leverage would increase. Our substantial indebtedness could have important consequences to investors. For example, it could: increase our vulnerability to general economic downturns and industry conditions; require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to payments on our indebtedness, thereby reducing the availability of our cash flow to fund working capital, capital expenditures, research and development efforts and other general corporate requirements; limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industry in which we operate; place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to competitors that have less debt; and limit, along with the financial and other restrictive covenants contained in the documents governing our indebtedness, among other things, our ability to borrow additional funds, make investments and incur liens. In addition, all of our debt under the senior secured credit facility, which includes a $780 million term loan facility and a revolving loan facility of $200 million, bears interest at floating rates. If we consummate the McKechnie acquisition, we expect that we would have a higher amount of term loans and a revolving facility of $300 million bearing interest at floating rates. Accordingly, in the event that interest rates increase, our debt service expense will also increase. In order to reduce the floating interest rate risk, as of September 30, 2010, the Company was party to an interest rate swap agreement that fixes the rate of interest through March 23, 2011 on $300 million of debt under the senior secured credit facility. Our substantial level of indebtedness increases the possibility that we may be unable to generate cash sufficient to pay, when due, the principal of, interest on or other amounts due in respect of our indebtedness, including the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes and, if the McKechnie acquisition is consummated, any new 10 Table of Contents notes issued and other indebtedness incurred in connection therewith. We cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that future borrowings will be available to us under the senior secured credit facility or otherwise in amounts sufficient to enable us to service our indebtedness. If we cannot service our debt, we will have to take actions such as reducing or delaying capital investments, selling assets, restructuring or refinancing our debt or seeking additional equity capital. To service our indebtedness, we will require a significant amount of cash. Our ability to generate cash depends on many factors beyond our control and any failure to meet our debt service obligations could harm our business, financial condition and results of operations. Our ability to make payments on our indebtedness, including the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes (as well as any new notes that will be issued and other indebtedness incurred if the McKechnie acquisition is consummated) and amounts borrowed under the credit facilities, and to fund our operations, will depend on our ability to generate cash in the future, which, to a certain extent, is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control. We cannot assure you, however, that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations, that currently anticipated cost savings and operating improvements will be realized on schedule or at all or that future borrowings will be available to us under the senior secured credit facility or otherwise in amounts sufficient to enable us to service our indebtedness, including the amounts borrowed under the senior secured credit facility and the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes (as well as any new notes that will be issued and other indebtedness incurred if the McKechnie acquisition is consummated), or to fund our other liquidity needs. If we cannot service our debt, we will have to take actions such as reducing or delaying capital investments, selling assets, restructuring or refinancing our debt or seeking additional equity capital. We cannot assure you that any of these remedies could, if necessary, be effected on commercially reasonable terms, or at all. Our ability to restructure or refinance our debt will depend on the condition of the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. Any refinancing of our debt could be at higher interest rates and may require us to comply with more onerous covenants, which could further restrict our business operations. The terms of existing or future debt instruments, the Indentures and the senior secured credit facility may restrict us from adopting any of these alternatives. In addition, any failure to make payments of interest and principal on our outstanding indebtedness on a timely basis would likely result in a reduction of our credit rating, which could harm our ability to incur additional indebtedness on acceptable terms and would otherwise adversely affect the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes (as well as any new notes that will be issued if the McKechnie acquisition is consummated). The terms of the senior secured credit facility, Indentures and other debt instruments may restrict our current and future operations, particularly our ability to respond to changes or to take certain actions. Our existing senior secured credit facility and the Indentures contain a number of restrictive covenants that impose significant operating and financial restrictions on TD Group, TransDigm Inc. and its subsidiaries (in the case of the senior secured credit facility) and TransDigm Inc. and its subsidiaries (in the case of the Indentures) and may limit their ability to engage in acts that may be in our long-term best interests. The senior secured credit facility and Indentures include covenants restricting, among other things, the ability of TD Group, TransDigm Inc. and its subsidiaries (in the case of the senior secured credit facility) and TransDigm Inc. and its subsidiaries (in the case of the Indentures) to: incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue preferred stock; pay distributions on, redeem or repurchase our capital stock or redeem or repurchase our subordinated debt; make investments; sell assets; 11 Table of Contents enter into agreements that restrict distributions or other payments from our restricted subsidiaries to us; incur or allow to exist liens; consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of our assets; engage in transactions with affiliates; create unrestricted subsidiaries; and engage in certain business activities. A breach of any of these covenants could result in a default under the senior secured credit facility or the Indentures. If any such default occurs, the lenders under the senior secured credit facility and the holders of the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes may elect to declare all outstanding borrowings, together with accrued interest and other amounts payable thereunder, to be immediately due and payable. The lenders under the senior secured credit facility also have the right in these circumstances to terminate any commitments they have to provide further borrowings. In addition, following an event of default under the senior secured credit facility, the lenders under that facility will have the right to proceed against the collateral granted to them to secure the debt, which includes our available cash, and they will also have the right to prevent us from making debt service payments on the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes. If the debt under the senior secured credit facility or the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes were to be accelerated, we cannot assure you that our assets would be sufficient to repay in full our debt. We expect that any new credit facility or new senior subordinated notes entered into or issued in connection with the financing of the McKechnie acquisition would also contain restrictive covenants and significant operating and financial restrictions on TD Group. We could incur substantial costs as a result of violations of or liabilities under environmental laws and regulations. Our operations and facilities are subject to a number of federal, state, local and foreign environmental laws and regulations that govern, among other things, discharges of pollutants into the air and water, the generation, handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials and wastes, the remediation of contamination and the health and safety of our employees. We could incur substantial costs, including clean-up costs, fines and sanctions and/or third party property damage or personal injury claims as a result of violations of, or liabilities under, environmental laws, relevant common law or the environmental permits required for our operations. Changes in environmental, health and safety laws or regulations or other new regulations could increase our costs of doing business or adversely impact the demand for our products. Pursuant to certain environmental laws, a current or previous owner or operator of a contaminated site may be held liable for the entire cost of investigation, removal or remediation of hazardous materials at such property, whether or not the owner or operator knew of, or was responsible for, the presence of any hazardous materials. Persons who arrange for the disposal or treatment of hazardous materials may also be held liable for the costs of investigation, removal or remediation of those substances at a disposal or treatment site, regardless of whether the affected site is owned or operated by them. Contaminants have been detected at some of our present and former sites, principally in connection with historical operations, and investigations and/or clean-ups have been undertaken by us or by former owners of the sites. We also receive inquiries and notices of potential liability with respect to offsite disposal facilities from time to time. Although we are not aware of any sites for which material obligations exist, the discovery of additional contaminants, the imposition of additional clean-up obligations at these or other sites, the failure of any other potentially liable party to meet its obligations or the initiation of suits for personal injury or damages to property or natural resources could result in significant liability. McKechnie is a party to a number of legal proceedings and is responsible, in whole or in part, for remediation at a number of owned or third-party sites, for which McKechnie has reserves on its balance sheet. 12 Table of Contents Assuming the McKechnie acquisition is consummated, if the amount of any reserves we establish in connection with those remediations and related legal liabilities is significantly less than the actual costs incurred to satisfy those liabilities, our operating results could be materially impacted. We are dependent on our highly trained employees and any work stoppage or difficulty hiring similar employees could adversely affect our business. Because our products are complicated and highly engineered, we depend on an educated and trained workforce. There is substantial competition for skilled personnel in the aircraft component industry, and we could be adversely affected by a shortage of skilled employees. We may not be able to fill new positions or vacancies created by expansion or turnover or attract and retain qualified personnel. As of September 30, 2010, we had approximately 2,400 employees. Approximately 3% of our employees were represented by the United Steelworkers Union, approximately 2% were represented by the United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America and approximately 3% were represented by the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. Collective bargaining agreements between us and these labor unions expire in April 2011, November 2012 and May 2013, respectively. Although we believe that our relations with our employees are satisfactory, we cannot assure you that we will be able to negotiate a satisfactory renewal of these collective bargaining agreements or that our employee relations will remain stable. Because we maintain a relatively small inventory of finished goods, any work stoppage could materially and adversely affect our ability to provide products to our customers. Our business is dependent on the availability of certain components and raw materials from suppliers. Our business is affected by the price and availability of the raw materials and component parts that we use to manufacture our components. Our business, therefore, could be adversely impacted by factors affecting our suppliers (such as the destruction of our suppliers facilities or their distribution infrastructure, a work stoppage or strike by our suppliers employees or the failure of our suppliers to provide materials of the requisite quality), or by increased costs of such raw materials or components if we were unable to pass along such price increases to our customers. Because we maintain a relatively small inventory of raw materials and component parts, our business could be adversely affected if we were unable to obtain these raw materials and components from our suppliers in the quantities we require or on favorable terms. Although we believe in most cases that we could identify alternative suppliers, or alternative raw materials or component parts, the lengthy and expensive FAA and OEM certification processes associated with aerospace products could prevent efficient replacement of a supplier, raw material or component part. We have recorded a significant amount of intangible assets, which may never generate the returns we expect. Mergers and acquisitions have resulted in significant increases in identifiable intangible assets and goodwill. Identifiable intangible assets, which primarily include trademarks, trade names, trade secrets, license agreements and technology, were approximately $400.4 million at September 30, 2010, representing approximately 15% of our total assets. Goodwill recognized in accounting for the mergers and acquisitions was approximately $1,571.7 million at September 30, 2010, representing approximately 59% of our total assets. We may never realize the full value of our identifiable intangible assets and goodwill, and to the extent we were to determine that our identifiable intangible assets or our goodwill were impaired within the meaning of applicable accounting standards, we would be required to write-off the amount of any impairment. We face significant competition. We operate in a highly competitive global industry and compete against a number of companies, including divisions of larger companies, some of which have significantly greater resources than we do, and therefore may be able to adapt more quickly to new or emerging technologies and changes in customer requirements, or devote 13 Table of Contents greater resources to the promotion and sale of their products than we can. Competitors in our product lines are both U.S. and foreign companies and range in size from divisions of large public corporations to small privately held entities. We believe that our ability to compete depends on high product performance, consistent high quality, short lead-time and timely delivery, competitive pricing, superior customer service and support and continued certification under customer quality requirements and assurance programs. We may have to adjust the prices of some of our products to stay competitive. We could be adversely affected if one of our components causes an aircraft to crash. Our operations expose us to potential liabilities for personal injury or death as a result of the failure of an aircraft component that we have designed, manufactured or serviced. While we maintain liability insurance to protect us from future products liability claims, in the event of product liability claims our insurers may attempt to deny coverage or any coverage we have may not be adequate. We also may not be able to maintain insurance coverage in the future at an acceptable cost. Any liability not covered by insurance or for which third party indemnification is not available could result in significant liability to us. In addition, a crash caused by one of our components could damage our reputation for quality products. We believe our customers consider safety and reliability as key criteria in selecting a provider of aircraft components. If a crash were to be caused by one of our components, or if we were to otherwise fail to maintain a satisfactory record of safety and reliability, our ability to retain and attract customers may be materially adversely affected. Our stock prices may be volatile, and your investment in our common stock could suffer a decline in value. There has been significant volatility in the market price and trading volume of equity securities, which is unrelated to the financial performance of the companies issuing the securities. These broad market fluctuations may negatively affect the market price of our common stock. You may not be able to sell your shares at or above the purchase price due to fluctuations in the market price of our common stock caused by changes in our operating performance or prospects, including possible changes due to the cyclical nature of the aerospace industry and other factors such as fluctuations in OEM and aftermarket ordering, which could cause short-term swings in profit margins, or unrelated to our operating performance, including market conditions affecting the stock market generally or the stocks of aerospace companies more specifically. Future sales of our common stock in the public market could lower our share price. We may sell additional shares of common stock into the public markets or issue convertible debt securities to raise capital in the future. The market price of our common stock could decline as a result of sales of a large number of shares of our common stock in the public markets or the perception that these sales could occur. These sales, or the possibility that these sales may occur, also might make it more difficult for us to sell equity securities to raise capital at a time and price that we deem appropriate. Our corporate documents and Delaware law contain certain provisions that could discourage, delay or prevent a change in control of our company. Provisions in our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and bylaws may discourage, delay or prevent a merger or acquisition involving us that our stockholders may consider favorable. For example, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation authorizes our Board of Directors to issue up to 149,600,000 shares of blank check preferred stock. Without stockholder approval, the Board of Directors has the authority to attach special rights, including voting and dividend rights, to this preferred stock. With these rights, holders of preferred stock could make it more difficult for a third party to acquire us. In addition, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides for a staggered Board of Directors, whereby directors serve for three-year terms, with approximately one-third of the directors coming up for re-election each year. Having a staggered board will make it more difficult for a third party to obtain control of our Board of Directors through a proxy 14 Table of Contents contest, which may be a necessary step in an acquisition of us that is not favored by our Board of Directors. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation also provides that the affirmative vote of the holders of at least 75% of the voting power of our issued and outstanding capital stock, voting together as a single class, is required for the alteration, amendment or repeal of certain provisions of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation, including the provisions authorizing a staggered board, and certain provisions of our amended and restated bylaws, including the provisions relating to our stockholders ability to call special meetings, notice provisions for stockholder business to be conducted at an annual meeting, requests for stockholder lists and corporate records, nomination and removal of directors, and filling of vacancies on our Board of Directors. We are also subject to the anti-takeover provisions of Section 203 of the Delaware General Corporation Law. Under these provisions, if anyone becomes an interested stockholder, we may not enter into a business combination with that person for three years without special approval, which could discourage a third party from making a takeover offer and could delay or prevent a change of control. For purposes of Section 203, interested stockholder means, generally, someone owning 15% or more of our outstanding voting stock or an affiliate of ours that owned 15% or more of our outstanding voting stock during the past three years, subject to certain exceptions as described in Section 203. We do not intend to pay regular cash dividends on our stock. Notwithstanding the special cash dividend paid in October 2009, we do not anticipate declaring or paying regular cash dividends on our common stock or any other equity security in the foreseeable future. The amounts that may be available to us to pay cash dividends are restricted under our debt and other agreements. Any payment of cash dividends on our common stock in the future will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend on our results of operations, earnings, capital requirements, financial condition, future prospects, contractual restrictions and other factors deemed relevant by our Board of Directors. Therefore, you should not rely on dividend income from shares of our common stock. ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS None. ITEM 2. PROPERTIES TransDigm owned properties as of September 30, 2010 are as follows: Location Square Footage Liberty, SC 219,000 Waco, TX 218,800 Los Angeles, CA 131,000 Addison, IL 83,300 Seattle, WA 78,000 Painesville, OH 63,900 Cleveland, OH 50,000 Avenel, NJ 48,500 Valencia, CA 38,000 Malaysia 24,800 Deerfield, FL 20,000 The properties listed above, except Addison, Deerfield, Malaysia and Valencia are subject to mortgage liens under our senior secured credit facility. 15 Table of Contents TransDigm leased properties as of September 30, 2010 are as follows: Location Square Footage Dayton, NV 144,000 Fullerton, CA 100,000 Collegeville, PA 90,000 Camarillo, CA 70,000 Tempe, AZ 40,200 Northridge, CA 35,000 Nogales, MX 27,000 Gardena, CA 25,000 Bellevue, WA 18,000 Wichita, KS 10,000 Mesa, AZ 9,100 Cleveland, OH 7,100 TransDigm also leases certain of its other non-material facilities. Management believes that our machinery, plants and offices are in satisfactory operating condition and that it will have sufficient capacity to meet foreseeable future needs without incurring significant additional capital expenditures. ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS During the ordinary course of business, TransDigm is from time to time threatened with, or may become a party to, legal actions and other proceedings related to its businesses, products or operations. While TransDigm is currently involved in some legal proceedings, management believes the results of these proceedings will not have a material effect on its financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows. ITEM 4. SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS None. 16 Table of Contents PART II ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES Market Information Our common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange, or NYSE, under the ticker symbol TDG. The following chart sets forth, for the periods indicated, the high and low sales prices of the common stock on the NYSE. Quarterly Stock Prices High Low Fiscal 2009 For Quarter ended December 27, 2008 $ 35.60 $ 23.00 For Quarter ended March 28, 2009 40.56 29.51 For Quarter ended June 27, 2009 40.63 31.49 For Quarter ended September 30, 2009 50.93 35.15 Fiscal 2010 For Quarter ended January 2, 2010 50.94 38.92 For Quarter ended April 3, 2010 54.48 46.54 For Quarter ended July 3, 2010 57.31 48.68 For Quarter ended September 30, 2010 64.67 49.22 Holders We estimate that there were approximately 3,400 beneficial holders of our common stock as of November 8, 2010. Dividends In October 2009 TD Group Board of Directors declared a special cash dividend of $7.65 on each outstanding share of common stock. We do not anticipate declaring or paying regular cash dividends on our common stock in the near future. Any payment of cash dividends on our common stock in the future will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon our results of operations, earnings, capital requirements, financial condition, future prospects, contractual restrictions, and other factors deemed relevant by our Board of Directors. TD Group is a holding company and conducts all of its operations through direct and indirect subsidiaries. Unless TD Group receives dividends, distributions, advances, transfers of funds or other payments from our subsidiaries, TD Group will be unable to pay any dividends on our common stock in the future. The ability of any subsidiaries to take any of the foregoing actions is limited by the terms of our debt documents and may be limited by future debt or other agreements that we may enter into. Performance Graph Set forth below is a line graph comparing the cumulative total return of a hypothetical investment in the shares of common stock of TD Group with the cumulative total return of a hypothetical investment in each of the S&P SmallCap 600 Index and the S&P SmallCap 600 Aerospace & Defense Index based on the respective market prices of each such investment on the dates shown below, assuming an initial investment of $100 on March 15, 2006. The following performance graph and related information shall not be deemed soliciting material nor to be filed with the SEC, nor shall such information be incorporated by reference into any future filings under the 17 Table of Contents Securities Act of 1933 or the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, each as amended, except to the extent we specifically incorporate it by reference into such filing. [CHART] COMPARISON OF 54 MONTH CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN* Among TransDigm Group, Inc, The S&P Smallcap 600 Index and S&P SmallCap 600 S&P Aerospace & Defense Index S&P SmallCap 600 TransDigm Group, Inc. S&P Smallcap 600 S&P Aerospace & Defense --------------------- ---------------- ----------------------- 3/06 100.00 100.00 100.00 9/06 101.33 99.24 89.68 9/07 189.67 114.06 139.70 9/08 142.03 98.29 107.76 9/09 206.68 87.86 81.20 9/10 301.78 100.35 92.35 *$100 invested on 3/15/06 in stock or 2/28/06 in index, including reinvestment of dividends. Fiscal year ending September 30. Copyright(C) 2010 S&P, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. All rights reserved. 3/06 9/06 9/07 9/08 9/09 9/10 TransDigm Group, Inc 100.00 101.33 189.67 142.03 206.68 301.78 S&P Smallcap 600 100.00 99.24 114.06 98.29 87.86 100.35 S&P SmallCap 600 S&P Aerospace & Defense 100.00 89.68 139.70 107.76 81.20 92.35 Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds On October 23, 2008, the Board of Directors authorized a common share repurchase program, which was announced on October 27, 2008. Under the terms of the program, the Company may purchase up to a maximum aggregate value of $50 million of its shares of common stock. At September 30, 2010, the Company had repurchased under this program 494,100 shares of its common stock at a gross cost of approximately $15.2 million at a weighted-average price per share of $30.85. No purchases were made under the program during the quarter. 18 Table of Contents ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA The following table sets forth selected historical consolidated financial and other data of TD Group for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2006 to 2010 which have been derived from TD Group audited consolidated financial statements. Separate historical financial information of TransDigm Inc. is not presented since the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes are guaranteed by TD Group and all direct and indirect domestic restricted subsidiaries of TransDigm Inc. and since TD Group has no operations or significant assets separate from its investment in TransDigm Inc. Acquisitions of businesses and product lines completed by TD Group during the last five fiscal years are as follows: On May 1, 2006, Skurka Aerospace Inc. ( Skurka ) acquired certain assets and assumed certain liabilities of Electra-Motion, Inc. On June 12, 2006, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Sweeney Engineering Corp. On October 3, 2006, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of CDA InterCorp. On February 7, 2007, TransDigm completed the merger with Aviation Technologies, Inc. ( ATI ), resulting in ATI becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of TransDigm Inc. On August 10, 2007, TransDigm (through Bruce Aerospace, Inc., a newly formed subsidiary of TransDigm Inc.) acquired certain assets and assumed certain liabilities of Bruce Industries Inc. On May 7, 2008, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of CEF Industries, Inc. On September 26, 2008, Champion Aerospace LLC, a subsidiary of TransDigm Inc., acquired certain product line assets from Unison Industries, LLC, a GE Aviation business. On December 16, 2008, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Aircraft Parts Corporation. On July 24, 2009, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Acme Aerospace Inc. On August 10, 2009, AeroControlex Group Inc., a subsidiary of TransDigm Inc., acquired certain product line assets of Woodward HRT, Inc., a subsidiary of Woodward Governor Company. On December 2, 2009, TransDigm Inc. (through a newly formed, wholly owned subsidiary of TransDigm Inc., Dukes Aerospace Inc.) acquired certain assets and liabilities from Dukes, Inc. and GST Industries, Inc. On September 3, 2010, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Semco Instruments Inc. All of the acquisitions were accounted for using the acquisition method. The results of operations of the acquired businesses and product lines are included in TD Group consolidated financial statements from the date of each of the acquisitions. Non-GAAP Financial Measures We present below certain financial information based on our EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined. References to EBITDA mean earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and references to EBITDA As Defined mean EBITDA plus, as applicable for each relevant period, certain adjustments as set forth in the reconciliations of net income to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined and the reconciliations of net cash provided by operating activities to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined presented below. 19 Table of Contents Neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined is a measurement of financial performance under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( GAAP ). We present EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined because we believe they are useful indicators for evaluating operating performance and liquidity. Our management believes that EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined are useful as indicators of liquidity because securities analysts, investors, rating agencies and others use EBITDA to evaluate a company ability to incur and service debt. In addition, EBITDA As Defined is useful to investors because the revolving credit facility under our senior secured credit facility requires compliance, on a pro forma basis, with a financial covenant that measures the ratio of the amount of our secured indebtedness to the amount of our Consolidated EBITDA defined in the same manner as we define EBITDA As Defined herein. This financial covenant is a material term of our senior secured credit facility as the failure to comply with such financial covenant could result in an event of default in respect of the revolving credit facility (and such an event of default could, in turn, result in an event of default under the indenture governing our 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes). In addition to the above, our management uses EBITDA As Defined to review and assess the performance of the management team in connection with employee incentive programs and to prepare its annual budget and financial projections. Moreover, our management uses EBITDA As Defined to evaluate acquisitions. Although we use EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined as measures to assess the performance of our business and for the other purposes set forth above, the use of these non-GAAP financial measures as analytical tools has limitations, and you should not consider any of them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations as reported in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations are: neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined reflects the significant interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest payments, on our indebtedness; although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined reflects any cash requirements for such replacements; the omission of the substantial amortization expense associated with our intangible assets further limits the usefulness of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined; neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined includes the payment of taxes, which is a necessary element of our operations; and EBITDA As Defined excludes the cash expense we have incurred to integrate acquired businesses into our operations, which is a necessary element of certain of our acquisitions. Because of these limitations, EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. Management compensates for these limitations by not viewing EBITDA or EBITDA As Defined in isolation and specifically by using other GAAP measures, such as net income, net sales and operating profit, to measure our operating performance. Neither EBITDA nor EBITDA As Defined is a measurement of financial performance under GAAP, and neither should be considered as an alternative to net income or cash flow from operations determined in accordance with GAAP. Our calculation of EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined may not be comparable to the calculation of similarly titled measures reported by other companies. 20 Table of Contents The information presented below should be read together with Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere herein. Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 (in thousands, except per share amounts ) Statement of Operations Data: Net Sales $ 827,654 $ 761,552 $ 713,711 $ 592,798 $ 435,164 Gross profit (1) 473,066 429,346 385,931 309,032 221,290 Operating expenses: Selling and administrative 94,918 80,018 74,650 62,890 48,309 Amortization of intangibles 15,079 13,928 12,002 12,304 6,197 Refinancing costs 48,617 Operating income (1) 363,069 335,400 299,279 233,838 118,167 Interest expense, net 112,234 84,398 92,677 91,767 76,732 Income before income taxes 250,835 251,002 206,602 142,071 41,435 Income tax provision 87,390 88,100 73,476 53,426 16,318 Net income $ 163,445 $ 162,902 $ 133,126 $ 88,645 $ 25,117 Net income applicable to common stock $ 133,132 $ 162,902 $ 133,126 $ 88,645 $ 25,117 Denominator for basic and diluted earnings per share under the two-class method: Weighted-average common shares outstanding 49,171 48,481 47,856 45,630 44,415 Vested options deemed participating securities 3,752 4,058 4,242 4,934 5,073 Total shares for basic and diluted earnings per share 52,923 52,539 52,098 50,564 49,488 Net earnings per share: Basic and diluted (2) $ 2.52 $ 3.10 $ 2.56 $ 1.75 $ 0.51 Cash dividends paid per common share $ 7.65 $ $ $ $ As of September 30, 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 (in thousands) Balance Sheet Data: Cash and cash equivalents $ 234,112 $ 190,167 $ 159,062 $ 105,946 $ 61,217 Working capital 470,496 395,002 334,932 298,380 190,742 Total assets 2,677,818 2,454,440 2,255,821 2,061,053 1,416,712 Long-term debt, including current portion 1,771,646 1,356,761 1,357,230 1,357,854 925,000 Stockholders equity 592,979 819,162 653,900 487,551 363,041 21 Table of Contents Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 (in thousands) Other Financial Data: Cash flows provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 197,304 $ 197,112 $ 189,635 $ 112,436 $ 3,058 Investing activities (176,559 ) (168,388 ) (165,044 ) (521,665 ) (35,323 ) Financing activities 23,200 2,381 28,525 453,958 (10,739 ) Depreciation and amortization 30,165 27,521 25,254 23,952 16,111 Capital expenditures 12,887 13,155 10,884 10,258 8,350 Ratio of earnings to fixed charges (3) 3.2x 3.9x 3.2x 2.5x 1.5x Other Data: EBITDA (4) $ 393,234 $ 362,921 $ 324,533 $ 257,790 $ 134,278 EBITDA As Defined (4) $ 411,609 $ 374,690 $ 333,077 $ 274,708 $ 194,437 (1) Gross profit and operating income include the effect of charges relating to purchase accounting adjustments to inventory associated with the acquisition of various businesses and product lines for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2010, 2009, 2008, 2007 and 2006 of $4,794,000, $2,264,000, $1,933,000, $6,392,000, and $200,000, respectively. (2) Net income per share is calculated by dividing net income applicable to common stock by the basic and diluted weighted average common shares outstanding. (3) For purposes of computing the ratio of earnings to fixed charges, earnings consist of earnings before income taxes plus fixed charges. Fixed charges consist of interest expense, amortization of debt issuance costs and the portion (approximately 33%) of rental expense that management believes is representative of the interest component of rental expense. (4) EBITDA represents earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. EBITDA As Defined represents EBITDA plus, as applicable for each relevant period, certain adjustments as set forth in the reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined and the reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined presented below. See Non-GAAP Financial Measures for additional information and limitations regarding these non-GAAP financial measures. 22 Table of Contents The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined: Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 (in thousands) Net income $ 163,445 $ 162,902 $ 133,126 $ 88,645 $ 25,117 Add: Depreciation and amortization 30,165 27,521 25,254 23,952 16,111 Interest expense, net 112,234 84,398 92,677 91,767 76,732 Provision for income taxes 87,390 88,100 73,476 53,426 16,318 EBITDA 393,234 362,921 324,533 257,790 134,278 Add: Inventory purchase accounting adjustments (1) 4,794 2,264 1,933 6,392 200 Acquisition integration costs (2) 4,171 3,426 393 2,037 1,032 Acquisition transaction-related expenses (3) 2,717 Non-cash compensation and deferred compensation costs (4) 6,693 6,079 6,218 5,482 988 One-time special bonus payments (5) 6,222 Acquisition earnout costs (6) 850 450 Refinancing costs (7) 48,617 Public offering costs (8) 1,691 2,650 Write-down of certain property held for sale 466 EBITDA As Defined $ 411,609 $ 374,690 $ 333,077 $ 274,708 $ 194,437 (1) Represents purchase accounting adjustments to inventory associated with the acquisitions of various businesses and product lines that were charged to cost of sales when the inventory was sold. (2) Represents costs incurred to integrate acquired businesses and product lines into TD Group operations, facility relocation costs and other acquisition-related costs. (3) Represents, for periods after October 1, 2009, transaction-related costs comprising deal fees; legal, financial and tax due diligence expenses; and valuation costs that are now required to be expensed as incurred. (4) Represents the expenses recognized by us under our stock option plans and our deferred compensation plans. The amount reflected above for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006 includes (i) a reversal of previously recorded amounts charged to expense of $3.8 million resulting from the termination of two of our deferred compensation plans during such period and (ii) expense recognized by us under a new deferred compensation plan adopted by us during such period. (5) Represents the aggregate amount of one-time special bonuses paid on November 10, 2005 to members of management. On November 10, 2005, we entered into an amendment to our former senior secured credit facility pursuant to which the lenders thereunder agreed to exclude these one-time special bonus payments from the calculation of EBITDA As Defined. (6) Represents the amount recognized for an earnout payment pursuant to the terms of the retention agreement entered into in connection with the acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Skurka Engineering Company in December 2004. Pursuant to the November 10, 2005 amendment to our former senior secured credit facility described above, the lenders thereunder agreed to exclude earnout payments and deferred purchase price payments made in connection with certain permitted acquisitions from the calculation of EBITDA As Defined. (7) Represents costs incurred in connection with the refinancing in June 2006, including the premium paid to redeem our 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes of $25.6 million, the write off of debt issue costs of $22.9 million, and other expenses of $0.1 million. (8) Represents costs and expenses incurred by TD Group related to the initial public offering in March 2006 or the secondary offering in May 2007. 23 Table of Contents The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined: Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 (in thousands) Net cash provided by operating activities $ 197,304 $ 197,112 $ 189,635 $ 112,436 $ 3,058 Adjustments: Changes in assets and liabilities, net of effects from acquisitions of businesses (4,971 ) 1,897 (35,544 ) (10,602 ) 111,148 Interest expense, net, excluding amortization of debt issue costs / note premium (1) 104,656 81,147 89,580 88,620 50,011 Income tax provision current 85,490 79,300 66,141 47,196 (1,925 ) Non-cash equity compensation (2) (6,704 ) (5,813 ) (4,035 ) (3,487 ) (2,403 ) Excess tax benefit from exercise of stock options 17,459 9,278 18,756 23,627 Loss on repayment of senior subordinated notes (3) (25,611 ) EBITDA 393,234 362,921 324,533 257,790 134,278 Add: Inventory purchase accounting adjustments (4) 4,794 2,264 1,933 6,392 200 Acquisition integration costs (5) 4,171 3,426 393 2,037 1,032 Acquisition transaction-related expenses (6) 2,717 Non-cash compensation and deferred compensation costs (7) 6,693 6,079 6,218 5,482 988 One-time special bonus payments (8) 6,222 Acquisition earnout costs (9) 850 450 Refinancing costs (10) 48,617 Public offering costs (11) 1,691 2,650 Write-down of certain property held for sale 466 EBITDA As Defined $ 411,609 $ 374,690 $ 333,077 $ 274,708 $ 194,437 (1) Represents interest expense excluding the amortization of debt issue costs and note premium and discount. (2) Represents the compensation expense recognized by TD Group under its stock plans. (3) Represents costs incurred in connection with the refinancing in June 2006 and the premium paid to redeem our 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes of $25.6 million. (4) Represents purchase accounting adjustments to inventory associated with the acquisitions of various businesses and product lines that were charged to cost of sales when the inventory was sold. (5) Represents costs incurred to integrate acquired businesses and product lines into TD Group operations, facility relocation costs and other acquisition-related costs. (6) Represents, for periods after October 1, 2009, transaction-related costs comprising deal fees; legal, financial and tax due diligence expenses; and valuation costs that are now required to be expensed as incurred. (7) Represents the expenses recognized by us under our stock option plans and our deferred compensation plans. The amount reflected above for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006 includes (i) a reversal of previously recorded amounts charged to expense of $3.8 million resulting from the termination of two of our deferred compensation plans during such period and (ii) expense recognized by us under a new deferred compensation plan adopted by us during such period. (8) Represents the aggregate amount of one-time special bonuses paid on November 10, 2005 to members of management. On November 10, 2005, we entered into an amendment to our former senior secured credit facility pursuant to which the lenders thereunder agreed to exclude these one-time special bonus payments from the calculation of EBITDA As Defined. 24 Table of Contents (9) Represents the amount recognized for an earnout payment pursuant to the terms of the retention agreement entered into in connection with the acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Skurka Engineering Company in December 2004. Pursuant to the November 10, 2005 amendment to our former senior secured credit facility described above, the lenders thereunder agreed to exclude earnout payments and deferred purchase price payments made in connection with certain permitted acquisitions from the calculation of EBITDA As Defined. (10) Represents costs incurred in connection with the refinancing in June 2006, including the premium paid to redeem our 8 3 / 8 % senior subordinated notes of $25.6 million, the write off of debt issue costs of $22.9 million, and other expenses of $0.1 million. (11) Represents costs and expenses incurred by TD Group related to the initial public offering in March 2006 or the secondary offering in May 2007. I TEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with Selected Financial Data and TD Group consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion may contain predictions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under the heading entitled Risk Factors included elsewhere in this report. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from any future performance suggested below. Overview We believe we are a leading global designer, producer and supplier of highly engineered aircraft components for use on nearly all commercial and military aircraft in service today. Our business is well diversified due to the broad range of products we offer to our customers. Some of our more significant product offerings, substantially all of which are ultimately provided to end-users in the aerospace industry, include mechanical/electro-mechanical actuators and controls, ignition systems and engine technology, specialized pumps and valves, power conditioning devices, specialized AC/DC electric motors and generators, aircraft audio systems, specialized cockpit displays, engineered latching and locking devices, specialized lavatory components, engineered connectors and elastomers, rods and locking devices, NiCad batteries/chargers, and lighting and control technology. Each of these product offerings is composed of many individual products that are typically customized to meet the needs of a particular aircraft platform or customer. Long-term Sustainable Growth For fiscal year 2010, we generated net sales of $827.7 million, gross profit of $473.1 million or 57.2% of sales, and net income of $163.4 million. We believe we have achieved steady, long-term growth in sales and improvements in operating performance since our formation in 1993 due to our competitive strengths and through execution of our value-driven operating strategy. More specifically, focusing our businesses on our value-driven operating strategy of obtaining profitable new business, carefully controlling the cost structure and pricing our highly engineered value-added products to fairly reflect the value we provide and the resources required to do so has historically resulted in improvements in gross profit and income from operations over the long term. Our selective acquisition strategy has also contributed to the growth of our business. The integration of certain acquisitions into our existing businesses combined with implementing our proven operating strategy has historically resulted in improvements of the financial performance of the acquired business. Our key competitive strengths and the elements of our business strategy are set forth in more detail below. 25 Table of Contents We believe our key competitive strengths include: Large and Growing Installed Product Base with Aftermarket Revenue Stream. We provide components to a large and growing installed base of aircraft to which we supply aftermarket products. We estimate that our products are installed on more than 63,000 commercial transport, regional transport, military and general aviation fixed wing turbine aircraft and rotary wing aircraft. Diversified Revenue Base. We believe that our diversified revenue base reduces our dependence on any particular product, platform or market channel and has been a significant factor in maintaining our financial performance. Our products are installed on almost all of the major commercial aircraft platforms now in production. Significant Barriers to Entry. We believe that the niche nature of our markets, the industry stringent regulatory and customer certification requirements, the relatively low unit cost as compared to many other highly engineered aerospace products and the investments necessary to develop and certify products create significant practical barriers to entry for potential competitors. Our business strategy is made up of two key elements: (1) a value-driven operating strategy focused around our three core value drivers and (2) a selective acquisition strategy. Value-Driven Operating Strategy. Our three core value drivers are: Obtaining Profitable New Business. We attempt to obtain profitable new business by using our technical expertise, application skill and our detailed knowledge of our customer base and the individual niche markets in which we operate. We have regularly been successful in identifying and developing both aftermarket and OEM products to drive our growth. Improving Our Cost Structure. We are committed to maintaining and continuously improving our lean cost structure through detailed attention to the cost of each of the products that we offer and our organizational structure, with a focus on reducing the cost of each. Providing Highly Engineered Value-Added Products to Customers. We focus on the engineering, manufacturing and marketing of a broad range of highly engineered niche products that we believe provide value to our customers. We believe we have been consistently successful in communicating to our customers the value of our products. This has generally enabled us to price our products to fairly reflect the value we provide and the resources required to do so. Selective Acquisition Strategy. We selectively pursue the acquisition of proprietary aerospace component businesses when we see an opportunity to create value through the application of our three core value-driven operating strategies. The aerospace industry, in particular, remains highly fragmented, with many of the companies in the industry being small private businesses or small non-core operations of larger businesses. We have significant experience among our management team in executing acquisitions and integrating acquired businesses into our company and culture. As of the date of this report, we have successfully acquired and integrated 28 businesses and/or product lines since our formation in 1993. Many of these acquisitions have been integrated into an existing TransDigm production facility, which enables a higher production capacity utilization, which in turn improves gross profit levels due to the ability to spread the fixed manufacturing overhead costs over higher production volume. Public Offerings On March 20, 2006 and May 25, 2007, certain stockholders of TD Group (including certain members of our management) sold an aggregate of 11.5 million and 12.6 million shares of TD Group common stock, respectively, in public offerings at prices of $21.00 and $35.25 per share. TD Group did not offer any shares of its common stock for sale in the public offerings and TD Group did not receive any of the proceeds from the sale of such shares by the selling stockholders. As a result of the initial public offering, TD Group common stock is publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol TDG. 26 Table of Contents Certain Acquisitions Semco Instruments Acquisition On September 3, 2010, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Semco Instruments, Inc. ( Semco ) for approximately $71 million in cash, subject to adjustment based on the level of working capital as of the closing date of the acquisition. Semco is a designer and manufacturer of proprietary, highly engineered components for all major turbo-prop, turbo-fan, and turbo-shaft engines, which are primarily used on helicopters, business jets and selected regional airplanes. These products fit well with TransDigm overall business direction. The Company is in the process of obtaining information to value certain tangible and intangible assets of Semco, and therefore the consolidated financial statements at September 30, 2010 reflect a preliminary purchase price allocation for the business. Dukes Aerospace Acquisition On December 2, 2009, TransDigm (through Dukes Aerospace, Inc., a newly formed, wholly owned subsidiary of TransDigm Inc.) acquired substantially all of the aerospace-related assets of Dukes, Inc. and GST Industries, Inc. (collectively Dukes Aerospace ) for approximately $96 million in cash, subject to adjustment based on the level of working capital as of the closing date of the acquisition. In addition, the agreement provides for potential earn-out payments up to a total of $60 million over four years based on the achievement of certain growth targets. Dukes Aerospace is a supplier of proprietary, highly engineered components primarily to the business jet, regional jet, and military aerospace markets, along with commercial and military helicopter markets. The products are comprised primarily of highly engineered valves and certain pumps, solenoids and related components. These products fit well with TransDigm overall business direction. The preliminary purchase price allocation includes a fair value liability of $8 million recorded for the potential earn-out payments. Woodward HRT Product Line Acquisition On August 10, 2009, TransDigm Inc., through its AeroControlex Group Inc. subsidiary, acquired certain product line assets of Woodward HRT, Inc., a subsidiary of Woodward Governor Company ( Woodward HRT product line ) for approximately $48.7 million in cash, which includes a purchase price adjustment of $0.7 million paid in February 2010. The product line comprises a range of highly engineered fuel and pneumatic valves and surge suppressors, the majority of which are used on military rotary and fixed wing aircraft, all of which fit well with TransDigm overall business direction. Woodward Governor had recently acquired this business as part of its acquisition of HR Textron, Inc. Acme Aerospace Acquisition On July 24, 2009, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Acme Aerospace, Inc. ( Acme ) for approximately $40.9 million in cash, which includes a purchase price adjustment of $0.2 million paid in October 2009. Acme is a designer and manufacturer of proprietary, highly engineered components to the commercial aerospace industry, comprising primarily fibrous nickel cadmium main ship batteries, battery chargers, battery back-up systems and power conversion equipment. These products fit well with TransDigm overall business direction. Aircraft Parts Corporation Acquisition On December 16, 2008, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of Aircraft Parts Corporation ( APC ) for approximately $66.9 million in cash, net of a purchase price adjustment of $0.7 million received in November 2009. APC is a designer and manufacturer of starter generators, generator control units and related components for turbine engines, all of which fit well with TransDigm overall business direction. Unison Product Line Acquisition On September 26, 2008, TransDigm Inc., through its wholly-owned Champion Aerospace, LLC subsidiary, acquired certain assets related to the magneto and harness product line business of Unison Industries, LLC 27 Table of Contents ( Unison ) for approximately $68.3 million in cash, net of a purchase price adjustment of $1.1 million received in November 2008. The acquired product line includes the highly engineered SLICK TM magnetos, harnesses and components, which are used on substantially all of the world general aviation piston aircraft. These products fit well with Champion existing product offerings and TransDigm overall business direction. CEF Acquisition On May 7, 2008, TransDigm Inc. acquired all of the outstanding capital stock of CEF Industries, Inc. ( CEF ) for approximately $84.5 million in cash, net of a purchase price adjustment of $0.5 million received in January 2009. CEF is a designer and manufacturer of specialized and highly engineered actuators, pumps and related components primarily for the military aerospace market, all of which fit well with TransDigm overall business direction. EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined: Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2010 2009 (in thousands) Net income $ 163,445 $ 162,902 Add: Depreciation and amortization expense 30,165 27,521 Interest expense, net 112,234 84,398 Income tax provision 87,390 88,100 EBITDA (1) 393,234 362,921 Add: Inventory purchase accounting adjustments (2) 4,794 2,264 Acquisition integration costs (3) 4,171 3,426 Acquisition transaction-related expenses (4) 2,717 Non-cash compensation and deferred compensation costs (5) 6,693 6,079 EBITDA As Defined (1) $ 411,609 $ 374,690 (1) EBITDA represents earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. EBITDA As Defined represents EBITDA plus, as applicable for each relevant period, certain adjustments as set forth in the reconciliation of net income to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined. See Non-GAAP Financial Measures for additional information and limitations regarding these non-GAAP financial measures. (2) Represents purchase accounting adjustments to inventory associated with the acquisitions of various businesses and product lines that were charged to cost of sales when the inventory was sold. (3) Represents costs incurred to integrate acquired businesses and product lines into TD Group operations, facility relocation costs and other acquisition-related costs. (4) Represents, for periods after October 1, 2009, transaction-related costs comprising deal fees; legal, financial and tax due diligence expenses; and valuation costs that are now required to be expensed as incurred. (5) Represents the expenses recognized by us under our stock option plans and our deferred compensation plans. 28 Table of Contents The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined: Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2010 2009 (in thousands) Net cash provided by operating activities $ 197,304 $ 197,112 Adjustments: Changes in assets and liabilities, net of effects from acquisitions of businesses (4,971 ) 1,897 Interest expense, net, excluding amortization (1) 104,656 81,147 Income tax provision current 85,490 79,300 Non-cash equity compensation (2) (6,704 ) (5,813 ) Excess tax benefit from exercise of stock options 17,459 9,278 EBITDA (3) 393,234 362,921 Add: Inventory purchase accounting adjustments (4) 4,794 2,264 Acquisition integration costs (5) 4,171 3,426 Acquisition transaction-related expenses (6) 2,717 Non-cash compensation and deferred compensation costs (7) 6,693 6,079 EBITDA As Defined (3) $ 411,609 $ 374,690 (1) Represents interest expense excluding the amortization of debt issue costs and note premium and discount. (2) Represents the compensation expense recognized by TD Group under its stock plans. (3) EBITDA represents earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. EBITDA As Defined represents EBITDA plus, as applicable for each relevant period, certain adjustments as set forth in the reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to EBITDA and EBITDA As Defined. See Non-GAAP Financial Measures for additional information and limitations regarding these non-GAAP financial measures. (4) Represents purchase accounting adjustments to inventory associated with the acquisitions of various businesses and product lines that were charged to cost of sales when the inventory was sold. (5) Represents costs incurred to integrate acquired businesses and product lines into TD Group operations, facility relocation costs and other acquisition-related costs. (6) Represents, for periods after October 1, 2009, transaction-related costs comprising deal fees; legal, financial and tax due diligence expenses; and valuation costs that are now required to be expensed as incurred. (7) Represents the expenses recognized by us under our stock option plans and our deferred compensation plans. Trend Information We predominantly serve customers in the commercial, regional, business jet and general aviation aftermarket, which accounts for approximately 40% of total sales; the commercial aerospace OEM market, comprising large commercial transport manufacturers and regional and business jet manufacturers, which accounts for approximately 23% of total sales; and the defense market, which accounts for approximately 34% of total sales. Non-aerospace sales comprise approximately 3% of our total sales. The commercial aerospace industry, including the aftermarket and OEM market, is impacted by the health of the global economy and geo-political events around the world. The commercial aerospace industry had shown strength with increases in revenue passenger miles, or RPMs, between 2003 and 2008, as well as increases in OEM production and backlog, however, the recent global economic downturn negatively impacted the commercial aerospace industry causing RPMs to decline slightly in 2009. In 2010, the commercial aerospace industry has slightly rebounded with increases in RPMs, as well the large commercial OEM sector (aircraft with 100 or more seats) with order announcements by The Boeing Company and Airbus S.A.S. leading to planned 29 Table of Contents increases in production. The 2011 leading indicators and industry consensus suggest that conditions in the commercial transport market sector are likely to improve, including a return to RPM growth and a modest acceleration of capacity growth. The defense aerospace market is dependent on government budget constraints, the timing of orders and the extent of global conflicts. It is not necessarily affected by general economic conditions that affect the commercial aerospace industry. Our presence in both the commercial aerospace and military sectors of the aerospace industry may mitigate the impact on our business of any specific industry risk. We service a diversified customer base in the commercial and military aerospace industry, and we provide components to a diverse installed base of aircraft, which mitigates our exposure to any individual airframe platform. At times, declines in sales in one channel have been offset by increased sales in another. However, due to differences between the profitability of our products sold to OEM and aftermarket customers, variation in product mix can cause variation in gross margin. There are many short-term factors (including inventory corrections, unannounced changes in order patterns, strikes and mergers and acquisitions) that can cause short-term disruptions in our quarterly shipment patterns as compared to previous quarters and the same periods in prior years. To normalize for short-term fluctuations, we tend to look at our performance over several quarters or years of activity rather than discrete short-term periods. As such, it can be difficult to determine longer-term trends in our business based on quarterly comparisons. There are also fluctuations in OEM and aftermarket ordering and delivery requests from quarter-to-quarter, as well as variations in product mix from quarter-to-quarter, that may cause positive or negative variations in gross profit margins since commercial aftermarket sales have historically produced a higher gross margin than sales to commercial OEMs. Again, in many instances these are timing events between quarters and must be balanced with macro aerospace industry indicators. Commercial Aftermarket The key growth factors in the commercial aftermarket include worldwide RPMs and the size and activity level of the worldwide fleet of aircraft. Although RPMs increased annually between 2003 and 2008, 2009 had negative growth as a result of the expected reductions in air traffic and capacity due to the slowdown in the global economy. Current industry consensus indicates that RPMs is stabilizing and will return to positive growth thereafter. Commercial OEM Market There is industry consensus that conditions in the commercial transport market sector have improved recently. We are expecting increased activity in the large commercial OEM sector (aircraft with 100 or more seats) driven by order announcements by The Boeing Company and Airbus S.A.S. Furthermore, the business jet OEM market significantly declined in 2009 and 2010 and is expected to bottom out in the near future. This market has also been negatively impacted by the slowdown in economic growth, corporate profits, commodity prices and stock market returns across the world. Defense In recent years, defense spending has reached historic highs, due in part to the military engagements in Afghanistan and Iraq and the war on terrorism. Our military business fluctuates from year to year, and is dependent, to a degree, on government budget constraints, the timing of orders and the extent of global conflicts. We anticipate that military related sales of our types of products could be flat to modestly down in future years over the current high levels. 30 Table of Contents Critical Accounting Policies Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with GAAP, which often requires the judgment of management in the selection and application of certain accounting principles and methods. Management believes that the quality and reasonableness of our most critical policies enable the fair presentation of our financial position and results of operations. However, investors are cautioned that the sensitivity of financial statements to these methods, assumptions and estimates could create materially different results under different conditions or using different assumptions. We have identified the following as the most critical accounting policies upon which our financial status depends. These critical policies were determined by considering accounting policies that involve the most complex or subjective decisions or assessments. Our most critical accounting policies are as follows: Revenue Recognition and Related Allowances: Revenue is recognized from the sale of products when title and risk of loss passes to the customer, which is generally at the time of shipment. Substantially all sales are made pursuant to firm, fixed-price purchase orders received from customers. Provisions for returns, uncollectible accounts and the cost of repairs under contract warranty provisions are provided for in the same period as the related revenues are recorded and are principally based on historical results modified, as appropriate, by the most current information available. We have a history of making reasonably dependable estimates of such allowances; however, due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that actual results may vary from the estimates and the differences could be material. Management estimates the allowance for doubtful accounts based on the aging of the accounts receivable and customer creditworthiness. The allowance also incorporates a provision for the estimated impact of disputes with customers. Management estimate of the allowance amounts that are necessary includes amounts for specifically identified losses and a general amount for estimated losses based on historical information. The determination of the amount of the allowance for doubtful accounts is subject to significant levels of judgment and estimation by management. If circumstances change or economic conditions deteriorate, management may need to increase the allowance for doubtful accounts. The Company provides limited warranties in connection with the sale of its products. The warranty period for products sold varies throughout the Company operations, generally ranging from 90 days to six years. In addition, certain contracts with distributors contain right of return provisions. The Company accrues for estimated returns and warranty claims based on knowledge of product performance issues and excess inventories provided by its customers and industry sources. The Company also provides a general amount based on historical results. Historically, actual product returns and warranty claims have not differed materially from the estimates originally established. Inventories: Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost of inventories is determined by the average cost and the first-in, first-out (FIFO) methods for all locations except CEF, which determines the cost of inventories using the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method. Because the Company sells products that are installed on airframes that can be in-service for 30 or more years, it must keep a supply of such products on hand while the airframes are in use. Provision for potentially obsolete or slow-moving inventory is made based on our analysis of inventory levels, past usage and future sales forecasts. Although management believes that the Company estimates of obsolete and slow-moving inventory are reasonable, actual results may differ materially from the estimates and additional provisions may be required in the future. In addition, in accordance with industry practice, all inventories are classified as current assets as all inventories are available and necessary to support current sales, even though a portion of the inventories may not be sold within one year. Intangible Assets: Mergers and acquisitions are accounted for using the acquisition method and have resulted in significant amounts of identifiable intangible assets and goodwill. Fair value adjustments to the 31 Table of Contents Company assets and liabilities are recognized and the results of operations of the acquired business are included in our consolidated financial statements from the effective date of the merger or acquisition. We generally use third-party appraisals to assist us in determining the fair value adjustments. Intangible assets other than goodwill are recognized if the benefit of the intangible asset is obtained through contractual or other legal rights, or if the intangible asset can be sold, transferred, licensed or exchanged, regardless of the Company intent to do so. Goodwill and identifiable intangible assets are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition and are reviewed at least annually for impairment based on cash flow projections and fair value estimates. The determination of undiscounted cash flows is based on the Company strategic plans and long-range planning forecasts. The revenue growth rates included in the plans are based on industry and Company specific data. The profit margin assumptions included in the plans are projected based on the current cost structure and anticipated cost changes. If different assumptions were used in these plans, the related undiscounted cash flows used in measuring impairment could be different and the recognition of an impairment loss might be required. Intangible assets, such as goodwill, trademarks and trade names that have an indefinite useful life are not amortized. All other intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives. GAAP requires that the annual, and any interim, impairment assessment be performed at the reporting unit level. The reporting unit level is the operating subsidiary level for the Company. Substantially all goodwill was determined and recognized for each operating subsidiary pursuant to the accounting for the merger or acquisition as of the date of each transaction, and therefore the allocation of goodwill among reporting units was immaterial for purposes of the impairment assessment. With respect to acquisitions integrated into an existing operating subsidiary, any related goodwill is combined with goodwill of the operating subsidiary. Stock Options: The Company accounts for the cost of its stock options in accordance with GAAP , which requires the measurement of compensation expense under the stock option plan to be based on the fair value of the awards under the plan on the grant dates and amortizes the expense over the options vesting periods. Compensation expense is recorded over the service period using the straight-line method for service-based awards and in the service period corresponding to the performance target for performance-based awards. Results of Operations The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain operating data of the Company, including presentation of the amounts as a percentage of net sales (amounts in thousands): Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2010 2010% of Sales 2009 2009% of Sales 2008 2008% of Sales Net sales $ 827,654 100.0 % $ 761,552 100.0 % $ 713,711 100.0 % Cost of sales 354,588 42.8 332,206 43.6 327,780 45.9 Selling and administrative 94,918 11.5 80,018 10.5 74,650 10.5 Amortization of intangibles 15,079 1.8 13,928 1.8 12,002 1.7 Income from operations 363,069 43.9 335,400 44.1 299,279 41.9 Interest expense, net 112,234 13.6 84,398 11.1 92,677 12.9 Income tax provision 87,390 10.6 88,100 11.6 73,476 10.3 Net income $ 163,445 19.7 % $ 162,902 21.4 % $ 133,126 18.7 % Fiscal year ended September 30, 2010 compared with fiscal year ended September 30, 2009 Net Sales. Net sales increased by $66.1 million, or 8.7%, to $827.7 million for fiscal 2010 from $761.5 million for fiscal 2009. Sales of $73.8 million resulted from the acquisitions of Aircraft Parts Corporation, Acme 32 Table of Contents and the Woodward HRT product line in fiscal 2009 as well as the recent acquisitions of Dukes Aerospace and Semco in fiscal 2010. Sales excluding acquisitions declined by $7.6 million, or 1.0%, from the prior year. The decline in organic sales was primarily due to a decrease of $18.7 million of commercial OEM sales resulting primarily from the business jet OEM significant production rate reductions and related inventory reductions resulting from the impact of the global economic conditions. Partially offsetting the decline in organic commercial OEM sales was (i) an increase of $6.2 million in commercial aftermarket sales due to the apparent beginning of a long awaited upturn in global air traffic; and (ii) an increase of $2.7 million in defense sales primarily due to increased demand for OEM products across most of our product lines. Cost of Sales and Gross Profit. Cost of sales increased by $22.4 million, or 6.7%, to $354.6 million for fiscal 2010 from $332.2 million for fiscal 2009. The increase in the dollar amount of cost of sales was primarily due to increased volume associated with the higher net sales discussed above. In addition, the increase was partially attributable to higher costs incurred to integrate acquired businesses into TD Group operations and purchase accounting adjustments to inventory that were charged to cost of sales of $3.3 million. Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased to 57.2% for fiscal 2010 from 56.4% for fiscal 2009. The dollar amount of gross profit increased by $43.7 million, or 10.2%, to $473.1 million for fiscal year 2010 from $429.3 million for fiscal 2009. The increase in the amount of gross profit was primarily due to the following items: Sales of $73.8 million from the acquisitions indicated above contributed gross profit of approximately $26 million in fiscal 2010, which includes the acquisition-related costs incurred in connection with those acquisitions. These acquisitions diluted gross profit as a percentage of sales for fiscal 2010 by approximately 2 percentage points. Favorable product mix, favorable product pricing on our proprietary products and cost reduction efforts partially offset by the negative impact of fixed overhead costs spread over lower production volume (excluding acquisitions). The net impact of these items resulted in increased gross profit of approximately $18 million in fiscal 2010 despite the decline in organic sales of $7.6 million discussed above. Selling and Administrative Expenses. Selling and administrative expenses increased by $14.9 million or 18.6%, to $94.9 million, 11.5% of net sales, for fiscal 2010 from $80.0 million, or 10.5% of net sales, for fiscal 2009. This increase was primarily due to higher selling and administrative expenses relating to recent acquisitions of approximately $6.4 million, transaction-related expenses incurred in connection with the acquisition of Dukes Aerospace and Semco Instruments of approximately $2.7 million, higher research and development expenses primarily relating to Airbus A350 and A380 platforms more than offsetting declines in expenses on the Boeing 787, new business development expenses and higher professional fees. Amortization of Intangibles. Amortization of intangibles increased to $15.1 million for fiscal 2010 from $13.9 million for fiscal 2009. The net increase of $1.2 million was primarily due to amortization expense related to the additional identifiable intangible assets recognized in connection with acquisitions during the last twelve months partially offset by the order backlog becoming fully amortized in fiscal 2009 relating to prior acquisitions. Income from Operations. Operating income increased by $27.7 million, or 8.2%, to $363.1 million for fiscal 2010 from $335.4 million for fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher sales and other factors described above. Interest Expense-Net . Interest expense-net increased $27.8 million, or 33.0%, to $112.2 million for fiscal 2010 from $84.4 million for fiscal 2009, comprising an increase in interest expense of $26.7 million and a decrease in interest income of $1.1 million. Interest expense increased primarily due to interest expense of approximately $37.3 million attributable to the $425 million of 7 3 / 4 % senior subordinated notes due 2014 issued 33 Table of Contents in October 2009. Partially offsetting the increase was lower interest rates on the Company existing floating-rate borrowings under its senior secured credit facility. The Company weighted average level of outstanding borrowings was approximately $1.78 billion for fiscal 2010 and approximately $1.36 billion for fiscal 2009. The average interest rate on total debt was approximately 6.0% for fiscal 2010 and fiscal 2009 (see Liquidity and Capital Resources below). Interest income was lower primarily due to lower interest rates on our invested cash balances. Income Taxes . Income tax expense as a percentage of income before income taxes was approximately 34.8% for fiscal 2010 compared to 35.1% for fiscal 2009. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to reductions in estimated state tax obligations and domestic tax credits. Net Income. Net income increased $0.5 million, or 0.3%, to $163.4 million for fiscal 2010 compared to $162.9 million for fiscal 2009, primarily as a result of the factors referred to above. Earnings per Share. The basic and diluted earnings per share, calculated under the two-class method, was $2.52 per share for fiscal 2010 and $3.10 per share for fiscal 2009. Due to the special cash dividend declared and paid during the first quarter of fiscal 2010, the net income for fiscal 2010 of $163.4 million was reduced by an allocation of dividends to participating securities of $30.3 million (approximately $0.57 per share) resulting in a net income applicable to common stockholders of $133.1 million. Fiscal year ended September 30, 2009 compared with fiscal year ended September 30, 2008 Net Sales. Net sales increased by $47.8 million, or 6.7%, to $761.5 million for fiscal 2009 from $713.7 million for fiscal 2008. Sales of $64.7 million resulted from the acquisitions of CEF and the Unison product line in fiscal 2008 as well as the recent acquisitions of Aircraft Parts Corporation, Acme and the Woodward HRT product line. Sales excluding acquisitions declined by $16.9 million, or 2.4%, from the prior year. The net decline in organic sales was primarily due to: (i) a decrease of $30.4 million of commercial OEM sales resulting primarily from the impact of the significant decline in production rates in the business jet market resulting from the continued impact of global economic conditions negatively impacting the business jet market and a reduction in sales to The Boeing Company due to its employee strike; (ii) a decrease of $20.1 million in commercial aftermarket sales due to the impact of the global economic downturn resulting in a decline in worldwide airline traffic and business jet activity; and (iii) an increase of $37.9 million in defense sales primarily due to increased demand for OEM and aftermarket spare parts and repairs across most of our product lines. Cost of Sales and Gross Profit. Cost of sales increased by $4.4 million, or 1.4%, to $332.2 million for fiscal 2009 from $327.8 million for fiscal 2008. The increase in the dollar amount of cost of sales was primarily due to increased volume associated with the higher net sales of $47.8 million discussed above and higher acquisition-related costs of $3.4 million, partially offset by the cost savings from the work force reductions discussed below. Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased to 56.4% for fiscal 2009 from 54.1% for fiscal 2008. The dollar amount of gross profit increased by $43.4 million, or 11.2%, to $429.3 million for fiscal 2009 from $385.9 million for fiscal 2008. The increase in the amount of gross profit was primarily due to the following items: Sales of $64.7 million from the acquisitions indicated above contributed gross profit of approximately $23 million in fiscal 2009, which includes the acquisition-related costs incurred in connection with those acquisitions. These acquisitions diluted gross profit as a percentage of sales for fiscal 2009 by approximately 2 percentage points. Reductions in manufacturing workforce of approximately 10% which occurred from mid-calendar year 2008 throughout calendar year 2009. These reductions in manufacturing workforce were in response to an anticipated drop in overall commercial aerospace market sales. These workforce reductions resulted in cost savings which increased gross profit by approximately $10 million in fiscal 2009. 34 Table of Contents Favorable product mix, meaning that the lower margin OEM product sales dropped more than the higher margin aftermarket product sales, favorable product pricing on our proprietary products and other cost reduction efforts partially offset by the impact of fixed overhead costs spread over lower production volume (excluding acquisitions). These factors resulted in increased gross profit of approximately $10 million in fiscal 2009 despite the decrease in organic sales. Selling and Administrative Expenses. Selling and administrative expenses increased by $5.4 million or 7.2%, to $80.0 million for fiscal 2009 from $74.7 million for fiscal 2008. This increase was primarily due to the higher sales discussed above. Amortization of Intangibles. Amortization of intangibles increased by $1.9 million to $13.9 million for fiscal 2009 from $12.0 million for fiscal 2008 primarily due to the recent acquisitions discussed above. Income from Operations. Operating income increased by $36.1 million, or 12.1%, to $335.4 million for fiscal 2009 from $299.2 million for fiscal 2008, primarily due to higher sales and other factors described above. Interest Expense-Net . Interest expense decreased $8.3 million, or 8.9%, to $84.4 million for fiscal 2009 from $92.7 million for fiscal 2008 primarily due to lower interest rates partially offset by a reduction in interest income of $4.5 million. The Company weighted average level of outstanding borrowings was approximately $1.36 billion during both fiscal 2009 and 2008 year while the average interest rate decreased to approximately 6.0% during fiscal 2009 from 6.9% for the comparable period last year. Income Taxes . Income tax expense as a percentage of income before income taxes was approximately 35.1% for fiscal 2009 compared to 35.6% for fiscal 2008. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to an increase in the research and development tax credit. Net Income. Net income increased $29.8 million, or 22.4% to $162.9 million for fiscal 2009 compared to $133.1 million for fiscal 2008, primarily as a result of the factors referred to above. Earnings per Share. The basic and diluted earnings per share, calculated under the two-class method, was $3.10 per share for fiscal 2009 and $2.56 per share for fiscal 2008. Backlog As of September 30, 2010, the Company estimated its sales order backlog at $467 million compared to an estimated sales order backlog of $402 million as of September 30, 2009. The increase in backlog is due to the acquisitions of Dukes Aerospace and Semco, discussed above, totaling approximately $35 million and an increase in orders across existing product lines in both OEM and aftermarket channels, reflecting the apparent beginning of a long awaited upturn in global air traffic. The majority of the purchase orders outstanding as of September 30, 2010 are scheduled for delivery within the next twelve months. Purchase orders may be subject to cancellation or deferral by the customer prior to shipment. The level of unfilled purchase orders at any given date during the year will be materially affected by the timing of the Company receipt of purchase orders and the speed with which those orders are filled. Accordingly, the Company backlog as of September 30, 2010 may not necessarily represent the actual amount of shipments or sales for any future period. Foreign Operations Although we manufacture substantially all of our products in the United States, we manufacture some products in Malaysia through our wholly-owned Malaysian subsidiary and some products in Mexico through a maquiladora relationship with a third party. We sell our products in the United States, as well as in foreign countries. Substantially all of our foreign sales are transacted in U.S. dollars and, therefore, we have no material 35 Table of Contents exposure to fluctuations in the rate of exchange between foreign currencies and the U.S. dollar as a result of foreign sales. In addition the amount of components or other raw materials or supplies that we purchase from foreign suppliers, including our Malaysian manufacturing subsidiary, are not material, with substantially all such transactions being made in U.S. dollars. Accordingly, we have no material exposure to currency fluctuations in the rate of exchange between foreign currencies and the U.S. dollar arising from these transactions. Our direct sales to foreign customers were approximately $170.6 million, $150.4 million, and $144.3 million for fiscal years 2010, 2009, and 2008, respectively. Sales to foreign customers are subject to numerous additional risks, including the impact of foreign government regulations, political uncertainties and differences in business practices. There can be no assurance that foreign governments will not adopt regulations or take other action that would have a direct or indirect adverse impact on the business or market opportunities of the Company within such governments countries. Furthermore, there can be no assurance that the political, cultural and economic climate outside the United States will be favorable to our operations and growth strategy. Inflation Many of the Company raw materials and operating expenses are sensitive to the effects of inflation, which could result in changing operating costs. The effects of inflation on the Company businesses during the fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 were not significant. Liquidity and Capital Resources We have historically maintained a capital structure comprising a mix of equity and debt financing. We vary our leverage both to optimize our equity return and to pursue acquisitions. We expect to meet our current debt obligations as they come due through internally generated funds from current levels of operations and/or through refinancing in the debt or equity markets prior to the maturity dates of our debt. We continually evaluate our debt facilities to assess whether they most efficiently and effectively meet the current and future needs of our business. The Company evaluates from time to time the appropriateness of its current leverage, taking into consideration the Company debt holders, equity holders, credit ratings, acquisition opportunities and other factors. The Company debt leverage ratio, which is computed as total debt divided by EBITDA As Defined for the applicable twelve-month period, has varied widely during the Company history, ranging from approximately 3.5 to 6.5. Our debt leverage ratio for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2010 was approximately 4.3. Notwithstanding the definitive agreement to acquire McKechnie Aerospace Holdings, Inc. described below, the Company has not, at this time, determined to change the nature of its debt facilities. However, in the future, the Company may increase its borrowings in connection with acquisitions, if cash flow from operations becomes insufficient to fund current operations or for other short-term cash needs or for stock repurchases or dividends. Our future leverage will also be impacted by the then current conditions of the credit markets. We note that our senior secured credit facility matures in June 2013 and our 7 3 / 4 % Senior Secured Notes under our Indentures mature in July 2014. As always, we are evaluating our options with respect to the maturity of such indebtedness. Notwithstanding the definitive agreement to acquire McKechnie Aerospace Holdings, Inc. described below, our current plan is to refinance a significant portion of our long-term debt upon maturity or prior to that time if the conditions of the credit markets become more favorable. On September 25, 2010, TransDigm entered into a Definitive Agreement with McKechnie Holdings LLC to purchase all of the outstanding stock of McKechnie, for a total purchase price on a cash-free, debt-free basis of approximately $1,265 million in cash. The Purchase Agreement contains representations, warranties, covenants and conditions that we believe are customary for a transaction of this size and type, as well as indemnification provisions subject to specified limitations. The closing of the McKechnie acquisition, which is expected before 36 Table of Contents the end of the calendar year, is subject to several conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals, and there can be no assurance that the McKechnie acquisition will be consummated as contemplated, or at all. We intend to finance the McKechnie acquisition and concurrently refinance a portion of our existing indebtedness through a combination of senior subordinated notes and borrowings under a new senior secured credit facility. If we consummate the McKechnie acquisition, we expect to add approximately $1,300 million of indebtedness. Operating Activities. The Company generated $197.3 million of cash from operating activities on net income of $163.4 million during fiscal 2010 compared to $197.1 million of cash from operating activities generated on net income of $162.9 million during fiscal 2009. The Company generated $197.1 million of cash from operating activities during fiscal 2009 compared to $189.6 million generated during fiscal 2008. The increase of $7.5 million in fiscal 2009 is primarily due to an increase in net income of $29.8 million partially offset by the payout of the deferred compensation liability of $6.2 and the change in income taxes receivable (including the impact of the excess tax benefit from exercise of stock options) of $12.8 million. Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $176.6 million during fiscal 2010 consisting primarily of the acquisitions of Dukes Aerospace and Semco for a total of $166.6 million and capital expenditures of $12.9 million. Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2010 also includes cash proceeds of $2.9 million from the sale of real estate no longer utilized that was acquired in a previous acquisition. Cash used in investing activities was $168.4 million during fiscal 2009 consisting primarily of the acquisitions of the businesses of Aircraft Parts Corporation, Acme and Woodward HRT product lines for a total of $155.2 million and capital expenditures of $13.2 million. Cash used in investing activities was $165.0 million during fiscal 2008 consisting of the acquisitions of the businesses of CEF and the Unison product line for a total of $154.1 million and capital expenditures of $10.9 million. Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2010 was $23.2 million, which comprised $404.2 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes in October 2009, $404.9 million of dividends and dividend equivalent payments, and $23.8 million of cash for tax benefits related to share-based payment arrangements and from the exercise of stock options. Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2009 was $2.4 million related to the exercise of stock options of $17.6 million partially offset by purchases of treasury stock amounting to $15.2 million. Cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2008 of $28.5 million related to the exercise of stock options. Description of Current Senior Secured Credit Facility and Indentures In June 2006 TransDigm refinanced its entire debt structure. In connection with the refinancing, TransDigm Inc. obtained a new senior secured credit facility. The senior secured credit facility was amended in 2007 in connection with the acquisition of ATI. The senior secured credit facility consists of a $780 million in term loans and a $200 million revolving loan facility. In addition, under the terms of the senior secured credit facility, TransDigm Inc. has the right to request (but no lender was committed to provide) additional term loans of up to $300 million, subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions, including pro forma compliance with the financial covenant contained in the senior secured credit facility after giving effect to any such incremental term loan borrowings. At September 30, 2010, $198.0 million of the revolving credit facility was available. 37 Table of Contents The term loan facility will mature in June 2013 and is not subject to interim scheduled amortization, but is subject to certain prepayment requirements. Under the amended terms of the senior secured credit facility, commencing 90 days after the end of fiscal 2008 and each fiscal year thereafter, TransDigm Inc. is required to prepay outstanding term loans in a principal amount equal to 50% of Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the senior secured credit facility); provided that the amount of the prepayment will be reduced to 25% of Excess Cash Flow if the Consolidated Leverage Ratio at the end of the applicable fiscal year is less than 5.00 to 1.00, but greater than 4.50 to 1.00. TransDigm Inc. will not be required to prepay any of the term loans if the Consolidated Leverage Ratio as of the end of the applicable fiscal year is equal to or less than 4.50 to 1.00 or if the term loans achieve certain minimum credit ratings at the end of such fiscal year. Excess Cash Flow is a negotiated definition generally designed to capture the cash that was generated by our business in excess of cash used in the business. Consolidated Leverage Ratio means the ratio of consolidated total indebtedness to the aggregate amount of EBITDA As Defined, calculated on a pro forma basis. TransDigm Consolidated Leverage Ratio was approximately 4.2 to 1.00 at September 30, 2010, thus the Company was not obligated to make a prepayment of the term loans based upon the Excess Cash Flow provision. In addition, subject to exceptions (including reinvestment in productive assets), TransDigm Inc. is required to offer to prepay the term loans with the net proceeds of certain asset sales. The revolving loan facility will mature and the commitments thereunder will terminate in June 2012. The senior secured credit facility is guaranteed by TD Group and all of TransDigm Inc. current domestic restricted subsidiaries, and is secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the existing property and assets of TransDigm Inc. and all of TransDigm Inc. existing domestic restricted subsidiaries, and a first priority pledge of the capital stock of TransDigm Inc. and TransDigm Inc. domestic subsidiaries. The interest rates per annum applicable to loans, other than swingline loans, under the senior secured credit facility are, at the Company option, equal to either an alternate base rate or an adjusted LIBO rate for one, two, three or six-month (or to the extent available to each lender, nine or twelve month) interest periods chosen by TransDigm Inc., in each case, plus an applicable margin percentage. The alternate base rate is the greater of (1) Credit Suisse prime rate or (2) 50 basis points over the weighted average rates on overnight Federal funds as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The adjusted LIBO rate is determined by reference to settlement rates established for deposits in dollars in the London interbank market for a period equal to the interest period of the loan as adjusted for the maximum reserve percentages established by the Board of Governors of the United States Federal Reserve. The applicable margin percentage is a percentage per annum equal to (1) 1.00% for alternate base rate term loans, (2) 2.00% for adjusted LIBO rate term loans, (3) in the case of alternate base rate revolving loans and adjusted LIBO rate revolving loans, a percentage which varies based on the consolidated leverage ratio of TransDigm Inc. as of the relevant date of determination. TransDigm Inc. entered into a three year interest rate swap in June 2006 with Credit Suisse for an initial notional amount of $187 million at a fixed rate of 7.63%. The notional amount decreased to $150 million on September 23, 2008, and the swap agreement expired on June 23, 2009. TransDigm Inc. entered into an additional three year interest rate swap in January 2008 with Credit Suisse for the notional amount of $300 million at a fixed rate of 5.0% through March 2011. In connection with the refinancing, TransDigm Inc. also issued $275 million aggregate principal amount of 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes. As a result of the acquisition of ATI, TransDigm Inc. issued an additional $300 million aggregate principal amount of 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes under the Indenture dated as of June 23, 2006. In October 2009, TransDigm issued an additional $425 million aggregate principal amount of 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes at an issue price of 97.125% of the principal amount thereof. The terms of the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes issued in October 2009 are substantially identical to the terms of the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes that were issued and sold by TransDigm in June 2006 and February 2007. 38 Table of Contents The proceeds from the issuance of the New 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes, after the original issue discount, were used to make a cash distribution to TD Group, which paid a special cash dividend to its stockholders of approximately $375 million, made dividend equivalent payments to its holders of stock options of approximately $30 million and paid for transaction-related fees and expenses. Such notes do not require principal payments prior to their maturity in July 2014. The notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed, jointly and severally and on an unsecured senior subordinated basis, by TD Group and all of our existing domestic subsidiaries. Certain Restrictive Covenants in Our Debt Documents Both the senior secured credit facility and the Indentures contain restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit the incurrence of additional indebtedness, the payment of dividends, transactions with affiliates, asset sales, acquisitions, mergers and consolidations, liens and encumbrances, and prepayments of other indebtedness. In addition, the revolving loan facility under the senior secured credit facility requires TransDigm Inc. to comply with a first lien leverage ratio. A breach of any of the covenants or an inability to comply with the required leverage ratio could result in a default under the senior secured credit facility or the Indentures. If any such default occurs, the lenders under the senior secured credit facility and the holders of the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes may elect to declare all outstanding borrowings, together with accrued interest and other amounts payable thereunder, to be immediately due and payable. The lenders under the senior secured credit facility also have the right in these circumstances to terminate any commitments they have to provide further borrowings. In addition, following an event of default under the senior secured credit facility, the lenders thereunder will have the right to proceed against the collateral granted to them to secure the debt, which includes our available cash, and they will also have the right to prevent us from making debt service payments on the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes. If the McKechnie acquisition is consummated, we anticipate that we will incur additional indebtedness, which will be subject to similar covenants and agreements. Stock Repurchase Program In October 2008 we announced a program permitting us to repurchase a portion of our outstanding shares not to exceed $50 million in the aggregate. During 2009, a total of 494,100 shares were repurchased under this program at an aggregate cost of approximately $15.2 million. During 2010, we did not repurchase any shares under the program. Contractual Obligations The following is a summary of contractual cash obligations as of September 30, 2010 (in millions): 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 and thereafter Total Senior Secured Credit Facility (1) $ $ $ 780.0 $ $ $ $ 780.0 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes due 2014 1,000.0 1,000.0 Scheduled Interest Payments (2) 108.2 106.9 99.7 78.1 392.9 Operating Leases 4.0 3.3 2.3 1.9 1.4 5.6 18.5 Purchase Obligations 5.9 2.1 8.0 Total Contractual Cash Obligations $ 118.1 $ 112.3 $ 882.0 $ 1,080.0 $ 1.4 $ 5.6 $ 2,199.4 (1) The senior secured credit facility will mature on June 23, 2013 and will not be subject to interim scheduled amortization. (2) Assumes that the variable interest rate on our borrowings under our senior secured credit facility remains constant at 3.6%. 39 Table of Contents In addition to the contractual obligations set forth above, the Company incurs capital expenditures for the purpose of maintaining and replacing existing equipment and facilities and, from time to time, for facility expansion. Capital expenditures totaled approximately $12.9 million, $13.2 million, and $10.9 million during fiscal 2010, 2009, and fiscal 2008, respectively. The Company expects its capital expenditures in fiscal 2011 to be between $15 million and $20 million and such expenditures are projected to increase moderately thereafter. The Company intends to pursue acquisitions that present opportunities consistent with the Company business direction. The Company regularly engages in discussions with respect to potential acquisitions and investments. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to consummate an agreement with respect to any future acquisition. The Company acquisition strategy may require substantial capital, and no assurance can be given that the Company will be able to raise any necessary funds on acceptable terms or at all. If the Company incurs additional debt to finance acquisitions, total interest expense will increase. If the Company has excess cash, it may consider methods by which it can provide cash to its debt or equity holders through a dividend, prepayment of indebtedness, repurchase of stock, or other means. In October 2008, the Company announced that its Board of Directors had authorized the repurchase of up to $50 million, in the aggregate, of the Company common stock. During fiscal 2009, the Company repurchased a total of 494,100 shares at an aggregate cost of $15.2 million. The Company did not repurchase any shares under the program in 2010. Whether the Company undertakes additional stock repurchases or other aforementioned activities will depend on prevailing market conditions, the Company liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amounts involved may be material. In addition, the Company may issue additional debt if prevailing market conditions are favorable to doing so. The Company ability to make scheduled interest payments on, or to refinance, the Company indebtedness, or to fund non-acquisition related capital expenditures and research and development efforts, will depend on the Company ability to generate cash in the future. This is subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors that are beyond its control. Based on its current levels of operations and absent any disruptive events, management believes that internally generated funds and borrowings available under our revolving loan facility should provide sufficient resources to finance its operations, non-acquisition related capital expenditures, research and development efforts and long-term indebtedness obligations through at least fiscal 2011. There can be no assurance, however, that the Company business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that future borrowings will be available to the Company under the senior secured credit facility in an amount sufficient to enable it to pay its indebtedness or to fund its other liquidity needs. The Company may need to refinance all or a portion of its indebtedness on or before maturity. Also, to the extent the Company accelerates its growth plans, consummates acquisitions or has lower than anticipated sales or increases in expenses, the Company may also need to raise additional capital. In particular, increased working capital needs occur whenever the Company consummates acquisitions or experiences strong incremental demand. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional capital on commercially reasonable terms or at all. If the McKechnie acquisition is consummated, we anticipate that we will incur additional indebtedness to finance the acquisition and to refinance existing indebtedness. New Accounting Standards New Accounting Standards Adopted in Fiscal 2010 In December 2007, the FASB issued authoritative guidance requiring assets and liabilities acquired in a business combination, contingent consideration, and certain acquired contingencies to be measured at their fair values as of the date of acquisition. This guidance also requires that acquisition-related costs and restructuring costs be recognized separately from the business combination. This authoritative guidance was adopted as of October 1, 2009. 40 Table of Contents In connection with the acquisition of Dukes Aerospace and Semco, TD Group recorded approximately $2.7 million of acquisition-related costs, which are included in selling and administrative expenses for the year ended September 30, 2010. Additional Disclosure Required by Indenture Separate financial statements of TransDigm Inc. are not presented since TD Group has no operations or significant assets separate from its investment in TransDigm Inc. and since the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes are guaranteed by TD Group and all direct and indirect domestic restricted subsidiaries of TransDigm Inc. As of September 30, 2010, two subsidiaries of TransDigm that are not obligated to guarantee the 7 3 / 4 % Senior Subordinated Notes are wholly-owned, foreign subsidiaries that have inconsequential assets, liabilities and equity. 
