CIK: 1279363
Company Name: WELLCARE HEALTH PLANS INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-03-16


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Selected Financial Data beginning on Page 47 and our combined and consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this 2008 Form 10-K . The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause our actual results to differ materially from management expectations. Factors that could cause such differences include those set forth under Risk Factors, Forward-Looking Statements, Business and elsewhere in this 2008 Form 10-K . Overview Current Financial Condition Financial Impact of Government Investigations and Litigation We do not know whether, or the extent to which, any pending investigations and related litigation discussed above under Part I Item 3 Legal Proceedings will result in our payment of fines, penalties or damages, any of which would require us to incur additional expenses and could have an adverse affect on our results of operations. Furthermore, if as a result of the resolution of these matters we are subject to operating restrictions, revocation of our licenses, termination of one or more of our contracts and/or exclusion from further participation in Medicare or Medicaid programs, our revenues and net income could be adversely affected. We are engaged in resolution discussions as to matters under review with the USAO, the Civil Division, the OIG and the State of Florida. Based on the current status of matters and all information known to us to date, in the year ended December 31, 2007 we recorded selling, general and administrative expense and accrued a liability in the amount of $50.0 million in connection with the resolution of these matters, which is included in the Other accrued expenses line item within our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2007, and 2008, respectively. We believe that it is probable that the actual resolution amount for all such matters under review will be more than the amounts that have already been reflected in our financial statements; however, we cannot provide an estimable range of additional amounts, if any, nor can we provide assurances regarding the timing, terms and conditions of any potential negotiated resolution of pending investigations by the USAO, the Civil Division, the OIG or the State of Florida. As discussed in more detail below, investigations and related matters have caused us to expend significant financial resources. As of December 31, 2008, we had spent a cumulative amount of approximately $124.1 million on administrative expenses associated with, or consequential to, the government and Special Committee investigations, including legal fees, accounting fees, consulting fees, employee recruitment and retention costs and similar expenses. Approximately $21.1 million of these investigation related costs were incurred in 2007 and approximately $103.0 million were incurred in 2008. We expect to continue incurring significant additional costs in 2009 as a result of the federal and state investigations and pending civil actions, including administrative expenses and costs necessary to improve our corporate governance and address other issues that were identified. Current Cash Position As of December 31, 2008, our consolidated cash and cash equivalents were approximately $1,181.9 million. As of December 31, 2008, our consolidated investments were approximately $125.1 million. As of December 31, 2008, we had unregulated cash of approximately $147.7 million and unregulated investments of approximately $4.9 million. On December 31, 2008, three of our Florida regulated subsidiaries declared dividends to one of our non-regulated subsidiaries in the aggregate amount of $105.1 million, two of which were paid on December 31, 2008 and one of which was paid on January 2, 2009. The proceeds of such dividends are reflected in our unregulated cash balances as of December 31, 2008, with the exception of the dividends received on January 2, 2009. 49 Table of Contents Our Credit Facility and Near-Term Cash Obligations As previously disclosed, our senior secured credit facility with Wachovia Bank, as Administrative Agent, and a syndicate of lenders, which has a term loan facility with an outstanding balance of approximately $152.8 million as of December 31, 2008, is currently in default and subject to acceleration by the lenders and, absent acceleration by the lenders, will become due and payable on May 13, 2009. Our senior secured credit facility also included a revolving credit facility that expired in May 2008. Taking into account, among other things, the increase in our unregulated cash balances as a result of our receipt of the $105.1 million in dividends described above, we currently expect that we will be able to repay in full the outstanding balance under the credit facility when it becomes due. However, we cannot provide any assurances that adverse developments will not arise that impede our ability to repay in full the outstanding balance under the credit facility when it becomes due. In particular, the timing and amount of any potential resolution of pending investigations by the USAO, the Civil Division, the OIG and the State of Florida are uncertain and could materially and adversely affect our ability to meet our near-term obligations, including repayment of the outstanding balance under the credit facility. Also, our ability to repay in full the outstanding balance under the credit facility could be materially and adversely affected if, among other things, Florida regulators were to require certain of our intercompany loan arrangements, which total approximately $50.0 million, to be terminated. In addition, there may be other potential adverse developments that could impede our ability to repay in full the outstanding balance under the credit facility. We also have a number of other near-term obligations, including currently anticipated capital contributions to certain of our regulated subsidiaries or the imposition of greater capital requirements by state insurance regulators such as the recent request by one of our regulators to contribute a total of approximately $30.0 million in additional statutory capital into two of our HMOs. In addition, we anticipate significant costs associated with the government and Special Committee investigations, including legal, accounting and consulting fees, and employee recruitment and retention costs. For a detailed discussion of our financing needs, the financing challenges we face and the initiatives we are pursuing to increase our unregulated cash, see Part II Item 7 Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Liquidity and Capital Resources. Business and Financial Outlook General Economic, Political and Financial Market Conditions As a result of economic uncertainty, many of the states in which we operate have experienced significant fiscal challenges, which are likely to result in budget deficits. In light of these budgetary challenges, the Medicaid segment premiums we receive likely will not keep pace with anticipated medical expense increases. While the economic downturn may increase the number of Medicaid recipients under current eligibility criteria, states may revise the eligibility criteria to reduce the number of people who are eligible for our plans. On February 20, 2009, CMS published the 45-day advance notice for the 2010 preliminary rating methodology. For calendar year 2010, a negative coding intensity adjustment factor will apply to all managed care plans. Plans will receive final rates for 2010 in April 2009. If the coding intensity adjustment factor is implemented as proposed, this would result in a significant decrease in our Medicare revenues. These events are likely to have a negative effect on our 2010 operating results and membership. Furthermore, federal budgetary challenges or policy changes could result in rates that do not keep pace with anticipated medical expense increases, which could have a material adverse effect on our performance in the Medicaid or Medicare segments. In addition, increasing market volatility and the tightening of the credit markets has significantly limited our ability to access external capital, which has, and is likely to continue to have, an adverse effect on our ability to execute our business strategy. However, we continue to pursue financing alternatives to raise additional unregulated cash, including seeking dividends from certain of our regulated subsidiaries and accessing the public and private equity and debt markets. Government funding continues to be a significant challenge to our business, particularly in light of the current economic conditions. Because the health care services we offer are through government-sponsored programs, our profitability is largely dependent on continued funding for government health care programs at or above current levels. Future Medicaid premium rate levels may be affected by continued government efforts to contain medical costs or state and federal budgetary constraints. Some of the states in which we operate have experienced fiscal challenges leading to significant budget deficits. Health care spending increases appear to be more limited than in the past as states continue to look at Medicaid programs as opportunities for budget savings, and some states may find it difficult to continue paying current rates to Medicaid health plans. In particular, we are experiencing pressure on rates in Florida and Georgia, two states from which we derive a substantial portion of our revenue. In 2009, Florida implemented Medicaid rates that made it economically unfeasible for us to continue to provide services in certain counties and programs. As a result, we notified the State of Florida that we were withdrawing from the Medicaid reform programs effective July 1, 2009, which will result in a loss of approximately 80,000 members. New or proposed legislation in Georgia related to 50 Table of Contents payment of claims, program design, eligibility determination and provider contracting, may negatively impact revenues and profits for the plan in 2009 and beyond. Further, continued economic slowdowns in Florida and Georgia, as well as other states, could result in additional state actions that could adversely affect our revenues. In January 2009, the new presidential administration took office. Although the new administration and recently elected U.S. Congress have expressed some support for measures intended to expand the number of citizens covered by health insurance and other changes within the health care system, the costs of implementing any of these proposals could be financed, in part, by reductions in the payments made to Medicare Advantage and other government programs. Similarly, although the U.S. Congress approved the children health bill which, among things, increases federal funding to the S-CHIP and President Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act that provides funding for, among other things, state Medicaid programs and aid to states to help defray budget cuts, because of the unsettled nature of these initiatives, the numerous steps required to implement them and the substantial amount of state flexibility for determining how Medicaid and S-CHIP funds will be used, we are currently unable to assess the ultimate impact that they will have on our business. It is possible that the ultimate impact of these initiatives could be negative. Medicare Competition; PDP Outlook In our Medicare segment, we are experiencing increased competition. As the result of the Part D bidding process for plan year 2009, we bid above the benchmark in 22 of the 34 regions. As a result, as of December 31, 2008, approximately 252,000 auto-assigned dual-eligible members were assigned away from our plans. In addition, approximately 28,000 low income subsidized members disenrolled from our plans in January 2009. We estimate that, based on these factors as well as new members choosing to enroll in our plans, new auto-assignment of members and other factors, our revenues generated from our PDP plans will decrease significantly for 2009. In addition, several changes to the Medicare program resulting from MIPPA that became effective in 2008 could increase competition for our existing and prospective members, which could adversely affect our revenues. Execution of Business Strategy To achieve our business strategy, we continue to look for economically viable opportunities to expand our business within our existing markets, expand our current service territory and develop new product initiatives. We also are, however, evaluating various strategic alternatives, which may include entering new lines of business or markets, exiting existing lines of business or markets and/or disposing of assets depending on various factors, including changes in our business and regulatory environment, competitive position and financial resources. We also continue to rationalize our operations to make sure that our ongoing business is profitable. To the extent that we expand our current service territory or product offerings, we expect to generate additional revenues. On the other hand, if we decide to exit certain markets, as we did during 2008 and early 2009, our revenues could decrease. We currently do not foresee large, one-time opportunities to expand our business, such as prior efforts like the launch of PDPs in 2006 and the privatization of Georgia Medicaid in 2006. We also intend to divert some resources to strengthening compliance and operating capabilities. These factors, when combined with the rationalization of our operations and the operational challenges we face, could cause us to not sustain the rapid growth we have achieved in the recent past. Membership and Trends We provide managed care services targeted exclusively to government-sponsored health care programs, focused on Medicaid and Medicare, including prescription drug plans and health plans for families, children, and the aged, blind and disabled. As of December 31, 2008, we served approximately 2,532,000 members. Most of our revenues are generated by premiums consisting of fixed monthly payments per member. We currently anticipate that our revenues and medical benefits expenses for fiscal years 2009 will be higher than in prior periods due to the changes in the numbers and demographic mix of membership principally occurring in our Medicare Advantage plans and Ohio Medicaid market, and, effective in 2009, in Hawaii. As the composition of our membership base continues to change as the result of programmatic, competitive, regulatory, benefit design, economic or other changes, we expect a corresponding change to our premium revenue, costs and margins, which may have a material adverse effect on our cash flow, profitability and results of operations. In February 2009, CMS notified us that, effective March 7, 2009, we have been sanctioned through a suspension of marketing of, and enrollment into, all lines of our Medicare business. This suspension will remain in effect until CMS determines that it should be lifted. Among other areas, CMS determination was based on findings of deficiencies in our enrollment and disenrollment operations, appeals and grievances, timely and proper responses to beneficiary complaints and requests for assistance and marketing and agent/broker oversight activities. We are working closely with CMS to address their concerns. At this time, we cannot estimate the duration of the suspension or the ultimate impact it will have on our results of operations and our business. Nonetheless, we anticipate that our inability to enroll new Medicare members will have a material negative affect on our results of operations and 51 Table of Contents business in 2009 and potentially beyond. Further, we cannot provide any assurances that we will be able to take appropriate corrective action or that, despite any corrective measures taken on our part, that we will not incur additional penalties, fines or other operating restrictions which could have an additional material adverse effect on our results of operations. In response to the CMS suspension in March 2009, we made certain changes to our Medicare marketing sales force and are continuing to assess the impact of suspending marketing activities and the resulting loss of membership to determine what effect, if any, this action will have on our staffing needs and other operational capabilities to effectively and efficiently meet the needs of the members we serve. Encounter Data To the extent that our encounter data is inaccurate or incomplete, we may incur additional costs to collect or correct this data and could be exposed to regulatory risk for noncompliance. The accurate and timely reporting of encounter data is crucial to the success of our programs because more states are using encounter data to determine compliance with performance standards which are partly used by such states to set premium rates. As states increase their reliance on encounter data, our inability to obtain complete and accurate encounter data could significantly affect the premium rates we receive and how membership is assigned to us, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flows and our ability to bid for, and continue to participate in, certain programs. Basis of Presentation The consolidated balance sheets, statements of operations, changes in stockholders and members equity and comprehensive income and cash flows include the accounts of the Company and all of its wholly-owned subsidiaries. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated. Our Segments We have two reportable business segments: Medicaid and Medicare. Medicaid Medicaid was established to provide medical assistance to low income and disabled persons, and is state operated and implemented, although it is funded and regulated by both the state and federal governments. For a more detailed description of our Medicaid segment, please see Item 1 Business Our Segments. As of December 31, 2008, we had approximately 1,300,000 Medicaid members. The following table summarizes our Medicaid segment membership by line of business as of December 31, 2008 and 2007: Medicaid Membership As of December 31, 2008 2007 Medicaid TANF 1,039,000 927,000 S-CHIP 164,000 203,000 SSI 75,000 72,000 FHP 22,000 30,000 Total 1,300,000 1,232,000 For purposes of our Medicaid segment, we define our customer as the state and related governmental agencies that have common control over the contracts under which we operate in that particular state. In 2007 and 2008, we had two customers, the states of Florida and Georgia, from which we received 10% or more of our Medicaid segment premiums revenues. Medicare Medicare is a federal program that provides eligible persons age 65 and over and some disabled persons a variety of hospital, medical insurance and prescription drug benefits, and is administered and funded by CMS. For a more detailed description of our Medicare segment, please see Item 1 Business Our Segments. As of December 31, 2008, we had approximately 1,232,000 Medicare members. 52 Table of Contents Medicare Membership As of December 31, 2008 2007 Medicare PDP 986,000 983,000 Medicare Advantage 246,000 158,000 Total 1,232,000 1,141,000 In our Medicare segment, we have just one customer, CMS, from which we receive substantially all of our Medicare segment premium revenue. Our Health and Prescription Drug Plans Premiums We receive premiums from state and federal agencies for the members who are assigned to us, or who have selected us to provide health care services under Medicaid and Medicare. The premiums we receive under each of our government benefit plans are generally determined at the beginning of the contract period and we are generally unable to change the premium rates during the contract year. The premiums we receive vary according to the specific government program and vary according to many factors, including the member geographic location, age, gender, medical history or condition, or the services rendered to the member. These premiums are subject to adjustment by our government clients throughout the term of the contract, although such adjustments are typically made at the commencement of each new contract period. The premium payments we receive are based upon eligibility lists produced by the government. As a result of these periodic premium rate adjustments and member eligibility determinations, we cannot predict with certainty what our future revenues will be under each of our government contracts even when we believe membership is remaining constant. For further detail about the CMS reimbursement methodology under the PDP program, see Critical Accounting Policies below. Services/Coverage Medicaid The Medicaid programs and services we offer to our members vary by state and county and are designed to serve effectively our various constituencies in the communities we serve. Although our Medicaid contracts determine to a large extent the type and scope of health care services that we arrange for our members, in certain markets we customize our benefits in ways that we believe make our products more attractive. Our Medicaid plans provide our members with access to a broad spectrum of medical benefits from many facets of primary care and preventive programs to full hospitalization and tertiary care. In general, members are required to use our network, except in cases of emergencies, transition of care or when network providers are unavailable to meet a member medical needs, and generally must receive a referral from their primary care physician in order to receive health care from a specialist, such as an orthopedic surgeon or neurologist. Members do not pay any premiums, deductibles or co-payments for most of our Medicaid plans. Medicare Through our Medicare Advantage plans, we also cover a wide spectrum of medical services. We provide additional benefits not covered by Original Medicare, such as vision, dental and hearing services. Through these enhanced benefits, the out-of-pocket expenses incurred by our members are reduced, which allows our members to better manage their health care costs. Most of our Medicare Advantage plans require members to pay a co-payment, which varies depending on the services and level of benefits provided. Typically, members of our CCPs are required to use our network of providers except in cases such as emergencies, transition of care or when specialty providers are unavailable to meet a member medical needs. CCP members may see an out-of-network specialist if they receive a referral from their PCP and may pay incremental cost-sharing. PFFS plans are open-access plans that allow members to be seen by any physician or facility that participates in the Medicare program, is willing to bill us for reimbursement and accepts our terms and conditions. Our pilot PPO plans offer members the option to seek any services outside of our contracted network but, in such case, they are subject to higher cost sharing. We also offer special needs plans to individuals who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, or D-SNPs, in most of our markets. D-SNPs are designed to provide specialized care and support for beneficiaries who are dually eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid. We believe that our D-SNPs are attractive to these beneficiaries due to the enhanced benefit offerings and clinical support programs. 53 Table of Contents The Medicare Part D benefit, which provides prescription drug benefits, is available to Medicare Advantage enrollees as well as Original Medicare enrollees. We offer Part D coverage as stand-alone PDPs and as a component of many of our Medicare Advantage plans. Depending on medical coverage type, a beneficiary has various options for accessing drug coverage. Beneficiaries enrolled in Original Medicare can either join a stand-alone PDP or forego Part D drug coverage. PFFS beneficiaries can join a PFFS plan that has Part D drug coverage or join a plan without such coverage and choose either to obtain a drug benefit from a stand-alone PDP or forego Part D drug coverage. Beneficiaries enrolled in CCPs or PPOs can join a plan with Part D coverage or forego Part D coverage. Medical Benefits Expense Our largest expense is the cost of medical benefits that we provide, which is based primarily on our arrangements with health care providers and utilization of health care services by our members. Our profitability depends on our ability to predict and effectively manage medical benefits expense relative to the primarily fixed premiums we receive. Our arrangements with providers primarily fall into two broad categories: capitation arrangements, pursuant to which we pay the capitated providers a fixed fee per member and fee-for-service as well as risk-sharing arrangements, pursuant to which the provider assumes a portion of the risk of the cost of the health care provided. Other components of medical benefits expense are variable and require estimation and ongoing cost management. Capitation payments represented 11.0% and 12.0% of our total medical benefits expense for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2008, respectively. Other components of medical benefits expense are variable and require estimation and ongoing cost management. Estimation of medical benefits payable is our most significant critical accounting estimate. See Critical Accounting Policies below. We use a variety of techniques to manage our medical benefits expense, including payment methods to providers, referral requirements, quality and disease management programs, reinsurance and member co-payments and premiums for some of our Medicare plans. National health care costs have been increasing at a higher rate than the general inflation rate; however, relatively small changes in our medical benefits expense relative to premiums that we receive can create significant changes in our financial results. Changes in health care laws, regulations and practices, levels of use of health care services, competitive pressures, hospital costs, major epidemics, terrorism or bio-terrorism, new medical technologies and other external factors could reduce our ability to manage our medical benefits expense effectively. One of our primary tools for measuring profitability is our MBR, the ratio of our medical benefits expense to the premiums we receive. Changes in the MBR from period to period result from, among other things, changes in Medicaid and Medicare funding, changes in the mix of Medicaid and Medicare membership, our ability to manage medical costs and changes in accounting estimates related to incurred but not reported claims. We use MBRs both to monitor our management of medical benefits expense and to make various business decisions, including what health care plans to offer, what geographic areas to enter or exit and the selection of health care providers. Although MBRs play an important role in our business strategy, we may for example be willing to enter into new geographical markets and/or enter into provider arrangements that might produce a less favorable MBR if those arrangements, such as capitation or risk-sharing, would likely lower our exposure to variability in medical costs and for other reasons. Critical Accounting Policies In the ordinary course of business, we make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of our results of operations and financial condition in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require management most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. 54 Table of Contents Revenue recognition . Our Medicaid contracts with state governments are generally multi-year contracts subject to annual renewal provisions. Our Medicare Advantage and PDP contracts with CMS generally have terms of one year. We recognize premium revenues in the period in which we are obligated to provide services to our members. We estimate, on an ongoing basis, the amount of member billings that may not be fully collectible or that will be returned based on historical trends, anticipated or actual MBRs, and other factors. An allowance is established for the estimated amount that may not be collectible and a liability is established for premium expected to be returned. The allowance has not been significant to premium revenue. The payment we receive monthly from CMS for our PDP program generally represents our bid amount for providing prescription drug insurance coverage. We recognize premium revenue for providing this insurance coverage ratably over the term of our annual contract. Premiums collected in advance are deferred and reported as unearned premiums in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and amounts that have not been received by the end of the period remain on the balance sheet classified as premium receivables. Premium payments that we receive are based upon eligibility lists produced by our customers. From time to time, the states or CMS may require us to reimburse them for premiums that we received based on an eligibility list that a state or CMS later discovers contains individuals who were not eligible for any government-sponsored program or are eligible for a different premium category, different program, or belong to a different plan other than ours. These adjustments reflect changes in the number of and eligibility status of enrollees subsequent to when revenue was received. We estimate the amount of outstanding retroactivity each period and adjust premium revenue accordingly; if appropriate the estimates of retroactive adjustments are based on historical trends, premiums billed, the volume of member and contract renewal activity and other information. Our government contracts establish monthly rates per member, but may have additional amounts due to us based on items such as age, working status or medical history. For example, CMS has implemented a risk adjustment model which apportions premiums paid to all Medicare plans according to the health status of each beneficiary enrolled. CMS transitioned to the risk adjustment model while the old demographic model was being phased out. The demographic model based the monthly premiums paid to Medicare plans on factors such as age, gender and disability status. The monthly premium amount for each member was separately determined under both the risk adjustment and demographic model, and these separate payment amounts were blended according to a transition schedule. The first year in which risk-adjusted payment for health plans was fully phased in was 2007. The PDP payment methodology is based 100% on the risk-adjustment model which began in 2006. Under the risk adjustment model, the settlement payment is based on each member preceding year medical diagnosis data. The final settlement payment amount under the risk adjustment model is made in August of the following year, allowing for the majority of medical claim run out. As a result of this process and the phasing in of the risk-adjustment model, our CMS monthly premium payments per member may change materially, either favorably or unfavorably. The CMS risk-adjustment model pays more for Medicare members with predictably higher costs. Under this risk-adjustment methodology, diagnosis data from inpatient and ambulatory treatment settings are used to calculate the risk-adjusted premium payment to us. We collect claims and encounter data and submit the necessary diagnosis data to CMS within prescribed deadlines. We continually estimate risk-adjusted revenues based upon membership claim activity and the diagnosis data submitted to CMS, as well as the data which is ultimately accepted by CMS, and record such adjustments in our results of operations. However, due to the variability of the assumptions that we use in our estimates, our actual results may differ from the amounts that we have estimated. If our estimates are materially incorrect, it may have an adverse effect on our results of operations in future periods. Historically, we have not experienced significant differences between the amounts that we have recorded and the revenues that we actually received. Other amounts included in this balance as a reduction of premium revenue represent the return of premium associated with certain of our Medicaid contracts. These contracts require the Company to expend a minimum percentage of premiums on eligible medical expense, and to the extent that we expend less than the minimum percentage of the premiums on eligible medical expense, we are required to refund all or some portion of the difference between the minimum and our actual allowable medical expense. The Company estimates the amounts due to the state as a return of premium each period based on the terms of the Company contract with the applicable state agency. Estimating medical benefits expense and medical benefits payable. The cost of medical benefits is recognized in the period in which services are provided and includes an estimate of the cost of medical benefits that have been incurred but not yet reported ( IBNR ). We contract with various health care providers for the provision of certain medical care services to our members and generally compensate those providers on a fee-for-service or capitated basis or pursuant to certain risk-sharing arrangements. Capitation represents fixed payments generally on a PMPM basis to participating physicians and other medical specialists as compensation for providing comprehensive health care services. Generally, by the terms of most of our capitation agreements, capitation payments we make to capitated providers alleviate any further obligation we have to pay the capitated provider for the actual medical expenses of the member. Participating physician capitation payments for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2007 and 2008 were approximately 13.0%, 11.0% and 12.0% of total medical benefits expense, respectively. 55 Table of Contents Medical benefits expense has two main components: direct medical expenses and medically-related administrative costs. Direct medical expenses include amounts paid to hospitals, physicians and providers of ancillary services, such as laboratory and pharmacy. Medically-related administrative costs include items such as case and disease management, utilization review services, quality assurance and on-call nurses. Medical benefits payable represents amounts for claims fully adjudicated awaiting payment disbursement and estimates for IBNR. The medical benefits payable estimate has been and continues to be the most significant estimate included in our financial statements. We historically have used and continue to use a consistent methodology for estimating our medical benefits expense and medical benefits payable. Our policy is to record management best estimate of medical benefits payable based on the experience and information available to us at the time. This estimate is determined utilizing standard actuarial methodologies based upon historical experience and key assumptions consisting of trend factors and completion factors using an assumption of moderately adverse conditions, which vary by business segment. These standard actuarial methodologies include using, among other factors, contractual requirements, historic utilization trends, the interval between the date services are rendered and the date claims are paid, denied claims activity, disputed claims activity, benefits changes, expected health care cost inflation, seasonality patterns, maturity of lines of business and changes in membership. The factors and assumptions described above that are used to develop our estimate of medical benefits expense and medical benefits payable inherently are subject to greater variability when there is more limited experience or information available to us. For example, from 2004 to 2008, we grew at a rapid pace, through the expansion of existing products and introduction of new products, such as Part D and PFFS, and entry into new geographic areas, such as Georgia. The ultimate claims payment amounts, patterns and trends for new products and geographic areas cannot be precisely predicted at their onset, since we, the providers and the members do not have experience in these products or geographic areas. Standard accepted actuarial methodologies require the use of key assumptions consisting of trend and completion factors using an assumption of moderately adverse conditions that would allow for this inherent variability. This can result in larger differences between the originally estimated medical benefits payable and the actual claims amounts paid. Conversely, during periods where our products and geographies are more stable and mature, we have more reliable claims payment patterns and trend experience. With more reliable data, we should be able to more closely estimate the ultimate claims payment amounts; therefore, we may experience smaller differences between our original estimate of medical benefits payable and the actual claim amounts paid. Medical cost trends can be volatile and management is required to use considerable judgment in the selection of medical benefits expense trends and other actuarial model inputs. In developing the estimate, we apply different estimation methods depending on the month for which incurred claims are being estimated. For the more recent months, which constitute the majority of the amount of the medical benefits payable, we estimate claims incurred by applying observed trend factors to the PMPM costs for prior months, which costs have been estimated using completion factors, in order to estimate the PMPM costs for the most recent months. We validate our estimates of the most recent PMPM costs by comparing the most recent months utilization levels to the utilization levels in older months and actuarial techniques that incorporate a historical analysis of claim payments, including trends in cost of care provided and timeliness of submission and processing of claims. Many aspects of the managed care business are not predictable. These aspects include the incidences of illness or disease state (such as cardiac heart failure cases, cases of upper respiratory illness, the length and severity of the flu season, diabetes, the number of full-term versus premature births and the number of neonatal intensive care babies). Therefore, we must rely upon historical experience, as continually monitored, to reflect the ever-changing mix, needs and growth of our membership in our trend assumptions. Among the factors considered by management are changes in the level of benefits provided to members, seasonal variations in utilization, identified industry trends and changes in provider reimbursement arrangements, including changes in the percentage of reimbursements made on a capitation as opposed to a fee-for-service basis. These considerations are aggregated in the trend in medical benefits expense. Other external factors such as government-mandated benefits or other regulatory changes, catastrophes and epidemics may impact medical cost trends. Other internal factors such as system conversions and claims processing interruptions may impact our ability to accurately predict estimates of historical completion factors or medical cost trends. Medical cost trends potentially are more volatile than other segments of the economy. Management is required to use considerable judgment in the selection of medical benefits expense trends and other actuarial model inputs. Also included in medical benefits payable are estimates for provider settlements due to clarification of contract terms, out-of-network reimbursement, claims payment differences as well as amounts due to contracted providers under risk-sharing arrangements. We record reserves for estimated referral claims related to health care providers under contract with us who are financially troubled or insolvent and who may not be able to honor their obligations for the costs of medical services provided by other providers. In these instances, we may be required to honor these obligations for legal or business reasons. Based on our current assessment of providers under contract with us, such losses have not been and are not expected to be significant. 56 Table of Contents Changes in medical benefits payable estimates are primarily the result of obtaining more complete claims information and medical expense trend data over time. Volatility in members needs for medical services, provider claims submissions and our payment processes result in identifiable patterns emerging several months after the causes of deviations from assumed trends occur. Since our estimates are based upon PMPM claims experience, changes cannot typically be explained by any single factor, but are the result of a number of interrelated variables, all influencing the resulting experienced medical cost trend. Differences in our financial statements between actual experience and estimates used to establish the liability, which we refer to as prior period developments, are recorded in the period when such differences become known, and have the effect of increasing or decreasing the reported medical benefits expense and resulting MBR in such periods. The following table provides a reconciliation of the total medical benefits payable balances as of December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006: As of December 31, % of % of % of 2008 Total 2007 Total 2006 Total (Dollars in thousands) Claims adjudicated, but not yet paid $ 77,117 10 % $ 68,948 13 % $ 43,066 9 % IBNR 689,062 90 % 469,198 87 % 417,662 91 % Total Medical benefits payable $ 766,179 $ 538,146 $ 460,728 The following table provides a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balance of medical benefits payable for the following periods: Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 (Dollars in thousands) Balances as of beginning of period $ 538,146 $ 460,728 $ 223,674 Medical benefits incurred related to: Current period 5,538,262 4,313,581 2,954,427 Prior periods (8,046 ) (100,197 ) (47,137 ) Total 5,530,216 4,213,384 2,907,290 Medical benefits paid related to: Current period (4,848,440 ) (3,781,425 ) (2,492,992 ) Prior periods (453,743 ) (354,541 ) (177,244 ) Total (5,302,183 ) (4,135,966 ) (2,670,236 ) Balances as of end of period $ 766,179 $ 538,146 $ 460,728 57 Table of Contents Medical benefits payable recorded at December 31, 2005, 2006 and 2007 developed favorably by approximately $47.1 million, $100.2 million and $8.0 million, respectively. The decreases in medical benefits payable are the amounts incurred related to prior years; 2008 related to 2007, 2007 related to 2006, and 2006 related to 2005, which were primarily attributable to favorable development in our key assumptions consisting of trend factors and completion factors using an assumption of moderately adverse conditions. Goodwill and intangible assets. We obtained goodwill and intangible assets as a result of the acquisitions of our subsidiaries. Goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair market value of net assets acquired. Intangible assets include provider networks, membership contracts, trademarks, non-compete agreements, state contracts, licenses and permits. Our intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives ranging from approximately one to 26 years. During 2006, we acquired 100% of the stock of three companies through which we operate our Medicare PFFS business. The purchase price allocated to intangible assets consisted of state licenses in the amount of $4.3 million. We evaluate whether events or circumstances have occurred that may affect the estimated useful life or the recoverability of the remaining balance of goodwill and other identifiable intangible assets. We must make assumptions and estimates, such as the discount factor, in determining the estimated fair values. While we believe these assumptions and estimates are appropriate, other assumptions and estimates could be applied and might produce significantly different results. Based on the current general economic conditions and outlook, we performed an analysis of the underlying valuation of Goodwill at December 31, 2008. Based on the valuation performed, we determined that the Goodwill associated with our Medicare reporting unit was impaired. The impairment to our Medicare reporting unit was due to, among other things, the anticipated operating environment resulting from regulatory changes and new health care legislation, and the resulting effects on our future membership trends. We recorded an expense of $78.3 million to Goodwill impairment, and a corresponding amount to Goodwill to reflect its fair value as presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Results of Operations The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income data, expressed as a percentage of total revenues for each period indicated. The historical results are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for any future period. Percentage of Total Revenues For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 Statement of Operations Data: Revenues Premium 99.4 % 98.4 % 98.6 % Investment and other income 0.6 % 1.6 % 1.4 % Total revenues 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Expenses: Medical benefits expense 84.8 % 78.2 % 80.0 % Selling, general and administrative 14.3 % 14.2 % 13.7 % Depreciation and amortization 0.3 % 0.3 % 0.5 % Interest 0.2 % 0.3 % 0.4 % Goodwill impairment 1.2 % % % Total expenses 100.8 % 93.0 % 94.6 % Income before income taxes (0.8 )% 7.0 % 5.4 % Income tax expense (0.2 )% 3.0 % 2.2 % Net income (0.6 )% 4.0 % 3.2 % One of our primary management tools for measuring profitability is our MBR. Changes in the MBR from period to period result from, among other things, changes in Medicaid and Medicare funding, changes in the mix of Medicaid and Medicare membership, our ability to manage medical costs and changes in accounting estimates related to IBNR claims. We use MBRs both to monitor our management of medical benefits expense and to make various business decisions, including what health care plans to offer, what geographic areas to enter or exit and the selection of health care providers. Although MBRs play an important role in our business strategy, we may be willing to enter into provider arrangements that might produce a less favorable MBR if those arrangements, such as capitation or risk-sharing, would likely lower our exposure to variability in medical costs. 58 Table of Contents Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2008 to Year Ended December 31, 2007 Premium revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2008, total premium revenue increased $1,178.2 million, or 22.2%, to $6,483.1 million from $5,304.9 million for the same period in the prior year due to increases in premium revenue in both the Medicaid and Medicare segments, as discussed below. Total membership grew by 159,000 members, or 6.7%, from 2,373,000 at December 31, 2007 to 2,532,000 at December 31, 2008. Premium Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 6,483.1 $ 5,304.9 Membership 2,532,000 2,373,000 Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2008, Medicaid segment premium revenue increased $299.3 million, or 11.1%, to $2,991.1 million from $2,691.8 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase in Medicaid segment revenue was primarily due to increases in membership, as well as premium rate increases in certain of our markets. Medicaid membership grew from 1,232,000 members at December 31, 2007 to 1,300,000 at December 31, 2008. Medicaid Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 2,991.1 $ 2,691.8 % of Total Premium Revenues 46.1 % 50.7 % Membership 1,300,000 1,232,000 % of Total Membership 51.3 % 51.9 % Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2008, Medicare segment premium revenue increased $878.9 million, or 33.6%, to $3,492.0 million from $2,613.1 million for the same period in the prior year. Growth in our PFFS product contributed $865.0 million of the change in revenue. Membership within the Medicare segment grew by 91,000 members, or 8.0%, from 1,141,000 members at December 31, 2007 to 1,232,000 members at December 31, 2008, principally due to growth in the PFFS product launched in 2007. Medicare Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Revenues (in millions) $ 3,492.0 $ 2,613.1 % of Total Premium Revenues 53.9 % 49.3 % Membership 1,232,000 1,141,000 % of Total Membership 48.7 % 48.1 % Investment and other income. For the year ended December 31, 2008, investment and other income decreased approximately $47.1 million, or 54.8%, to $38.8 million from $85.9 million for the same period in the prior year. The decrease is primarily due to an overall decrease in invested assets, coupled with a lower interest rate environment. The decrease is also attributable to the non-recurring gain from the settlement of a legal matter in the amount of approximately $9.0 million, which was recorded 2007. A similar gain did not occur in the fiscal year 2008. Medical benefits expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, total medical benefits expense increased $1,316.8 million, or 31.3%, to $5,530.2 million from $4,213.4 million for the same period in the prior year due to membership increases, primarily in our Medicare Advantage products. The demographic mix of our members and overall increased utilization patterns and costs of our members accounted for the majority of the remaining change. Our MBR was 85.3% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 79.4% for the same period in the prior year. 59 Table of Contents Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Medical Benefits Expense $ 5,530.2 $ 4,213.4 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (92.9 )(1) 92.9 (2) Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 5,437.3 $ 4,306.3 MBR as reported 85.3 % 79.4 % MBR as adjusted 83.9 % 81.2 % (1) We believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in the year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $92.9 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time. Consequently, we believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. (2) We believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it does not take into account the claims information that has become available as of the date of filing our 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing the 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for medical benefits expense for year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medical Benefits Expense and Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted is approximately $92.9 million. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2008, medical benefits expense increased $400.7 million, or 18.8%, to $2,537.4 million from $2,136.7 million for the same period in the prior year. Our Medicaid MBR was 84.8% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 79.4% for the same period in the prior year. Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense $ 2,537.4 $ 2,136.7 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (39.5 )(1) 39.5 (2) Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 2,497.9 $ 2,176.2 MBR as reported 84.8 % 79.4 % MBR as adjusted 83.5 % 80.8 % (1) We believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $39.5 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time. Consequently, we believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. (2) We believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial 60 Table of Contents measure because it does not take into account the claims information that has become available as of the date of filing the 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing our 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for medical benefits expense for year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted is approximately $39.5 million. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, Medicaid medical benefits expense as adjusted increased $321.7 million, or 14.8%, to $2,497.9 million from $2,176.2 million for the same period in the prior year. Membership growth in our Medicaid segment accounted for $212.9 million of the increase, partially off set by the decrease in medical benefits expense resulting from our Connecticut Medicaid withdrawal totaling approximately $62.8 million. The remaining change is attributed to the demographic mix of our members and overall increased utilization patterns and costs. Absent the adjustment that was recorded in 2007 for the favorable medical benefits development, our MBR would have been 83.5% and 80.8% for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2008, medical benefits expense increased $916.1 million, or 44.1%, to $2,992.8 million from $2,076.7 million for the same period in the prior year due to the increases in medical benefits expense in both the Medicaid and Medicare segments, as discussed below. Our Medicare MBR was 85.7% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 79.5% for the same period in the prior year. Medicare Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Medicare Medical Benefits Expense $ 2,992.8 $ 2,076.7 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (53.4 ) 53.4 Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 2,939.4 $ 2,130.1 MBR as reported 85.7 % 79.5 % MBR as adjusted 84.2 % 81.5 % (1) We believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicare Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $53.4 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time. Consequently, we believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medicare Medical Benefits Expense. (2) We believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it does not take into account the claims information that had become available as of the date of filing our 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicare Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing the 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for medical benefits expense for year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted is approximately $53.4 million. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially-determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medicare Medical Benefits Expense. 61 Table of Contents For the year ended December 31, 2008, Medicare medical benefits expense as adjusted increased $809.3 million, or 38.0%, to $2,939.4 million from $2,130.1 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the growth in membership, principally with the launch of PFFS, which accounted for $431.0 million of the increase. Increased health care costs and the demographic change in membership accounted for the remaining increase. For the year ended December 31, 2008, the Medicare MBR as adjusted was 84.2% compared to 81.5% for the same period in the prior year, primarily due to the increasing MBR in our PDP product. Selling, general and administrative expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expenses increased approximately $166.8 million, or 21.8%, to $933.4 million from $766.6 million for the same period in the prior year. Administrative expenses associated with, or consequential to, the government and Special Committee investigations, including legal fees, consulting fees, employee recruitment and retention costs, and similar expenses were approximately $103.0 and $21.1 million in the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The increase in SG&A expense resulting from the substantially higher government and Special Committee investigation costs incurred in 2008 were partially off set by the $50.0 million accrual that was recorded in 2007 for our potential liability in connection with the ultimate resolution of the investigation related matters. The remaining increase was primarily due to our investments in information technology and sales and marketing activities, as well as increased spending necessary to support and sustain our membership growth. Our SG&A expense to total revenue ratio ( SG&A ratio ) was 14.3% and 14.2% for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Selling, General and Administrative Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) SG&A (in millions) $ 933.4 $ 766.6 SG&A expense to total revenue ratio 14.3 % 14.2 % Interest expense . Interest expense decreased $2.2 million, or 15.7%, to $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $14.0 million for the same period in the prior year. The decrease relates to the reduced amount of debt outstanding and the lower cost of borrowing given the lower interest rate environment in 2008 versus higher interest rates in 2007. Income tax expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, income tax decreased $178.0 million, or 110.1%, to a benefit of $16.3 million from expense of $161.7 million for the same period in the prior year. The tax effective rate was approximately (30.7)% and 42.8% in the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate was attributed to the tax benefit of the goodwill impairment and, to a lesser extent, tax-exempt investment income on certain investments, offset by the non-deductibility of certain compensation costs related to changes in senior management and state taxes. Income Tax Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Income tax (benefit) expense $ (16.3 ) $ 161.7 Effective tax rate (30.7 %) 42.8 % Net income (loss). Net income decreased approximately $253.0 million, or 117.0%, to a net loss of $36.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2008 from net income of $216.2 in the prior year period. The decrease is primarily due to the period-over-period increase in MBR, as medical benefits expense grew at a faster pace than premium revenues during year ended December 31, 2008, the goodwill impairment recorded in 2008 and the increase in SG&A expenses associated with, or consequential to, the government and Special Committee investigations. Net Income (Loss) For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (In millions, except per share data) Net (loss) income $ (36.8 ) $ 216.2 Net (loss) income per diluted share $ (0.89 ) $ 5.16 Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2007 to Year Ended December 31, 2006 Premium revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2007, total premium revenue increased $1,718.9 million, or 47.9%, to $5,304.9 million from $3,586.0 million for the same period in the prior year due to increases in premium revenue in both the Medicaid 62 Table of Contents and Medicare segments, as discussed below. Total membership grew by 115,000 members, or 5.1%, from 2,258,000 at December 31, 2006 to 2,373,000 at December 31, 2007. Premium Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 5,304.9 $ 3,586.0 Membership 2,373,000 2,258,000 Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2007, Medicaid segment premium revenue increased $785.4 million, or 41.2%, to $2,691.8 million from $1,906.4 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase in Medicaid segment revenue was primarily due to increases in premium rates in certain markets and a full year of operating in Georgia in 2007 compared to seven months in 2006. Georgia premium revenue for 2007 totaled $1,086.8 million compared to $496.9 million in 2006. The increase also resulted from our entry into the Ohio market in 2007 in which we had revenues of approximately $161.0 million. This increase was partially offset by a decrease resulting from the aggregate membership in the Medicaid segment decreasing slightly by 13,000 members, or 1%, from 1,245,000 members at December 31, 2006 to 1,232,000 at December 31, 2007. Medicaid Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 2,691.8 $ 1,906.4 % of Total Premium Revenues 50.7 % 53.2 % Membership 1,232,000 1,245,000 % of Total Membership 51.9 % 55.1 % Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2007, Medicare segment premium revenue increased $933.4 million, or 55.6%, to $2,613.1 million from $1,679.7 million for the same period in the prior year. Growth in premium revenue within the Medicare segment was primarily the result of our PFFS product launch and premium increases associated with the demographic mix of our Medicare Advantage membership. Membership within the Medicare segment grew by 128,000 members, or 12.6%, from 1,013,000 members at December 31, 2006 to 1,141,000 members at December 31, 2007, principally due to the new PFFS product. Medicare Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 2,613.1 $ 1,679.7 % of Total Premium Revenues 49.3 % 46.8 % Membership 1,141,000 1,013,000 % of Total Membership 48.1 % 44.9 % Investment and other income. For the year ended December 31, 2007, investment and other income increased $36.0 million, or 72.1%, to $85.9 million from $49.9 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase was due to our increased cash and investment balances held throughout 2007 primarily from our PFFS product launch and a full year of operations in Georgia in 2007 compared to only seven months in 2006. Higher interest rates accounted for approximately $12.2 million of the increase. Medical benefits expense. For the year ended December 31, 2007, total medical benefits expense increased $1,306.1 million, or 44.9%, to $4,213.4 million from $2,907.3 million for the same period in the prior year due to the increases in medical benefits expense in both the Medicaid and Medicare segments, as discussed below. Our MBR was 79.4% for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to 81.1% for the same period in the prior year. Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) Medical Benefits Expense $ 4,213.4 $ 2,907.3 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment 92.9 N/A 63 Table of Contents Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted(1) $ 4,306.3 N/A MBR as reported 79.4 % 81.1 % MBR as adjusted 81.2 % N/A (1) We believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it does not take into account the claims information that has become available as of the date of filing of our 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing of our 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for medical benefits expense for the year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medical Benefits Expense and Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted, is approximately $92.9 million, or a 1.8% decrease in the MBR. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially-determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2007, medical benefits expense increased $580.9 million, or 37.3%, to $2,136.7 million from $1,555.8 million for the same period in the prior year. Our Medicaid MBR was 79.4% for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to 81.6% for the same period in the prior year. Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense $ 2,136.7 $ 1,555.8 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment 39.5 N/A Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted(1) $ 2,176.2 N/A MBR as reported 79.4 % 81.6 % MBR as adjusted 80.8 % N/A (1) We believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it does not take into account the claims information that had become available as of the date of filing of our 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing our 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense for the year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted, is approximately $39.5 million. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2007, Medicaid medical benefits expense as adjusted increased $580.9 million, or 37.3%, to $2,176.2 million from $1,555.8 million for the same period in the prior year. The membership increase, principally in our Georgia and Ohio markets, accounted for $417.7 million and $143.4 million of the increase, respectively. Increased health care costs and the demographic change in membership accounted for the remaining $19.8 million of the increase. For the year ended December 31, 2007, the Medicaid MBR as adjusted was 80.8% compared to 81.6% for the same period in the prior year. This increase resulted from changes in the health care utilization pattern of our members and the demographic mix of our members in our 2006 existing markets. Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2007, medical benefits expense increased $725.2 million, or 53.7%, to $2,076.7 million from $1,351.5 million for the same period in the prior year due to the increases in medical benefits expense in both the Medicaid and Medicare segments, as discussed below. Our MBR was 79.5% for the year ended December 31, 2007 compared to 80.5% for the same period in the prior year. 64 Table of Contents Medicare Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) Medicare Medical Benefits Expense $ 2,076.7 $ 1,351.5 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment 53.4 N/A Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted(1) $ 2,130.1 N/A MBR as reported 79.5 % 80.5 % MBR as adjusted 81.5 % N/A (1) We believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it does not take into account the claims information that had become available as of the date of filing of our 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicare Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing of our 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for Medicare Medical Benefits Expense for the year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted, is approximately $53.4 million. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medicare Medical Benefits Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2007, Medicare medical benefits expense as adjusted increased $778.6 million, or 57.6%, to $2,130.1 million from $1,351.5 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the growth in membership, principally with the launch of PFFS, which accounted for $384.2 million of the increase, and growth in our PDP market, which contributed an additional $98.9 million. Increased health care costs and the demographic change in membership accounted for the remaining $295.5 million of the increase. For the year ended December 31, 2007, the Medicare MBR as adjusted was 81.5% compared to 80.5% for the same period in the prior year. Selling, general and administrative expense. For the year ended December 31, 2007, SG&A expense increased $270.2 million, or 54.4%, to $766.6 million from $496.4 million for the same period in the prior year. Our SG&A ratio was 14.2% and 13.7% for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in SG&A expense was primarily due to the costs related to the investigations, investments in information technology, investments in sales and marketing activities, and increased spending necessary to support and sustain our membership growth. Our SG&A ratio increased in 2007 as a result of recording a $50.0 million accrual for our potential liability in connection with the ultimate resolution of the investigation related matters discussed in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Selling, General and Administrative Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) SG&A $ 766.6 $ 496.4 SG&A expense to total revenue ratio 14.2 % 13.7 % Interest expense . Interest expense was $14.0 million and $14.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The decrease relates to the reduced amount of debt outstanding due to the settlement of the related party note, partially off-set by the higher cost of borrowing due to higher interest rates in 2007. Income tax expense. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2007 was $161.7 million with an effective tax rate of 42.8% as compared to $79.8 million with an effective tax rate of 39.7% for the same period in the prior year. The increase in the effective tax rate is principally attributed to the non-deductible expense that was recorded in the amount of $50.0 million in connection with the ultimate resolution of the investigation related matters discussed in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The ultimate terms and structure of any potential resolution of pending enforcement investigations is still unknown; therefore, we have assumed that the potential resolution amount will not be tax deductible. Income Tax Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (Dollars in millions) Income tax expense $ 161.7 $ 79.8 Effective tax rate 42.8 % 39.7 % Net income. For the year ended December 31, 2007, net income was $216.2 million compared to $121.2 million for the same period in the prior year, representing an increase of $95.0 million or 78.4%. Net income increased as a result of the favorable 65 Table of Contents adjustment that was recorded to medical benefits expense to reflect the difference between the actual claims paid and the Company actuarially determined estimate which accounted for $53.1 million of the increase. This increase was off-set by the increase in non-tax-deductible expense that was recorded in the amount of $50.0 million in connection with the potential resolution of the investigation related matters discussed in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The remaining $91.9 million increase is a result of significant premium growth as discussed above. Net Income For the Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 (In millions, except per share data) Net income $ 216.2 $ 121.2 Net income per diluted share $ 5.16 $ 2.98 Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2006 to Year Ended December 31, 2005 Premium revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2006, premium revenue increased $1,737.7 million, or 94.0%, to $3,586.0 million from $1,848.3 million for the same period in the prior year due to increases in premium revenue in both the Medicaid and Medicare segments, as discussed below. Total membership grew by 1,403,000 members, or 164.1%, from 855,000 at December 31, 2005 to 2,258,000 at December 31, 2006. Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2006, Medicaid segment premium revenue increased $562.6 million, or 41.8%, to $1,906.4 million from $1,343.8 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase in Medicaid segment revenue is due to growth in membership, principally as a result of the addition of the Georgia market, coupled with increases in premium rates in certain markets. Aggregate membership in the Medicaid segment grew by 459,000 members, or 58.4%, from 786,000 members at December 31, 2005 to 1,245,000 at December 31, 2006 principally due to the addition of the Georgia market which accounted for $496.9 million, and premium increases associated with the demographic mix of our membership accounted for $52.2 million of the increase. The remaining increase was attributed to organic membership growth in our other markets. Medicaid Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 1,906.4 $ 1,343.8 % of Total Premium Revenues 53.2 % 72.7 % Membership 1,245,000 786,000 % of Total Membership 55.1 % 91.9 % Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2006, Medicare segment premium revenue increased $1,175.2 million, or 232.9%, to $1,679.7 million from $504.5 million for the same period in the prior year. Growth in premium revenue within the Medicare segment was primarily the result of the new PDP business that we launched in 2006 and the related membership growth of 923,000 members, which accounted for $909.6 million, and premium increases associated with the demographic mix of our Medicare Coordinated Care membership. Membership within the Medicare segment grew by 944,000 members, or 1,368.1%, from 69,000 members at December 31, 2005 to 1,013,000 members at December 31, 2006, principally due to our new PDP business. Medicare Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 1,679.7 $ 504.5 % of Total Premium Revenues 46.8 % 27.3 % Membership 1,013,000 69,000 % of Total Membership 44.9 % 8.1 % Investment and other income. For the year ended December 31, 2006, investment and other income increased $32.9 million, or 193.5%, to $49.9 million from $17.0 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase was due to increased cash and investment positions held throughout 2006 primarily from the new PDP and Georgia businesses, as well as the higher interest rate environment. The higher average cash and investment balances accounted for approximately $14.4 million of the increase and the higher interest rate environment accounted for approximately $18.5 million of the increase. 66 Table of Contents Medical benefits expense. For the year ended December 31, 2006, medical benefits expense increased $1,401.9 million, or 93.1%, to $2,907.3 million from $1,505.4 million for the same period in the prior year due to the increases in medical benefits expense in both the Medicaid and Medicare segments, as discussed below. The MBR was 81.1% for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to 81.4% for the same period in the prior year. Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2006, Medicaid medical benefits expense increased $462.6 million, or 42.3%, to $1,555.8 million from $1,093.2 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase in our Medicaid membership, principally as a result of our Georgia market, accounted for $439.1 million of the increase while increased health care costs and the demographic change in membership accounted for $23.5 million of the increase. For the year ended December 31, 2006, the Medicaid MBR was 81.6% compared to 81.3% for the same period in the prior year. This decline resulted from premium rate increases, changes in the health care utilization pattern of our members and the demographic mix of our members in our 2005 existing markets, partially off set by the higher medical costs associated with our Georgia launch. Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 (Dollars in millions) Medical Benefits $ 1,555.8 $ 1,093.2 MBR 81.6 % 81.3 % Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2006, Medicare medical benefits expense increased $939.3 million, or 227.9%, to $1,351.5 million from $412.2 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the growth in membership, principally as a result of our new PDP business, which accounted for $715.7 million of the increase. Increased health care costs and the demographic change in membership accounted for $223.6 million of the increase. For the year ended December 31, 2006, the Medicare MBR was 80.5% compared to 81.7% for the same period in the prior year. Medicare Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 (Dollars in millions) Medical Benefits $ 1,351.5 $ 412.2 MBR 80.5 % 81.7 % Selling, general and administrative expense. For the year ended December 31, 2006, SG&A expense increased $236.9 million, or 91.3%, to $496.4 million from $259.5 million for the same period in the prior year. Our SG&A ratio was 13.7% and 13.9% for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase in SG&A expense was primarily due to investments in information technology, investments in sales and marketing strategies and increased spending necessary to support and sustain our membership growth. Selling, General and Administrative Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 SG&A $ 496.4 $ 259.5 SG&A expense to total revenue ratio 13.7 % 13.9 % Interest expense. Interest expense was $14.1 million and $13.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase relates to higher borrowing costs due to the rising interest rate environment, partially off-set by the reduced amount of debt outstanding due to the settlement of the related party note. Income tax expense. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2006 was $79.8 million with an effective tax rate of 39.7% as compared to $30.3 million with an effective tax rate of 39.0% for the same period in the prior year. Income Tax Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 (Dollars in millions) Income tax expense $ 79.8 $ 30.3 Effective tax rate 39.7 % 39.0 % 67 Table of Contents Net income. For the year ended December 31, 2006, net income was $121.2 million compared to $47.4 million for the same period in the prior year, representing an increase of $73.8 million or 156.0%. The increase is due to increased revenues generated by our membership growth while maintaining a relatively consistent MBR. Net Income For the Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 (In millions, except per share data) Net income $ 121.2 $ 47.4 Net income per diluted share $ 2.98 $ 1.21 Liquidity and Capital Resources Overview Cash Generating Activities Our business consists of operations conducted by our regulated subsidiaries, including HMOs and insurance subsidiaries, and our non-regulated subsidiaries. The primary sources of cash for our regulated subsidiaries include premium revenue, investment income and capital contributions made by us to our regulated subsidiaries. Our regulated subsidiaries are each subject to applicable state regulations that, among other things, require the maintenance of minimum levels of capital and surplus. Our regulated subsidiaries primary uses of cash include payment of medical expenses, management fees to our non-regulated third-party administrator subsidiary (the TPA ) and direct administrative costs which are not covered by the agreement with the TPA, such as selling expenses and legal costs. We refer collectively to the cash and investment balances maintained by our regulated subsidiaries as regulated cash and regulated investments, respectively. The primary sources of cash for our non-regulated subsidiaries are management fees received from our regulated subsidiaries, investment income and cash received from debt or equity offerings. Our non-regulated subsidiaries primary uses of cash include payment of administrative costs not charged to our regulated subsidiaries for corporate functions, including administrative services related to claims payment, member and provider services and information technology. Other primary uses include capital contributions made by our non-regulated subsidiaries to our regulated subsidiaries and repayment of debt. We refer collectively to the cash and investment balances available in our non-regulated subsidiaries as unregulated cash and unregulated investments, respectively. Cash Positions At December 31, 2008 and 2007, cash and cash equivalents were $1,181.9 million and $1,008.4 million, respectively. We also had short-term investments of $70.1 million and $253.9 million at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Of these short-term investments, $66.2 million and $33.8 million had maturities of three to 12 months as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. As of December 31, 2008 and 2007, 94.4% and 12.3% of our investments were invested in certificates of deposit with a weighted average maturity of 50 days and 98 days, respectively. The annualized tax equivalent portfolio yield for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007 was 2.4% and 5.0%, respectively. On December 31, 2008, three of our Florida regulated subsidiaries declared dividends to one of our non-regulated subsidiaries in the aggregate amount of $105.1 million, two of which were paid on December 31, 2008 and one of which was paid on January 2, 2009. As of December 31 2008, we had unregulated cash of approximately $147.7 million and unregulated investments of approximately $4.9 million. The proceeds from the intercompany dividends discussed above are reflected in our unregulated cash balances as of December 31, 2008 with the exception of the dividends received on January 2, 2009. Our Credit Facility and Significant Near-Term Cash Requirements Our senior secured credit facility with Wachovia Bank, as Administrative Agent, and a syndicate of lenders, which has a term loan facility with an outstanding balance of approximately $152.8 million as of December 31, 2008, is currently in default and subject to acceleration by the lenders and, absent acceleration by the lenders, will become due and payable on May 13, 2009. Taking into account, among other things, the increase in our unregulated cash balances as a result of our receipt of the $105.1 million in dividends described above, we currently expect that we will be able to repay in full the outstanding balance under the credit facility when it becomes due. However, we cannot provide any assurances that adverse developments will not arise that impede our ability to repay in full the outstanding balance under the credit facility when it becomes due. In particular, the timing and amount of any potential resolution with the USAO, the Civil Division, the OIG and the State of Florida is uncertain and could materially and adversely affect 68 Table of Contents our ability to meet our near-term obligations, including repayment of the outstanding balance under the credit facility. Also, our ability to repay in full the outstanding balance under the credit facility could be materially and adversely affected if, among other things, Florida regulators were to require certain of our intercompany loan arrangements, which total approximately $50.0 million, to be terminated. Additionally, one or more of our regulators could require one or more of our subsidiaries to maintain minimum levels of statutory net worth in excess of the amount required under the applicable state laws if the regulators were to determine that such a requirement were in the interest of our members. For example, a state regulator recently notified us that, in its view, notwithstanding a parental guarantee that has been in place since 2006, we should contribute a total of approximately $30.0 million in additional statutory capital to two of our HMOs. We are currently in discussions with the regulator to determine the necessity of a capital contribution, if any, into these regulated entities. In addition, there may be other potential adverse developments that could impede our ability to repay in full the outstanding balance under the credit facility. In addition to our senior secured credit facility, we have other significant near-term cash requirements, principally costs associated with the ongoing investigations. As of December 31, 2008, we had spent a cumulative amount of approximately $124.1 million on administrative expenses associated with, or consequential to, the government and Special Committee investigations, including legal fees, accounting fees, consulting fees, employee recruitment and retention costs and similar expenses. Approximately $21.1 million of these investigation related costs were incurred in 2007 and approximately $103.0 million were incurred in 2008. We expect to continue incurring significant additional costs in 2009 as a result of the federal and state investigations and pending civil actions, including administrative expenses and costs necessary to improve our corporate governance and address other issues that were identified. As noted elsewhere we accrued a liability in the amount of $50.0 million in connection with the resolution of these matters which is reflected in our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2007 and 2008, respectively. We believe that it is probable that the actual resolution amount for all such matters under review will be more than the amounts that have been reflected in our financial statements; however, the timing, term and conditions of such costs remain uncertain. In addition, in 2007, one of our non-regulated subsidiaries borrowed $50.0 million from two of our Florida regulated subsidiaries through intercompany loan arrangements for the purpose of commencing a new business. The borrowing subsidiary ultimately did not commence the new business and the borrowing subsidiary still holds approximately $50.0 million, which we intend to use to the extent necessary to meet our general corporate obligations. We currently do not intend to cause the loans to be repaid until at least September 2010. However, the Florida regulators could require the regulated subsidiaries to terminate the intercompany loan arrangements, necessitating the borrowing subsidiary to repay in full the amount owed to the Florida regulated subsidiaries. If the borrowing subsidiary were required to repay the intercompany loans, or other restrictions were placed on the use of proceeds from such loans, our unregulated cash balance could be reduced by up to $50.0 million plus any accrued interest. Initiatives to Increase Our Unregulated Cash We are pursuing financing alternatives to raise additional unregulated cash. Some of these initiatives include, but are not limited to, seeking additional dividends from certain of our regulated subsidiaries to the extent that we are able to access available excess capital. For example, as discussed above, on December 31, 2008, three of our Florida regulated subsidiaries declared dividends to one of our non-regulated subsidiaries in the aggregate amount of $105.1 million, two of which were paid on December 31, 2008 and one of which was paid on January 2, 2009. We are currently considering other intercompany dividends to increase our unregulated cash balances. However, we cannot provide any assurances that any other applicable state regulatory authorities will approve, to the extent such approvals are required, the payment of dividends to our non-regulated subsidiaries by our regulated subsidiaries. In addition to dividends, our strategies include accessing the public and private debt and equity markets and potentially selling assets. Our ability to obtain financing has been and continues to be materially and negatively affected by a number of factors. The recent turmoil in the credit markets, market volatility, the deterioration in the soundness of certain financial institutions and general adverse economic conditions have caused the cost of prospective debt financings to increase considerably. These circumstances have materially adversely affected liquidity in the financial markets, making terms for certain financings unattractive, and in some cases have resulted in the unavailability of financing. We also believe the uncertainty created by the ongoing state and federal investigations is affecting our ability to obtain financing. In light of the current and evolving credit market crisis and the uncertainty created by the ongoing investigations, we may not be able to obtain financing. Even if we are able to obtain financing under these circumstances, the cost to us likely will be high and the terms and conditions likely will be onerous. The required repayment of the outstanding balance due under our credit facility will materially reduce our outstanding cash balances unless we are able to refinance the debt. Auction Rate Securities As of December 31, 2008, all of our long-term investments were comprised of municipal note investments with an auction reset feature ( auction rate securities ). These notes are issued by various state and local municipal entities for the purpose of financing student loans, public projects and other activities, which carry investment grade credit ratings. Liquidity for these auction rate securities is typically provided by an auction process which allows holders to sell their notes and resets the applicable interest rate at pre-determined intervals, usually every seven, 14, 28 or 35 days. As of the date of this report, auctions have failed for $50.6 million of our auction rate securities and there is no assurance that auctions on the remaining auction rate securities in our investment portfolio will continue to succeed. An auction failure means that the parties wishing to sell their securities could not be matched with an adequate volume of buyers. In the event that there is a failed auction the indenture governing the security requires the issuer to pay interest at a contractually defined rate that is generally above market rates for other types of similar short-term instruments. The securities for which auctions have failed will continue to accrue interest at the contractual rate and be auctioned every seven, 14, 28 or 35 days until the auction succeeds, the issuer calls the securities, or they mature. As a result, our ability to liquidate and fully recover the carrying value of our remaining auction rate securities in the near term may be limited or non-existent. In addition, while all of our auction rate securities currently carry investment grade ratings, if the issuers are unable to successfully close future auctions and their credit ratings deteriorate, we may in the future be required to record an impairment charge on these investments. We believe we will be able to liquidate our auction rate securities without significant loss, and we currently believe these securities are not impaired, primarily due to government guarantees or municipal bond insurance; however, it could take until the final maturity of the underlying securities to realize our investments recorded value. The final maturity of the underlying securities could be as long as 31 years. The weighted-average life of the underlying securities for our auction rate securities portfolio is 22 years. We currently have the ability and intent to hold our auction rate securities until market stability is restored with respect to these securities. 69 Table of Contents Regulatory Capital and Restrictions on Dividends and Management Fees Each of our HMO subsidiaries is licensed in the markets in which it operates and is subject to the rules, regulations and oversight by the applicable state DOI in the areas of licensing and solvency. Each of our health and prescription drug plans is required to report regularly on its operational and financial performance to the appropriate regulatory agency in the state in which it is licensed, which describes our HMO capital structure, ownership, financial condition, certain intercompany transactions and business operations. From time to time, each of our plans is selected to undergo periodic examinations and reviews by the applicable state to review our operational and financial assertions. The plans that we operate generally must obtain approval from or provide notice to the state in which it is domiciled before entering into certain transactions, such as declaring dividends in excess of certain thresholds or paying dividends to a related party, entering into other arrangements with related parties, and acquisitions or similar transactions involving an HMO, or any other change in control. For purposes of these laws, in general, control commonly is presumed to exist when a person, group of persons or entity, directly or indirectly, owns, controls or holds the power to vote 10% or more of the voting securities of another entity. Each of our HMO and insurance subsidiaries must maintain a minimum statutory net worth in an amount determined by statute or regulation and we may only invest in types of investments approved by the state. The minimum statutory net worth requirements differ by state and are generally based on a percentage of annualized premium revenue, a percentage of annualized health care costs, a percentage of certain liabilities, a statutory minimum, or RBC, requirements. The RBC requirements are based on guidelines established by the NAIC and are administered by the states. As of December 31, 2008, our Connecticut, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Louisiana, Missouri, Ohio and PFFS operations are subject to RBC requirements. The RBC requirements may be modified as each state legislature deems appropriate for that state. The RBC formula, based on asset risk, underwriting risk, credit risk, business risk and other factors, generates the authorized company action level, or CAL, which represents the amount of net worth believed to be required to support the regulated entity business. For states in which the RBC requirements have been adopted, the regulated entity typically must maintain a minimum of the greater of the required CAL or the minimum statutory net worth requirement calculated pursuant to pre-RBC guidelines. In addition to the foregoing requirements, our regulated subsidiaries are subject to restrictions on their ability to make dividend payments, loans and other transfers of cash. The statutory framework for our regulated subsidiaries minimum net worth may change over time. For instance, RBC requirements may be adopted by more of the states in which we operate. These subsidiaries are also subject to their state regulators overall oversight powers. For example, New York enacted regulations that increase the reserve requirement by 150% over an eight-year period. In addition, regulators could require our subsidiaries to maintain minimum levels of statutory net worth in excess of the amount required under the applicable state laws if the regulators determine that maintaining such additional statutory net worth is in the best interest of our members. For example, our Ohio HMO is required to maintain required statutory capital at an RBC level of 150% of CAL. Moreover, as we expand our plan offerings in new states or pursue new business opportunities, such as the Medicare private-fee-for-service programs, we may be required to make additional statutory capital contributions. In addition, our Medicaid and S-CHIP activities are regulated by each state department of health or equivalent agency, and our Medicare activities are regulated by CMS. These agencies typically require demonstration of the same capabilities mentioned above and perform periodic audits of performance, usually annually. State enforcement authorities, including state attorneys general and Medicaid fraud control units, have become increasingly active in recent years in their review and scrutiny of various sectors of the health care industry, including health insurers and managed care organizations. We routinely respond to requests for information from these entities and, more generally, we endeavor to cooperate fully with all government agencies that regulate our business. For a discussion of our material pending legal proceedings, see Part Item 3 Legal Proceedings. At December 31, 2008 and 2007, all of our restricted assets consisted of cash and cash equivalents, money market accounts, certificates of deposits, and U.S. Government Securities. As of December 31, 2008, we believe our subsidiaries were in compliance with the minimum capital requirements. However, a state regulator recently notified us that, in its view, notwithstanding a parental guarantee that has been in place since 2006, two of our HMOs should contribute a total of approximately $30.0 million in additional statutory capital. We are currently discussing this request with the regulator. 70 Table of Contents Overview of Cash Flow Activities For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 our cash flows from operations are summarized as follows: For the Years Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 (In millions) Net cash provided by operations $ 296.4 $ 277.6 $ 507.7 Net cash used in investing activities (91.1 ) (186.2 ) (88.1 ) Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities (31.8 ) (47.5 ) 123.0 Net cash provided by operations The net cash inflow from operations for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 was primarily due to increased revenues from increased membership and changes in the receivables and liabilities due to timing of cash receipts and payments. Because we generally receive premium revenue in advance of payment for the related medical care costs, our cash typically has increased during periods of premium revenue growth. Net cash used in investing activities In 2008, investing activities consisted primarily of $124.8 million in proceeds from the sale and maturity of investments, net of investment purchases. An additional $109.8 million was used in investing activities to purchase restricted investments, net of proceeds received from the sale of restricted investments. Additions to property, equipment and capitalized software used approximately $19.6 million. In 2008, investing activities also consisted primarily of net cash used in Funds receivable for the benefit of members totaling $86.5 million. These funds, which represent PDP member subsidies and pass-through payments from government partners, are not accounted for in our results of operations since they represent pass-through payments from our government partners to fund deductibles, co-payments and other member benefits for certain of our members. In 2007, investing activities consisted primarily of the investment of excess cash generated by operations totaling approximately $127.5 million in various short-term investment instruments, and an additional $39.3 million was invested in restricted investment accounts to satisfy the requirements of various state statutes. An additional $22.9 million was invested in capitalized assets. In 2006, investing activities consisted primarily of the investment of excess cash generated by operations totaling approximately $32.3 million in various short-term investment instruments. An additional $31.7 million was invested in capitalized assets, which included expansion costs related to our corporate headquarters in Tampa, and investments needed for our new product offerings. Additionally, $31.0 million was invested in restricted investment accounts to satisfy the requirements of various state statutes. Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities In 2008, financing activities consisted primarily of net cash used in Funds held for the benefit of members totaling $31.8 million. These funds, which represent PDP member subsidies and pass-through payments from government partners, are not accounted for in our results of operations since they represent pass-through payments from our government partners to fund deductibles, co-payments and other member benefits for certain of our members In 2007, financing activities consisted of net proceeds from options exercised totaling $12.8 million, and the incremental tax benefit from options exercised of $23.1 million. Also included in financing activities are funds held for the benefit of others, which used approximately $81.9 million of cash as of December 31, 2007. These funds, which represent PDP member subsidies and pass-through payments from government partners, are not accounted for in our results of operations since they represent pass-through payments from our government partners to fund deductibles, co-payments and other member benefits for certain of our members. In 2006, financing activities consisted of proceeds from options exercised totaling $9.0 million and proceeds from our follow-on offering of $22.0 million, partially offset by payments on our related-party note of $25.6 million. Also included in financing activities are funds held for the benefit of others, which totaled approximately $113.7 million as of December 31, 2006. These funds are PDP member subsidies and represent pass-through payments from government partners and are 71 Table of Contents not accounted for in our results of operations since they represent pass-through payments from our government partners to fund deductibles, co-payments and other member benefits for certain of our members. Debt and Credit Facilities Credit Agreement As discussed above, our senior secured credit facility with Wachovia Bank, as Administrative Agent, and a syndicate of lenders, which has a term loan facility with an outstanding balance of approximately $152.8 million as of December 31, 2008, is currently in default and subject to acceleration by the lenders and will, absent acceleration by the lenders, become due and payable on May 13, 2009. Our senior secured credit facility also included a revolving credit facility that expired in May 2008. Although we are not in payment default, we are in default of a number of covenants contained in the credit agreement (including our failure to provide the lenders with audited financial statements, our 2008 budget and other requested information, and our inability to maintain certain leverage ratios), some of which cannot be cured prior to maturity of the senior secured credit facility (such as our entry into intercompany loan transactions that were not effected in compliance with the credit agreement). As of the date hereof, our payment obligations under the credit agreement have not been accelerated and the rate of interest has not been increased. However, we cannot provide any assurance that such obligations will not be accelerated or the rate of interest increased in the future or that the lenders will not exercise other remedies for default. The term loan is secured by a pledge of substantially all of the assets of our non-regulated entities, which includes the stock of our operating subsidiaries directly held by our non-regulated entities. Interest is payable quarterly, currently at a rate equal to the sum of a rate based upon the applicable Prime rate plus a rate equal to 1.50%. If we fail to pay any of our indebtedness when due, or if we breach any of the other covenants in the instruments governing our indebtedness, it may result in additional events of default. Working Capital As of December 31, 2008, our credit ratings were as follows: Agency Outlook Credit Rating Moody Rating Under Review/Possible Downgrade Ba2 Standard & Poor Credit Watch Negative B Consequently, if we seek to raise funds in capital markets transactions, our ability to do so will be limited to issuing additional non-investment grade debt or issuing equity and/or equity-linked instruments. We expect to fund our working capital requirements and capital expenditures during the next several years from our existing cash balances, our cash flow from operations, public offerings or other possible future capital markets transactions. We have taken a number of steps to increase our internally generated cash flow, including reducing our health care expenses by, among other things, exiting from unprofitable markets and undertaking cost savings initiatives. We also may be required to take additional actions to reduce our cash flow requirements, including the deferral of planned investments aimed at reducing our selling, general and administrative expenses. The deferral or cancellation of any investments could have a material adverse impact on our ability to meet our short-term business objectives. We regularly evaluate cash requirements for current operations and commitments, and for capital acquisitions and other strategic transactions. We may elect to raise additional funds for these purposes either through additional debt or equity, the sale of investment securities or otherwise as appropriate. Off Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2008, we did not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements except for operating leases as described in the table below. Commitments and Contingencies The following table sets forth information regarding our contractual obligations. 72 Table of Contents Payments due to period Contractual Obligations at Less Than 1-3 3-5 More than December 31, 2008(1) Total 1 Year Years Years 5 Years (in millions) Current portion of debt $ 152.8 $ 152.8 $ $ $ Operating leases 78.3 16.9 29.4 15.1 16.9 Purchase obligations 42.3 31.4 10.8 0.1 Unrecognized tax benefit 26.6 26.6 Total $ 300.0 $ 201.1 $ 40.2 $ 15.2 $ 43.5 (1) We are engaged in resolution discussions as to matters under review with the USAO, the Civil Division, the OIG and the State of Florida. Based on the current status of matters and all information known to us to date, in the year ended December 31, 2007 we recorded selling, general and administrative expense and accrued a liability in the amount of $50.0 million in connection with the resolution of these matters, which is included in the Other accrued expenses line item within our Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2007, and 2008, respectively. We believe that it is probable that the actual resolution amount for all such matters under review will be more than the amounts that have already been reflected in our financial statements; however, we cannot provide an estimable range of additional amounts, if any, nor can we provide assurances regarding the timing, terms and conditions of any potential negotiated resolution of pending investigations by the USAO, the Civil Division, the OIG or the State of Florida. Accordingly, the amount has been excluded from the table above. We are not an obligor under or guarantor of any indebtedness of any other party; however, we may have to pay referral claims of health care providers under contract with us who are not able to pay costs of medical services provided by other providers. Recently Adopted Accounting Standards In September 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( FAS ) No. 157, Fair Value Measurements ( FAS 157 ). FAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in GAAP and requires enhanced disclosures about fair value measurements. FAS 157 does not require any new fair value measurements. The pronouncement is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007. In February 2008, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position FAS 157-2, Effective Date of FASB Statement No. 157 ( FSP 157-2 ). FSP 157-2 delayed the effective date of FAS 157 for all non-financial assets and liabilities for one year, except those that are measured at fair value in the financial statements on at least an annual basis. We adopted FAS 157 as of January 1, 2008, except for those provisions deferred under FSP 157-2. The deferred provisions of FAS 157, which apply primarily to goodwill and other intangible assets for annual impairment testing purposes, will be effective in 2009. We adopted the new standard during the first quarter of 2008 as required. There was no cumulative effect of adopting FAS 157 for 2008. In February 2007, the FASB issued FAS No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities ( FAS 159 ). FAS 159 permits an entity to measure certain financial assets and financial liabilities at fair value. Under FAS 159, entities that elect the fair value option will report unrealized gains and losses in earnings at each subsequent reporting date. The pronouncement is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007. The Company adopted FAS 159 as of January 1, 2008 as required, but did not elect the fair value option. Recently Issued Accounting Standards In April 2008, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position FAS 142-3, Determination of the Useful Life of Intangible Assets ( FSP 142-3 ). FSP 142-3 amends the factors to be considered in developing renewal and extension assumptions used to determine the useful life of a recognized intangible asset accounted for under FAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets . FSP 142-3 is effective for our fiscal year 2009 and must be applied prospectively to intangible assets acquired after January 1, 2009. Early adoption is not permitted. We do not expect the adoption of FSP 142-3 will have a material impact on its Consolidated Financial Statements. In March 2008, the FASB issued FAS No. 161, Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities an amendment of FASB Statement No. 133 ( FAS 161 ). FAS 161 amends and expands the disclosure requirements of FAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities ( FAS 133 ), to require qualitative disclosure about objectives and strategies for using derivatives; quantitative disclosures about fair value amounts and gains and losses on derivative instruments; and disclosures about credit-risk-related contingent features in derivative agreements. FAS 161 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after November 15, 2008. We do not expect that the adoption of FAS 160 will have an impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. In December 2007, the FASB issued FAS No. 141 (revised 2007), Business Combinations ( FAS 141R ). FAS 141R replaces current guidance in FAS 141 to better represent the economic value of a business combination transaction. FAS 141 establishes principles and requirements for how an acquiring entity recognizes and measures all identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed, any non-controlling interest in the acquired entity and the goodwill acquired. The changes to be effected with FAS 141R from the current guidance include, but are not limited to treatment of certain specific items such as expensing transaction and restructuring costs and adjusting earnings in periods subsequent to the acquisition for changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances and income tax uncertainties as well as changes in the fair value of acquired contingent liabilities. FAS 141R also includes a substantial number of new disclosure requirements that will enable users of financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial effect of 73 Table of Contents business combination. FAS 141R must be applied prospectively to all new acquisitions closing on or after January 1, 2009. The impact of this pronouncement will depend on future acquisition activity by us, if any. In December 2007, the FASB issued FAS No. 160, Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements An Amendment of ARB No. 51 ( FAS 160 ). FAS 160 requires that accounting and reporting for minority interests be recharacterized as noncontrolling interests and classified as a component of equity. The standard is effective for fiscal year 2009 and must be applied prospectively. We do not expect that the adoption of FAS 160 will have an impact on its consolidated financial statements. 
