CIK: 1279363
Company Name: WELLCARE HEALTH PLANS INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-02-18


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Selected Financial Data beginning on Page 47 and our combined and consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this 2009 Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause our actual results to differ materially from management expectations. Factors that could cause such differences include those set forth under Risk Factors, Forward-Looking Statements, Business and elsewhere in this 2009 Form 10-K. Overview Current Financial Condition Financial Impact of Government Investigations and Litigation We do not know whether, or the extent to which, any investigations that remain unresolved and any investigation-related litigation or any of the class actions discussed above under Part I Item 3 Legal Proceedings will result in our payment of additional fines, penalties or damages, any of which would require us to incur additional expenses and could have an adverse affect on our results of operations. Furthermore, if as a result of the resolution of the investigations we are subject to operating restrictions, revocation of our licenses, termination of one or more of our contracts and/or exclusion from further participation in Medicare or Medicaid programs, our revenues and net income could be adversely affected. 48 Table of Contents As discussed above, we have resolved our previously disclosed matters under investigation by the USAO and the State of Florida but remain in resolution discussions as to matters under review with the Civil Division and the OIG. Any resolution of the ongoing investigations being conducted by these agencies could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows. As previously disclosed, we have paid the USAO a total of $80.0 million pursuant to the terms of the DPA. Pursuant to the Consent and Final Judgment, we agreed to pay a penalty of $10.0 million to the SEC, of which $2.5 million remains to be paid during the first quarter of 2010. Based on the current status of matters and all information known to us to date, management estimates that we have a liability of approximately $60.0 million plus interest associated with the matters remaining under investigation. We anticipate these amounts will be payable in installments over a period of four to five years. In accordance with fair value accounting guidance, we discounted the liability and recorded it at its current fair value of approximately $55.9 million. This amount remains accrued in our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2009 within the short and long term portions of Amounts accrued related to investigation resolution line items. The final timing, terms and conditions of a resolution of these matters may differ from those currently anticipated, which may result in an adjustment to our recorded amounts. These adjustments may be material. We cannot provide an estimable range of additional amounts, if any, nor can we provide assurances regarding the timing, terms and conditions of any potential negotiated resolution of pending investigations by the Civil Division or the OIG. We have expended significant financial resources in connection with the investigations and related matters. Since the inception of these investigations through December 31, 2009, we have incurred a total of approximately $165.4 million for administrative expenses associated with, or consequential to, these governmental and Company investigations for legal fees, accounting fees, consulting fees, employee recruitment and retention costs and other similar expenses. Approximately $21.1 million of these investigation related costs were incurred in 2007, approximately $103.0 million were incurred in 2008 and approximately $41.3 million were incurred in 2009. We expect to continue incurring additional costs in connection with the governmental and Company investigations, compliance with the DPA and related matters during its term. Although investigation related costs overall have gradually declined, we can provide no assurance that such costs will not be significant or increase in the future. These include, among others, anticipated costs associated with the retention of the Monitor and implementation of any recommendations, as discussed above, as well as anticipated costs related to the class action lawsuit and efforts of the Special Litigation Committee in connection with the ongoing shareholder derivative actions. Current Cash Position As of December 31, 2009, our consolidated cash and cash equivalents were approximately $1,158.1 million. As of December 31, 2009, our consolidated investments were approximately $114.4 million. As of December 31, 2009, we had unregulated cash of approximately $117.6 million and unregulated investments of approximately $2.8 million. Business and Financial Outlook General Economic, Political and Financial Market Conditions As a result of economic uncertainty, the states in which we operate are experiencing significant fiscal challenges, which are likely to result in budget deficits. In light of these budgetary challenges, the Medicaid segment premiums we receive likely will not keep pace with anticipated medical expense increases. While the economic downturn may increase the number of Medicaid recipients under current eligibility criteria, states may revise the eligibility criteria to reduce the number of people who are eligible for our plans. In February 2008, CMS published preliminary results of a study designed to assess the degree of coding pattern differences between Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage and the extent to which any such differences could be appropriately addressed by an adjustment to risk scores. CMS study of risk scores for Medicare populations from 2004 through 2006 found that Medicare Advantage member risk scores increased substantially more than the risk scores for the general Medicare fee-for-service population. CMS found that the overall risk scores of stayers (a CMS term referring to those persons who were enrolled either in the same Medicare Advantage plan or in Original Medicare during the study periods) in Medicare Advantage increased more than those of Original Medicare stayers. Accordingly, in the 2009 Advance Notice of Methodological Changes for Calendar Year 2009 for Medicare Advantage Capitation Rates and Part D Payment Policies, CMS summarized findings from its analysis of risk scores over the 2004-2006 time period and proposed to apply a coding intensity adjustment to contracts whose disease scores for stayers exceeded fee-for-service by twice the industry average. CMS proposed to apply an adjustment that was calculated based on those contracts that fell above this threshold. In response to the Advance Notice, CMS received a significant number of comments on the proposed adjustment for Medicare Advantage coding differences, most of which expressed disagreement with the view that CMS had identified differences in coding patterns between Medicare Advantage and fee-for-service Medicare. CMS then decided not to make a coding intensity adjustment for 2009. For calendar year 2010, a negative coding intensity adjustment factor of 3.41% will apply to all managed care plans. The coding intensity adjustment factor would be applied to beneficiaries and risk scores, resulting in a decrease in our Medicare revenue and membership. Furthermore, federal budgetary challenges or policy changes could result in rates that do not keep pace with anticipated medical expense increases, which could have a material adverse effect on our performance in the Medicaid or Medicare segments. 49 Table of Contents In addition, increasing market volatility and the tightening of the credit markets have significantly limited our ability to access external capital, which may have an adverse effect on our ability to execute our business strategy. However, we continue to pursue financing alternatives to raise additional unregulated cash, including seeking dividends from certain of our regulated subsidiaries and accessing the public and private equity and debt markets. Government funding continues to be a significant challenge to our business, particularly in light of the current economic conditions. Because the health care services we offer are through government-sponsored programs, our profitability is largely dependent on continued funding for government health care programs at or above current levels. Future Medicaid premium rate levels may be affected by continued government efforts to contain medical costs or state and federal budgetary constraints. Health care spending increases appear to be more limited than in the past as states continue to look at Medicaid programs as opportunities for budget savings, and some states may find it difficult to continue paying current rates to Medicaid health plans. In particular, we are experiencing pressure on rates in Florida and Georgia, two states from which we derive a substantial portion of our revenue. In 2009, Florida implemented Medicaid rates that made it economically unfeasible for us to continue to provide services in certain counties and programs. As a result, we withdrew from the Medicaid reform programs effective July 1, 2009, which resulted in a loss of approximately 80,000 members. New or proposed legislation in Georgia related to payment of claims, program design, eligibility determination and provider contracting may negatively impact revenues and administrative expenses for the plan in 2010 and beyond. Further, continued economic slowdowns in Florida and Georgia, as well as other states, could result in additional state actions that could adversely affect our revenues. In January 2009, the Obama Administration took office. Although the Obama Administration and Congress have expressed some support for measures intended to expand the number of citizens covered by health insurance and other changes within the health care system, the costs of implementing any of these proposals could be financed, in part, by reductions in the payments made to Medicare Advantage and other government programs. Similarly, although Congress approved the children health bill which, among things, increases federal funding to the S-CHIP and President Obama signed the ARRA that provides funding for, among other things, state Medicaid programs and aid to states to help defray budget cuts, because of the unsettled nature of these initiatives, the numerous steps required to implement them and the substantial amount of state flexibility for determining how Medicaid and S-CHIP funds will be used, we are currently unable to assess the ultimate impact that they will have on our business. It is possible that the ultimate impact of these initiatives could be negative. Execution of Business Strategy To achieve our business strategy, we continue to look for economically viable opportunities to expand our business within our existing markets, expand our current service territory and develop new product initiatives. We also are, however, evaluating various strategic alternatives, which may include entering new lines of business or markets, exiting existing lines of business or markets and/or disposing of assets depending on various factors, including changes in our business and regulatory environment, competitive position and financial resources. We also continue to rationalize our operations to enhance the likelihood that our ongoing business is profitable. To the extent that we expand our current service territory or product offerings, we expect to generate additional revenues. On the other hand, if we decide to exit certain markets, such as our exit from certain Florida counties in 2009 and the 2010 exit from PFFS, our revenues and net income could decrease. We currently do not foresee large, one-time opportunities to expand our business, such as prior efforts like the launch of PDPs in 2006 and the privatization of Georgia Medicaid in 2006. We continue to focus our resources on strengthening compliance and operating capabilities. These factors, when combined with the rationalization of our operations and the operational challenges we face, will cause us to be unable to sustain the rapid growth we have achieved in the recent past. Membership and Trends We provide managed care services targeted exclusively to government-sponsored health care programs, focused on Medicaid and Medicare, including prescription drug plans and health plans for families, children, and the aged, blind and disabled. As of December 31, 2009, we served approximately 2,321,000 members. Most of our revenues are generated by premiums consisting of fixed monthly payments per member. 50 Table of Contents We currently anticipate that our revenues and medical benefits expenses for fiscal years 2010 will be lower than in prior periods due to the previously discussed exit from our MA PFFS business and certain Florida counties. As the composition of our membership base continues to change as the result of programmatic, competitive, regulatory, benefit design, economic or other changes, we expect a corresponding change to our premium revenue, costs and margins, which may have a material adverse effect on our cash flow, profitability and results of operations. During 2009, CMS imposed a marketing sanction against us that prohibited us from the marketing of, and enrollment into, all lines of our Medicare business from March until the sanction was released in November. CMS released us from the sanction in November 2009, in time to begin enrolling beneficiaries for the 2010 contract year on November 15, 2009, which is the first day that plans may begin enrolling participants. However, as a result of the sanction, we were not eligible to receive auto-assignments of LIS dual-eligible beneficiaries into our PDP program, for January 2010 enrollment. We are eligible to receive auto-assignments of these members in subsequent months, although such assignments are expected to be at levels well below the level we typically experience in the month of January. We did not renew our contracts to participate in the MA PFFS program in 2010 or beyond. Our MA PFFS business represents approximately 31.4% of our Medicare segment revenue and 16.5% of our total premium revenue for the year ended December 31, 2009; accordingly our exit of this line of business will cause our Medicare revenue and consolidated net income to decline in 2010. We anticipate that the withdrawal from the MA PFFS business may provide approximately $40.0 million to $60.0 million of excess capital in the insurance companies that underwrite this line of business, which we may be able to dividend to our unregulated subsidiaries. However, we currently believe we will not have the benefit of these dividends prior to 2011, if at all. Any dividend of surplus capital of our applicable insurance subsidiaries, including the timing and amount of any dividend, would be subject to a variety of factors, which could materially change the aforementioned timing and amount. Those factors include the ultimate financial performance of the MA PFFS business as well as the financial performance of other lines of business that operate in those insurance subsidiaries, approval from regulatory agencies and potential changes in regulatory capital requirements. For example, our current estimate of $40.0 million to $60.0 million has declined from previous estimates of $80.0 million to $100.0 million, because the financial performance of these insurance subsidiaries worsened during 2009. In 2010, we will continue to serve our current members in our PDP program in 49 states and the District of Columbia, and our MA CCP in 12 states. For 2010, we will be below the CMS benchmarks in 19 regions, including the following eight new regions: Arizona, Central New England (Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Vermont), Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, New York, Oklahoma and Virginia. As mentioned previously, during the CMS sanction period, we were precluded from marketing our plans and enrolling new members, including low income subsidy auto-assignments, into our stand-alone PDPs. In addition, as a result of the sanction, we were not eligible to be auto-assigned LIS dual eligible beneficiaries for January 2010 membership. Accordingly, our revenues generated from our stand-alone PDPs may decrease significantly in 2010. With the sanctions resolved, we became eligible for new voluntary enrollment for January 1, 2010 and we became eligible for LIS auto-assigned membership beginning in February 2010. Unrelated to the CMS sanctions, we decided to exit the Medicare PDP program in Wisconsin for 2010, and auto-assigned PDP membership in Wisconsin will be re-assigned to other plans. Basis of Presentation The consolidated balance sheets, statements of operations, changes in stockholders equity and comprehensive income and cash flows include accounts of ours and all of our wholly-owned subsidiaries. Intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated. Segments We have two reportable business segments: Medicaid and Medicare. Medicaid Medicaid was established to provide medical assistance to low income and disabled persons, and is state operated and implemented, although it is funded and regulated by both the state and federal governments. For a more detailed description of our Medicaid segment, please see Item 1 Business Our Segments. As of December 31, 2009, we had approximately 1,349,000 Medicaid members. The following table summarizes our Medicaid segment membership by line of business as of December 31, 2009 and 2008: 51 Table of Contents Medicaid Membership As of December 31, 2009 2008 Medicaid TANF 1,094,000 1,039,000 S-CHIP 163,000 164,000 SSI and ABD 79,000 75,000 FHP 13,000 22,000 Total 1,349,000 1,300,000 For purposes of our Medicaid segment, we define our customer as the state and related governmental agencies that have common control over the contracts under which we operate in that particular state. In 2008 and 2009, we had two customers, the states of Florida and Georgia, from which we received 10% or more of our Medicaid segment premiums revenues. Medicare Medicare is a federal program that provides eligible persons age 65 and over and some disabled persons a variety of hospital, medical insurance and prescription drug benefits, and is funded by Congress and administered by CMS. For a more detailed description of our Medicare segment, please see Item 1 Business Our Segments. As of December 31, 2009, we had approximately 972,000 Medicare members. Medicare Membership As of December 31, 2009 2008 Medicare PDP 747,000 986,000 Medicare Advantage 225,000 246,000 Total 972,000 1,232,000 In our Medicare segment, we have just one customer, CMS, from which we receive substantially all of our Medicare segment premium revenue. Health and Prescription Drug Plans Premiums We receive premiums from state and federal agencies for the members that are assigned to, or have selected, us to provide health care services under Medicaid and Medicare. The premiums we receive for each member varies according to the specific government program and may vary according to many other factors, including the member geographic location, age, gender, medical history or condition, or the services rendered to the member. The premiums we receive under each of our government benefit plans are generally determined at the beginning of the contract period. These premiums are subject to adjustment throughout the term of the contract, although such adjustments are typically made at the commencement of each new contract period. The premium payments we receive are based upon eligibility lists produced by the government. From time to time, our regulators require us to reimburse them for premiums we received based on an eligibility list that the regulator later discovers contains individuals who were not eligible for any government-sponsored program or are eligible for a different premium category or a different program. CMS employs a risk-adjustment model that apportions premiums paid to all Medicare plans according to the health status of each beneficiary enrolled. The CMS risk-adjustment model pays more for Medicare members with predictably higher costs. We collect claim and encounter data from providers, who we rely on to properly code and document this data, and submit the necessary diagnosis data and coding to CMS within the prescribed deadlines and CMS determines the final risk score based on its interpretation and acceptance of the data we provided. The claims and encounter data provided to determine the risk score are subject to subsequent audit by CMS. These audits may result in the refund of premiums to CMS that were previously received by us. While our experience to date has not resulted in a material refund, this refund could be significant in the future, which would reduce our premium revenue in the year that CMS requires repayment from us. See "Risk Factors - CMS risk adjustment payment system makes our revenue and results of operations difficult to predict and could result in material retroactive adjustments that have a material adverse effect on our results of operations for additional risks associated with a current CMS audit of one of our plans. These periodic premium rate adjustments, risk-adjusted premiums and member eligibility determinations, adversely impact our ability to predict what our future revenues will be under each of our government contracts even when we believe membership will remain constant. For further detail about the CMS reimbursement methodology under the PDP program, see Critical Accounting Policies below. 52 Table of Contents Services/Coverage Medicaid The Medicaid programs and services we offer to our members vary by state and county and are designed to serve our various constituencies effectively in the communities we serve. Although our Medicaid contracts determine to a large extent the type and scope of health care services that we arrange for our members, in certain markets we customize our benefits in ways that we believe make our products more attractive. Our Medicaid plans provide our members with access to a broad spectrum of medical benefits from many facets of primary care and preventive programs to full hospitalization and tertiary care. In general, members are required to use our network, except in cases of emergencies, transition of care or when network providers are unavailable to meet a member medical needs, and generally must receive a referral from their PCP in order to receive health care from a specialist, such as an orthopedic surgeon or neurologist. Members do not pay any premiums, deductibles or co-payments for most of our Medicaid plans. Medicare Through our Medicare Advantage plans, we also cover a wide spectrum of medical services. We provide additional benefits not covered by Original Medicare, such as vision, dental and hearing services. Through these enhanced benefits, the out-of-pocket expenses incurred by our members are reduced, which allows our members to better manage their health care costs. Most of our Medicare Advantage plans require members to pay a co-payment, which varies depending on the services and level of benefits provided. Typically, members of our MA CCPs are required to use our network of providers except in cases such as emergencies, transition of care or when specialty providers are unavailable to meet a member medical needs. MA CCP members may see an out-of-network specialist if they receive a referral from their PCP and may pay incremental cost-sharing. MA PFFS plans are open-access plans that allow members to be seen by any physician or facility that participates in the Medicare program, is willing to bill us for reimbursement and accepts our terms and conditions. We also offer special needs plans to individuals who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, or D-SNPs, in most of our markets. D-SNPs are designed to provide specialized care and support for beneficiaries who are dually eligible for both Medicare and Medicaid. We believe that our D-SNPs are attractive to these beneficiaries due to the enhanced benefit offerings and clinical support programs. The Medicare Part D benefit, which provides prescription drug benefits, is available to Medicare Advantage enrollees as well as Original Medicare enrollees. We offer Part D coverage as stand-alone PDPs and as a component of many of our Medicare Advantage plans. Depending on medical coverage type, a beneficiary has various options for accessing drug coverage. Beneficiaries enrolled in Original Medicare can either join a stand-alone PDP or forego Part D drug coverage. MA PFFS beneficiaries can join a MA PFFS plan that has Part D drug coverage or join a plan without such coverage and choose either to obtain a drug benefit from a stand-alone PDP or forego Part D drug coverage. Beneficiaries enrolled in MA CCPs can join a plan with Part D coverage or forego Part D coverage. Medical Benefits Expense Our largest expense is the cost of medical benefits that we provide, which is based primarily on our arrangements with health care providers and utilization of health care services by our members. Our profitability depends on our ability to predict and effectively manage medical benefits expense relative to the primarily fixed premiums we receive. Our arrangements with providers primarily fall into two broad categories: capitation arrangements, pursuant to which we pay the capitated providers a fixed fee per member and fee-for-service as well as risk-sharing arrangements, pursuant to which the provider assumes a portion of the risk of the cost of the health care provided. Capitation payments represented 11.0%, 12.0% and 11.0% of our total medical benefits expense for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Other components of medical benefits expense are variable and require estimation and ongoing cost management. 53 Table of Contents We use a variety of techniques to manage our medical benefits expense, including payment methods to providers, referral requirements, quality and disease management programs, reinsurance and member co-payments and premiums for some of our Medicare plans. National health care costs have been increasing at a higher rate than the general inflation rate; however, relatively small changes in our medical benefits expense relative to premiums that we receive can create significant changes in our financial results. Changes in health care laws, regulations and practices, levels of use of health care services, competitive pressures, hospital costs, major epidemics, terrorism or bio-terrorism, new medical technologies and other external factors could reduce our ability to manage our medical benefits expense effectively. One of our primary tools for measuring profitability is our MBR, the ratio of our medical benefits expense to the premiums we receive. Changes in the MBR from period to period result from, among other things, changes in Medicaid and Medicare funding, changes in the mix of Medicaid and Medicare membership, our ability to manage medical costs and changes in accounting estimates related to incurred but not reported claims ( IBNR ). Estimation of medical benefits expense and medical benefits payable is our most significant critical accounting estimate. See Critical Accounting Policies below. We use MBRs both to monitor our management of medical benefits expense and to make various business decisions, including what health care plans to offer, what geographic areas to enter or exit and the selection of health care providers. Although MBRs play an important role in our business strategy, we may, for example, be willing to enter into new geographical markets and/or enter into provider arrangements that might produce a less favorable MBR if those arrangements, such as capitation or risk-sharing, would likely lower our exposure to variability in medical costs and for other reasons. Critical Accounting Policies In the ordinary course of business, we make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of our results of operations and financial condition in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies relating to revenue recognition, medical benefits expense and medical benefits payable, and goodwill and intangible assets are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results and require management most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Revenue recognition . Our Medicaid contracts with state governments are generally multi-year contracts subject to annual renewal provisions. Our Medicare Advantage and PDP contracts with CMS generally have terms of one year. We recognize premium revenues in the period in which we are obligated to provide services to our members. We estimate, on an ongoing basis, the amount of member billings that may not be fully collectible or that will be returned based on historical trends, anticipated or actual MBRs, and other factors. An allowance is established for the estimated amount that may not be collectible and a liability is established for premium expected to be returned. Historically, the allowance has not been significant relative to premium revenue. The payment we receive monthly from CMS for our PDP program generally represents our bid amount for providing prescription drug insurance coverage. We recognize premium revenue for providing this insurance coverage ratably over the term of our annual contract. Premiums collected in advance are deferred and reported as unearned premiums in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and amounts that have not been received by the end of the period remain on the balance sheet classified as premium receivables. Premium payments that we receive are based upon eligibility lists produced by our customers. From time to time, the states or CMS require us to reimburse them for premiums that we received based on an eligibility list that a state or CMS later discovers contains individuals who were not eligible for any government-sponsored program or are eligible for a different premium category, different program, or belong to a different plan other than ours. We record adjustments to revenues based on member retroactivity, if deemed material. These adjustments reflect changes in the number of and eligibility status of enrollees subsequent to when revenue was billed. We estimate the amount of outstanding retroactivity adjustments each period and adjust premium revenue accordingly; if appropriate, the estimates of retroactivity adjustments are based on historical trends, premiums billed, the volume of member and contract renewal activity and other information. Changes to member retroactivity adjustment estimates had a minimal impact on adjustments recorded during the periods presented. Our government contracts establish monthly rates per member, but may have additional amounts due to us based on items such as age, working status or medical history. CMS employs a risk-adjustment model to determine the premium amount for each member. This model apportions premiums paid to all MA plans according to the health status of each beneficiary enrolled. Under the risk adjustment model, the settlement payment is based on each member preceding year medical diagnosis data. The final settlement payment amount under the risk adjustment model is made in August of the following year, allowing for the majority of medical claim run out. As a result of this process, our CMS monthly premium payments per member may change materially, either favorably or unfavorably. 54 Table of Contents The CMS risk adjustment model pays more for Medicare members with predictably higher costs. Diagnosis data from inpatient and ambulatory treatment settings are used to calculate the risk adjusted premium payment to us. We collect claims and encounter data and submit the necessary diagnosis data to CMS within prescribed deadlines. We estimate risk adjustments to revenues based upon the diagnosis data submitted to CMS and ultimately accepted by CMS, and record such adjustments in our results of operations. However, due to the variability of the assumptions that we use in our estimates, the actual results may differ from the amounts that management estimated. If our estimates are materially incorrect, it may have an adverse effect on our results of operations in future periods. Historically, we have not experienced significant differences between the amounts that we have recorded and the revenues that we actually received. The claims and encounter data submitted to CMS to determine our risk-adjusted premium are subject to audit by CMS subsequent to the annual settlement. CMS has begun a program to perform audits of selected MA plans to validate the provider coding practices under the risk-adjustment model used to calculate the premium paid for each MA member. Our Florida HMO contract has been selected by CMS for audit for the 2007 contract year and we anticipate that CMS will conduct additional audits of other contract and contract years on an ongoing basis. The CMS audit of this data involves a review of a sample of provider medical records for the contract under audit. We are unable to estimate the financial impact of any audit that is underway or that may be conducted in the future. We are also unable to determine whether any conclusions that CMS may make, based on the audit of our plan and others, will cause us to change our revenue estimation process. At this time, we do not know whether CMS will require retroactive or subsequent payment adjustments to be made using an audit methodology that may not compare the coding of our providers to the coding of Original Medicare and other MA plan providers, and how, if at all, CMS will extrapolate its findings to the entire contract. However, it is reasonably possible that a payment adjustment as a result of these audits could occur, and that any such adjustment could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows, possibly in 2010 and beyond. Other amounts included in this balance as a reduction of premium revenue represent the return of premium associated with certain of our Medicaid contracts. These contracts require us to expend a minimum percentage of premiums on eligible medical expense, and to the extent that we expend less than the minimum percentage of the premiums on eligible medical expense, we are required to refund all or some portion of the difference between the minimum and our actual allowable medical expense. We estimate the amounts due to the state as a return of premium each period based on the terms of our contract with the applicable state agency. Estimating medical benefits expense and medical benefits payable. The cost of medical benefits is recognized in the period in which services are provided and includes an estimate of the IBNR cost of medical benefits. We contract with various health care providers for the provision of certain medical care services to our members and generally compensate those providers on a fee-for-service or capitated basis or pursuant to certain risk-sharing arrangements. Capitation represents fixed payments generally on a PMPM basis to participating physicians and other medical specialists as compensation for providing comprehensive health care services. Generally, by the terms of most of our capitation agreements, capitation payments we make to capitated providers alleviate any further obligation we have to pay the capitated provider for the actual medical expenses of the member. Participating physician capitation payments for the years ended December 31, 2007, 2008 and 2009 were approximately 11.0%, 12.0% and 11.0% of total medical benefits expense, respectively. Medical benefits expense has two main components: direct medical expenses and medically-related administrative costs. Direct medical expenses include amounts paid to hospitals, physicians and providers of ancillary services, such as laboratory and pharmacy. Medically-related administrative costs include items such as case and disease management, utilization review services, quality assurance and on-call nurses. Medical benefits payable represents amounts for claims fully adjudicated awaiting payment disbursement and estimates for IBNR. The medical benefits payable estimate has been and continues to be the most significant estimate included in our financial statements. We historically have used and continue to use a consistent methodology for estimating our medical benefits expense and medical benefits payable. Our policy is to record management best estimate of medical benefits payable based on the experience and information available to us at the time. This estimate is determined utilizing standard actuarial methodologies based upon historical experience and key assumptions consisting of trend factors and completion factors using an assumption of moderately adverse conditions, which vary by business segment. These standard actuarial methodologies include using, among other factors, contractual requirements, historic utilization trends, the interval between the date services are rendered and the date claims are paid, denied claims activity, disputed claims activity, benefits changes, expected health care cost inflation, seasonality patterns, maturity of lines of business and changes in membership. The factors and assumptions described above that are used to develop our estimate of medical benefits expense and medical benefits payable inherently are subject to greater variability when there is more limited experience or information available to us. The ultimate claims payment amounts, patterns and trends for new products and geographic areas cannot be precisely predicted at their onset, since we, the providers and the members do not have experience in these products or geographic areas. Standard accepted actuarial methodologies, discussed above, would allow for this inherent variability, which could result in larger differences between the originally estimated medical benefits payable and the actual claims amounts paid. Conversely, during periods where our products and geographies are more stable and mature, we have more reliable claims payment patterns and trend experience. With more reliable data, we should be able to more closely estimate the ultimate claims payment amounts; therefore, we may experience smaller differences between our original estimate of medical benefits payable and the actual claim amounts paid. 55 Table of Contents In developing our estimates, we apply different estimation methods depending on the month for which incurred claims are being estimated. For the more recent months, which constitute the majority of the amount of the medical benefits payable, we estimate claims incurred by applying observed trend factors to the PMPM costs for prior months, which costs have been estimated using completion factors, in order to estimate the PMPM costs for the most recent months. We validate our estimates of the most recent PMPM costs by comparing the most recent months utilization levels to the utilization levels in prior months and actuarial techniques that incorporate a historical analysis of claim payments, including trends in cost of care provided and timeliness of submission and processing of claims. Many aspects of the managed care business are not predictable. These aspects include the incidences of illness or disease state (such as cardiac heart failure cases, cases of upper respiratory illness, the length and severity of the flu season, diabetes, the number of full-term versus premature births and the number of neonatal intensive care babies). Therefore, we must rely upon historical experience, as continually monitored, to reflect the ever-changing mix, needs and growth of our membership in our trend assumptions. Among the factors considered by management are changes in the level of benefits provided to members, seasonal variations in utilization, identified industry trends and changes in provider reimbursement arrangements, including changes in the percentage of reimbursements made on a capitation as opposed to a fee-for-service basis. These considerations are aggregated in the trend in medical benefits expense. Other external factors such as government-mandated benefits or other regulatory changes, catastrophes and epidemics may impact medical cost trends. Other internal factors such as system conversions and claims processing interruptions may impact our ability to accurately predict estimates of historical completion factors or medical cost trends. Medical cost trends potentially are more volatile than other segments of the economy. Management is required to use considerable judgment in the selection of medical benefits expense trends and other actuarial model inputs. Also included in medical benefits payable are estimates for provider settlements due to clarification of contract terms, out-of-network reimbursement, claims payment differences as well as amounts due to contracted providers under risk-sharing arrangements. We record reserves for estimated referral claims related to health care providers under contract with us who are financially troubled or insolvent and who may not be able to honor their obligations for the costs of medical services provided by other providers. In these instances, we may be required to honor these obligations for legal or business reasons. Based on our current assessment of providers under contract with us, such losses have not been and are not expected to be significant. Changes in medical benefits payable estimates are primarily the result of obtaining more complete claims information and medical expense trend data over time. Volatility in members needs for medical services, provider claims submissions and our payment processes result in identifiable patterns emerging several months after the causes of deviations from assumed trends occur. Since our estimates are based upon PMPM claims experience, changes cannot typically be explained by any single factor, but are the result of a number of interrelated variables, all influencing the resulting experienced medical cost trend. Differences in our financial statements between actual experience and estimates used to establish the liability, which we refer to as prior period developments, are recorded in the period when such differences become known, and have the effect of increasing or decreasing the reported medical benefits expense and resulting MBR in such periods. The following table provides a reconciliation of the total medical benefits payable balances as of December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007: As of December 31, 2009 % of Total 2008 % of Total 2007 % of Total (Dollars in thousands) Claims adjudicated, but not yet paid $ 53,006 7 % $ 77,117 10 % $ 68,948 13 % IBNR 749,509 93 % 689,062 90 % 469,198 87 % Total Medical benefits payable $ 802,515 $ 766,179 $ 538,146 56 Table of Contents Medical benefits payable includes reserves for claims adjudicated, but not yet paid, an estimate of claims incurred but not reported, reserves for medically-related administrative costs and other liabilities, including estimates for provider settlements due to clarification of contract terms, out-of-network reimbursement, claims payment differences and amounts due to contracted providers under risk-sharing arrangements. The following table provides a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balance of medical benefits payable for the following periods: Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 (Dollars in thousands) Balances as of beginning of period $ 766,179 $ 538,146 $ 460,728 Medical benefits incurred related to: Current period 5,983,537 5,538,262 4,313,581 Prior periods (121,080 ) (8,046 ) (100,197 ) Total 5,862,457 5,530,216 4,213,384 Medical benefits paid related to: Current period (5,250,859 ) (4,848,440 ) (3,781,425 ) Prior periods (575,262 ) (453,743 ) (354,541 ) Total (5,826,121 ) (5,302,183 ) (4,135,966 ) Balances as of end of period $ 802,515 $ 766,179 $ 538,146 Changes in medical benefits payable estimates are primarily the result of obtaining more complete claims information and medical expense trend data over time. Differences in our financial statements between actual experience and estimates used to establish the liability, which we refer to as prior period developments, are recorded in the period when such differences become known, and have the effect of increasing or decreasing the reported medical benefits expense and resulting MBR in such periods. Medical benefits payable recorded at December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 developed favorably by approximately $121.1 million, $8.0 million and $100.2 million in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. These prior period developments were primarily attributable to the release of the provision for moderately adverse conditions, which is included as part of the assumptions, and favorable variances between actual experience and key assumptions relating to trend factors and completion factors for claims incurred in prior years. The release of the provision for moderately adverse conditions was substantially offset by the provision for moderately adverse conditions established for claims incurred in the current year. Accordingly, the change in the amount of the incurred claims related to prior years in the Medical benefits payable does not directly correspond to an increase in net income recognized during the period. We consistently recognize the actuarial best estimate of the ultimate medical benefits payable within a level of confidence, as required by actuarial standards of practice, which require that the medical benefits payable be adequate under moderately adverse conditions. As we establish the liability for each year, we ensure that our assumptions appropriately consider moderately adverse conditions. When a portion of the development related to the prior year incurred claims is offset by an increase determined appropriate to address moderately adverse conditions for the current year incurred claims, we do not consider that offset amount as having any impact on net income during the period. Goodwill and intangible assets. We obtained goodwill and intangible assets as a result of the acquisitions of our subsidiaries. Goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair market value of net assets acquired. Intangible assets include provider networks, membership contracts, trademarks, non-compete agreements, state contracts, licenses and permits. Our intangible assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives ranging from approximately one to 26 years. We review goodwill and intangible assets for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances occur that may affect the estimated useful life or the recoverability of the remaining balance of goodwill or intangible assets. Events or changes in circumstances would include significant changes in membership, state funding, medical contracts and provider networks. We evaluate the impairment of goodwill and intangible assets using both the income and market approach. In doing so, we must make assumptions and estimates, such as the discount factor, in determining the estimated fair values. While we believe these assumptions and estimates are appropriate, other assumptions and estimates could be applied and might produce significantly different results. An impairment loss is recognized for goodwill and intangible assets if the carrying value of such costs exceeds its fair value. We select the second quarter of each year for our annual impairment test, which generally coincides with the finalization of state and federal contract negotiations and our initial budgeting process. Accordingly, we have assessed the book value of goodwill and other intangible assets and believe that such assets have not been impaired as of December 31, 2009. 57 Table of Contents Based on the general economic conditions and outlook during 2008, we performed a similar analysis of the underlying valuation of Goodwill at December 31, 2008. Based on the valuation performed, we determined that the Goodwill associated with our Medicare reporting unit was impaired. The impairment to our Medicare reporting unit was due to, among other things, the anticipated operating environment resulting from regulatory changes and new health care legislation, and the resulting effects on our future membership trends. In 2008, we recorded an expense of $78.3 million to Goodwill impairment, and a corresponding amount to Goodwill to reflect its fair value as presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. In addition, we have evaluated the intangible assets in connection with the PFFS exit in 2010, which primarily consisted of state licenses for the insurance companies. As we continue to use these company licenses for other lines of business and the licenses have a market value, we determined that these assets have not been impaired as of December 31, 2009. Results of Operations The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income data, expressed as a percentage of total revenues for each period indicated. The historical results are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for any future period. Percentage of Total Revenues For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 Statement of Operations Data: Revenues: Premium 99.8 % 99.4 % 98.4 % Investment and other income 0.2 % 0.6 % 1.6 % Total revenues 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Expenses: Medical benefits 85.2 % 84.8 % 78.2 % Selling, general and administrative 13.0 % 14.3 % 14.2 % Depreciation and amortization 0.3 % 0.3 % 0.3 % Interest 0.1 % 0.2 % 0.3 % Goodwill impairment % 1.2 % % Total expenses 98.6 % 100.8 % 93.0 % Income (loss) before income taxes 1.4 % (0.8 )% 7.0 % Income tax expense (benefit) 0.8 % (0.2 )% 3.0 % Net income (loss) 0.6 % (0.6 )% 4.0 % Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2009 to Year Ended December 31, 2008 Premium revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2009, total premium revenue increased $384.1 million, or 5.9%, to $6,867.2 million from $6,483.1 million for the same period in the prior year due to increases in premium revenue in both the Medicaid and Medicare segments, as discussed below. Total membership decreased by 211,000 members, or 8.3%, from 2,532,000 at December 31, 2008 to 2,321,000 at December 31, 2009. Premium Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 6,867.2 $ 6,483.1 Membership 2,321,000 2,532,000 Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2009, Medicaid segment premium revenue increased $265.6 million, or 8.9%, to $3,256.7 million from $2,991.1 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase in Medicaid segment revenue is primarily due to the inclusion of operations for the Hawaii ABD program, which was not present for the same period in the prior year. This increase was partially offset by the impact of a loss of membership in Florida and the Ohio ABD program, with the remaining change due to a change in the demographic mix of our members. Aggregate membership in our Medicaid segment grew from 1,300,000 members at December 31, 2008 to 1,349,000 at December 31, 2009. 58 Table of Contents Medicaid Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 3,256.7 $ 2,991.1 % of Total Premium Revenues 47.4 % 46.1 % Membership 1,349,000 1,300,000 % of Total Membership 58.1 % 51.3 % Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2009, Medicare segment premium revenue increased $118.5 million, or 3.4%, to $3,610.5 million from $3,492.0 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase in Medicare segment revenue is primarily due to a change in the demographic mix of our members, partially offset by a loss in PDP membership of approximately 239,000 members. Aggregate membership within the Medicare segment declined by 260,000 members, or 21.1%, from 1,232,000 members at December 31, 2008 to 972,000 members at December 31, 2009. Medicare Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (Dollars in millions) Revenues (in millions) $ 3,610.5 $ 3,492.0 % of Total Premium Revenues 52.6 % 53.9 % Membership 972,000 1,232,000 % of Total Membership 41.9 % 48.7 % Investment and other income. For the year ended December 31, 2009, investment and other income decreased approximately $27.9 million, or 71.9%, to $10.9 million from $38.8 million for the same period in the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to reduced market rates on lower average investment and cash balances. Medical benefits expense. For the year ended December 31, 2009, total medical benefits expense increased $332.3 million, or 6.0%, to $5,862.5 million from $5,530.2 million for the same period in the prior year due to membership increases, primarily in our Medicaid segment, partially offset by our loss in PDP membership. The change in the demographic mix of our members and overall increased utilization patterns and costs of our members accounted for the majority of the remaining change. Our MBR was 85.4% for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to 85.3% for the same period in the prior year. Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (Dollars in millions) Medical Benefits Expense $ 5,862.5 $ 5,530.2 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (92.9 )(1) Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 5,437.3 MBR as reported 85.4 % 85.3 % MBR as adjusted 83.9 %(1) ____________ (1) Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in the year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $92.9 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time, which resulted in an unfavorable impact on MBR. Consequently, we believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2009, Medicaid medical benefits expense increased $273.2 million, or 10.8%, to $2,810.6 million from $2,537.4 million for the same period in the prior year. Our Medicaid MBR was 86.3% for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to 84.8% for the same period in the prior year. The Medicaid segment medical benefits expense for the year ended December 31, 2009, increased $312.7 million, or 12.5%, to approximately $2,810.6 million from approximately $2,497.9 million, as adjusted, for the same period in the prior year. This increase was due to the growth in membership primarily in the Hawaii ABD program. The changes in the utilization patterns of our members in our other markets accounted for the remaining change. The Medicaid MBR for the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, was 86.3% compared to 83.5% as adjusted for the same period in the prior year. The increase in MBR is primarily the result of higher costs associated with the Hawaii business as well as premium rate increases during the past year that were below our medical cost trend, or in some cases, rate decreases. 59 Table of Contents Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (Dollars in millions) Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense $ 2,810.6 $ 2,537.4 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (39.5 )(1) Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 2,497.9 MBR as reported 86.3 % 84.8 % MBR as adjusted 83.5 %(1) ____________ (1) Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $39.5 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time, which resulted in an unfavorable impact on MBR. Consequently, we believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2009, Medicare medical benefits expense increased $59.1 million, or 2.0%, to $3,051.9 million from $2,992.8 million for the same period in the prior year. Our Medicare MBR was 84.5% for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to 85.7% for the same period in the prior year. Medicare medical benefits expense for the year ended December 31, 2009, increased $112.5 million, or 3.8%, to $3,051.9 million from $2,939.4 million, as adjusted, for the same period in the prior year. The decrease was driven primarily by an unfavorable variance in PDP MBR. As previously discussed, we withdrew from offering PFFS plans as of January 1, 2010. The overall decrease was partially offset by a favorable change in the demographic mix of our members. For the year ended December 31, 2009, the Medicare MBR was 84.5% compared to 84.2% as adjusted for the same period in the prior year, primarily due to the increasing MBR in our PDP product. Medicare Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (Dollars in millions) Medicare Medical Benefits Expense $ 3,051.9 $ 2,992.8 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (53.4 )(1) Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 2,939.4 MBR as reported 84.5 % 85.7 % MBR as adjusted 84.2 %(1) ____________ (1) Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicare Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $53.4 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time. Consequently, we believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medicare Medical Benefits Expense. Selling, general and administrative expense. For the year ended December 31, 2009, selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expenses decreased approximately $40.5 million, or 4.3%, to $892.9 million from $933.4 million for the same period in the prior year. The reduction in SG&A expense was primarily driven by decreased legal, professional and retention expenses consequential to the governmental and Company investigations of $61.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, as well as lower sales and marketing costs 60 Table of Contents caused by the CMS sanction and reduced Florida Medicaid sales costs. The lower SG&A expense was partially offset by an increase in expense related to the resolution of certain of the government investigations in the amount of approximately $59.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2009, as well as investments to improve operating efficiency and effectiveness and to remediate issues in conjunction with the CMS sanction. Our SG&A expense to total revenue ratio ( SG&A ratio ) was 13.0% and 14.3% for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Selling, General and Administrative Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (Dollars in millions) SG&A (in millions) $ 892.9 $ 933.4 SG&A expense to total revenue ratio 13.0 % 14.3 % Interest expense . Interest expense decreased $5.4 million, or 45.8%, to $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2009 from $11.8 million for the same period in the prior year. The decrease resulted from our repayment in full of the outstanding balance under our senior secured credit facility in May 2009. Income tax expense (benefit). For the year ended December 31, 2009, income tax increased $69.5 million to an expense of $53.1 million from a benefit of $(16.3) million for the same period in the prior year. The tax effective rate was approximately 57.1% and (30.7)% in the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily attributable to non-deductible amounts accrued in 2009 related to certain government investigation related matters and the tax benefit of the goodwill impairment incurred in 2008. Income Tax Expense (Benefit) For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (Dollars in millions) Income tax expense (benefit) $ 53.1 $ (16.3 ) Effective tax rate 57.1 % (30.7 %) Net income (loss). Net income increased approximately $76.7 million to $39.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2009 from a net loss of $36.8 million in the prior year period. The increase in net income is due primarily to decreased SG&A expenses and an impairment charge of goodwill for the Medicare reporting unit, that was recorded in 2008 and did not recur 2009. Net Income (Loss) For the Year Ended December 31, 2009 2008 (In millions, except per share data) Net income (loss) $ 39.9 $ (36.8 ) Net income (loss) per diluted share $ 0.95 $ (0.89 ) Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2008 to Year Ended December 31, 2007 Premium revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2008, total premium revenue increased $1,178.2 million, or 22.2%, to $6,483.1 million from $5,304.9 million for the same period in the prior year due to increases in premium revenue in both the Medicaid and Medicare segments, as discussed below. Total membership grew by 159,000 members, or 6.7%, from 2,373,000 at December 31, 2007 to 2,532,000 at December 31, 2008. Premium Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 6,483.1 $ 5,304.9 Membership 2,532,000 2,373,000 Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2008, Medicaid segment premium revenue increased $299.3 million, or 11.1%, to $2,991.1 million from $2,691.8 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase in Medicaid segment revenue was primarily due to increases in membership, as well as premium rate increases in certain of our markets. Medicaid membership grew from 1,232,000 members at December 31, 2007 to 1,300,000 at December 31, 2008. 61 Table of Contents Medicaid Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Revenues $ 2,991.1 $ 2,691.8 % of Total Premium Revenues 46.1 % 50.7 % Membership 1,300,000 1,232,000 % of Total Membership 51.3 % 51.9 % Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2008, Medicare segment premium revenue increased $878.9 million, or 33.6%, to $3,492.0 million from $2,613.1 million for the same period in the prior year. Growth in our PFFS product contributed $865.0 million of the change in revenue. Membership within the Medicare segment grew by 91,000 members, or 8.0%, from 1,141,000 members at December 31, 2007 to 1,232,000 members at December 31, 2008, principally due to growth in the PFFS product launched in 2007. As previously disclosed, we withdrew from offering PFFS plans as of January 1, 2010. Medicare Revenues and Membership For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Revenues (in millions) $ 3,492.0 $ 2,613.1 % of Total Premium Revenues 53.9 % 49.3 % Membership 1,232,000 1,141,000 % of Total Membership 48.7 % 48.1 % Investment and other income. For the year ended December 31, 2008, investment and other income decreased approximately $47.1 million, or 54.8%, to $38.8 million from $85.9 million for the same period in the prior year. The decrease is primarily due to an overall decrease in invested assets, coupled with a lower interest rate environment. The decrease is also attributable to the non-recurring gain from the settlement of a legal matter in the amount of approximately $9.0 million, which was recorded 2007. A similar gain did not occur in the fiscal year 2008. Medical benefits expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, total medical benefits expense increased $1,316.8 million, or 31.3%, to $5,530.2 million from $4,213.4 million for the same period in the prior year due to membership increases, primarily in our Medicare Advantage products. The demographic mix of our members and overall increased utilization patterns and costs of our members accounted for the majority of the remaining change. Our MBR was 85.3% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 79.4% for the same period in the prior year. Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Medical Benefits Expense $ 5,530.2 $ 4,213.4 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (92.9 )(1) 92.9 (2) Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 5,437.3 $ 4,306.3 MBR as reported 85.3 % 79.4 % MBR as adjusted 83.9 %(1) 81.2 %(2) ____________ (1) We believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in the year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $92.9 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time. Consequently, we believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. (2) We believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it does not take into account the claims information that has become available as of the date of filing our 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing the 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, 62 Table of Contents the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for medical benefits expense for year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medical Benefits Expense and Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted is approximately $92.9 million. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. Medicaid . For the year ended December 31, 2008, medical benefits expense increased $400.7 million, or 18.8%, to $2,537.4 million from $2,136.7 million for the same period in the prior year. Our Medicaid MBR was 84.8% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 79.4% for the same period in the prior year. Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense $ 2,537.4 $ 2,136.7 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (39.5 )(1) 39.5 (2) Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 2,497.9 $ 2,176.2 MBR as reported 84.8 % 79.4 % MBR as adjusted 83.5 %(1) 80.8 %(2) ____________ (1) We believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $39.5 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time. Consequently, we believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. (2) We believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it does not take into account the claims information that has become available as of the date of filing the 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing our 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for medical benefits expense for year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted is approximately $39.5 million. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medical Benefits Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, Medicaid medical benefits expense as adjusted increased $321.7 million, or 14.8%, to $2,497.9 million from $2,176.2 million for the same period in the prior year. Membership growth in our Medicaid segment accounted for $212.9 million of the increase, partially offset by the decrease in medical benefits expense resulting from our Connecticut Medicaid withdrawal totaling approximately $62.8 million. The remaining change is attributed to the demographic mix of our members and overall increased utilization patterns and costs. Absent the adjustment that was recorded in 2007 for the favorable medical benefits development, our MBR would have been 83.5% and 80.8% for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Medicare . For the year ended December 31, 2008, medical benefits expense increased $916.1 million, or 44.1%, to $2,992.8 million from $2,076.7 million for the same period in the prior year due to the increases in medical benefits expense in the Medicare segments, as discussed below. Our Medicare MBR was 85.7% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 79.5% for the same period in the prior year. 63 Table of Contents Medicare Medical Benefits Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Medicare Medical Benefits Expense $ 2,992.8 $ 2,076.7 Non-recurring IBNR adjustment (53.4 )(1) 53.4 (2) Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted $ 2,939.4 $ 2,130.1 MBR as reported 85.7 % 79.5 % MBR as adjusted 84.2 %(1) 81.5 %(2) ____________ (1) We believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it reflects the favorable development that otherwise would have been recognized in year ended December 31, 2008 if we had timely filed our 2007 Form 10-K. Due to the delay in filing our 2007 Form 10-K, we were able to review substantially complete claims information that had become available due to the substantial lapse in time between December 31, 2007 and the date we filed our 2007 Form 10-K; therefore, the favorable development was reported in 2007 instead of 2008 as it otherwise would have been. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicare Medical Benefits Expense, which has been determined based on the actuarially determined methods. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2008 is approximately $53.4 million higher than it otherwise would have been if we had filed our 2007 Form 10-K on time. Consequently, we believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2008 will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medicare Medical Benefits Expense. (2) We believe that Medicare Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007 is a non-GAAP financial measure because it does not take into account the claims information that had become available as of the date of filing our 2007 Form 10-K. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is Medicare Medical Benefits Expense, which was determined based on the substantially complete claims information that had subsequently become available as of the date of filing the 2007 Form 10-K. Consequently, the amounts we recorded in accordance with GAAP for medical benefits expense for year ended December 31, 2007 were based on actual claims paid. The difference between Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted is approximately $53.4 million. Thus, our recorded amounts for Medicare Medical Benefits Expense and MBR for the year ended December 31, 2007 both include the effect of using actual claims paid. Consequently, we believe that Medicaid Medical Benefits Expense as adjusted for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was based on our actuarially-determined estimate, will better facilitate a year over year comparison of our Medicare Medical Benefits Expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, Medicare medical benefits expense as adjusted increased $809.3 million, or 38.0%, to $2,939.4 million from $2,130.1 million for the same period in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to the growth in membership, principally with the launch of PFFS, which accounted for $431.0 million of the increase. Increased health care costs and the demographic change in membership accounted for the remaining increase. For the year ended December 31, 2008, the Medicare MBR as adjusted was 84.2% compared to 81.5% for the same period in the prior year, primarily due to the increasing MBR in our PDP product. Selling, general and administrative expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expenses increased approximately $166.8 million, or 21.8%, to $933.4 million from $766.6 million for the same period in the prior year. Administrative expenses associated with, or consequential to, the government and Special Committee investigations, including legal fees, consulting fees, employee recruitment and retention costs, and similar expenses were approximately $103.0 and $21.1 million in the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The increase in SG&A expense resulting from the substantially higher government and Special Committee investigation costs incurred in 2008 were partially off set by the $50.0 million accrual that was recorded in 2007 for our potential liability in connection with the ultimate resolution of the investigation related matters. The remaining increase was primarily due to our investments in information technology and sales and marketing activities, as well as increased spending necessary to support and sustain our membership growth. Our SG&A expense to total revenue ratio ( SG&A ratio ) was 14.3% and 14.2% for the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Selling, General and Administrative Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) SG&A (in millions) $ 933.4 $ 766.6 SG&A expense to total revenue ratio 14.3 % 14.2 % 64 Table of Contents Interest expense . Interest expense decreased $2.2 million, or 15.7%, to $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 from $14.0 million for the same period in the prior year. The decrease relates to the reduced amount of debt outstanding and the lower cost of borrowing given the lower interest rate environment in 2008 versus higher interest rates in 2007. Income tax (benefit) expense. For the year ended December 31, 2008, income tax decreased $178.0 million to a benefit of $16.3 million from expense of $161.7 million for the same period in the prior year. The tax effective rate was approximately (30.7)% and 42.8% in the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate was attributed to the tax benefit of the goodwill impairment and, to a lesser extent, tax-exempt investment income on certain investments, offset by the non-deductibility of certain compensation costs related to changes in senior management and state taxes. Income Tax (Benefit) Expense For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (Dollars in millions) Income tax (benefit) expense $ (16.3 ) $ 161.7 Effective tax rate (30.7 %) 42.8 % Net (loss) income. Net income decreased approximately $253.0 million to a net loss of $36.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2008 from net income of $216.2 in the prior year period. The decrease is primarily due to the period-over-period increase in MBR, as medical benefits expense grew at a faster pace than premium revenues during year ended December 31, 2008, the goodwill impairment recorded in 2008 and the increase in SG&A expenses associated with, or consequential to, the government and Special Committee investigations. Net (Loss) Income For the Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 (In millions, except per share data) Net (loss) income $ (36.8 ) $ 216.2 Net (loss) income per diluted share $ (0.89 ) $ 5.16 Liquidity and Capital Resources Overview Cash Generating Activities Our business consists of operations conducted by our regulated subsidiaries, including HMOs and insurance subsidiaries, and our non-regulated subsidiaries. The primary sources of cash for our regulated subsidiaries include premium revenue, investment income and capital contributions made by us to our regulated subsidiaries. Our regulated subsidiaries are each subject to applicable state regulations that, among other things, require the maintenance of minimum levels of capital and surplus. Our regulated subsidiaries primary uses of cash include payment of medical expenses, management fees to our non-regulated third-party administrator subsidiary (the TPA ) and direct administrative costs, which are not covered by the agreement with the TPA, such as selling expenses and legal costs. We refer collectively to the cash and investment balances maintained by our regulated subsidiaries as regulated cash and regulated investments, respectively. The primary sources of cash for our non-regulated subsidiaries are management fees received from our regulated subsidiaries, investment income and dividends from our regulated subsidiaries. Our non-regulated subsidiaries primary uses of cash include payment of administrative costs not charged to our regulated subsidiaries for corporate functions, including administrative services related to claims payment, member and provider services and information technology. Other primary uses include capital contributions made by our non-regulated subsidiaries to our regulated subsidiaries and the repayment of our credit facility. We refer collectively to the cash and investment balances available in our non-regulated subsidiaries as unregulated cash and unregulated investments, respectively. Cash Positions At December 31, 2009 and 2008, cash and cash equivalents were $1,158.1 million and $1,181.9 million, respectively. We also had short-term investments of $62.7 million and $70.1 million at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Of these short-term investments, $58.9 million and $66.2 million had maturities of three to 12 months as of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. As of December 31, 2009 and 2008, 93.9% and 94.4% of our investments were invested in certificates of deposit with a weighted average maturity of 40 days and 98 days, respectively. The annualized tax equivalent portfolio yield for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008 was 0.6% and 2.4%, respectively. 65 Table of Contents During 2009, three of our Florida regulated subsidiaries declared and paid dividends to one of our non-regulated subsidiaries in the aggregate amount of $44.4 million. On December 31, 2008, the same three Florida regulated subsidiaries of ours, declared dividends to one of our non-regulated subsidiaries in the aggregate amount of $105.1 million, of which two dividends were paid in December 2008 and one dividend which was paid in January 2009. Initiatives to Increase Our Unregulated Cash We are pursuing alternatives to raise additional unregulated cash. Some of these initiatives include, but are not limited to, consideration of obtaining dividends from certain of our regulated subsidiaries to the extent that we are able to access any available excess capital and accessing the credit markets. However, we cannot provide any assurances that we will obtain applicable state regulatory approvals for dividends to our non-regulated subsidiaries by our regulated subsidiaries. In addition to dividends, our strategies include accessing the public and private debt and equity markets and potentially selling assets. Our ability to obtain financing has been and continues to be materially and negatively affected by a number of factors. The recent turmoil in the credit markets, market volatility, the deterioration in the soundness of certain financial institutions and general adverse economic conditions have caused the cost of prospective debt financings to increase considerably. These circumstances have materially adversely affected liquidity in the financial markets, making terms for certain financings unattractive, and in some cases have resulted in the unavailability of financing. We also believe the uncertainty created by the ongoing state and federal investigations is affecting our ability to obtain financing. In light of the current and evolving credit market crisis and the uncertainty created by the ongoing investigations, we may not be able to obtain financing. Even if we are able to obtain financing under these circumstances, the cost to us likely will be high and the terms and conditions likely will be onerous. Auction Rate Securities As of December 31, 2009, all of our long-term investments were comprised of municipal note investments with an auction reset feature ( auction rate securities ). These notes are issued by various state and local municipal entities for the purpose of financing student loans, public projects and other activities, which carry investment grade credit ratings. Liquidity for these auction rate securities is typically provided by an auction process which allows holders to sell their notes and resets the applicable interest rate at pre-determined intervals, usually every seven, 14, 28 or 35 days. As of the date of this Form 10-K, auctions have failed for $57.0 million of our auction rate securities and there is no assurance that auctions on the remaining auction rate securities in our investment portfolio will succeed in the future. An auction failure means that the parties wishing to sell their securities could not be matched with an adequate volume of buyers. In the event that there is a failed auction the indenture governing the security requires the issuer to pay interest at a contractually defined rate that is generally above market rates for other types of similar instruments. The securities for which auctions have failed will continue to accrue interest at the contractual rate and be auctioned every seven, 14, 28 or 35 days until the auction succeeds, the issuer calls the securities, or they mature. As a result, our ability to liquidate and fully recover the carrying value of our remaining auction rate securities in the near term may be limited or non-existent. In addition, while all of our auction rate securities currently carry investment grade ratings, if the issuers are unable to successfully close future auctions and their credit ratings deteriorate, we may in the future be required to record an impairment charge on these investments. We believe we will be able to liquidate our auction rate securities without significant loss, and we currently believe these securities are not impaired, primarily due to government guarantees or municipal bond insurance; however, it could take until the final maturity of the underlying securities to realize our investments recorded value. The final maturity of the underlying securities could be as long as 30 years. The weighted-average life of the underlying securities for our auction rate securities portfolio is 21 years. We currently have the ability and intent to hold our auction rate securities until market stability is restored with respect to these securities. Investigation and Litigation Related Costs We have expended significant financial resources in connection with the ongoing investigations and related matters. Since the inception of the investigations through December 31, 2009, we have incurred approximately $165.4 million for administrative expenses associated with, or consequential to, these governmental and Company investigations for legal fees, accounting fees, consulting fees, employee recruitment and retention costs and other similar expenses. Approximately $8.4 million and $41.3 million were incurred in the three months and year ended December 31, 2009, respectively. In addition, we have paid $87.5 million to resolve matters with certain government agencies, of which $52.3 million was paid during 2009. We currently estimate that we will pay approximately $60.0 million in installments over a period of four to five years to resolve matters with the Civil Division and the OIG. The final timing, terms and conditions of a civil resolution may differ from those current anticipated, which may results in an adjustment to our recorded amounts. These adjustments may be material. 66 Table of Contents We may be required to pay significant damages or other amounts in the event of an adverse judgment or settlement of the shareholder actions against us. A substantial amount of these costs will not be covered by, or may exceed the limits of, our insurance. We are unable to provide an estimate or range of amounts that we may pay, if any, to resolve the outstanding shareholder actions. If we were required to pay a significant amount to resolves these matters, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and cash flows. We expect to continue incurring additional administrative costs in connection with the governmental and Company investigations, defending the class-action lawsuits against us, compliance with the DPA and other related matters into 2010. Although costs related to the investigations have declined in recent periods, we can provide no assurance that such costs will not be significant or increase in the future. These costs include, among others, costs associated with the retention of the Monitor and implementation of any recommendations as well as costs related to the class-action lawsuit and efforts of the Special Litigation Committee in connection with the ongoing shareholder derivative actions. Regulatory Capital and Restrictions on Dividends and Management Fees Each of our HMO and insurance company subsidiaries is licensed in the markets in which it operates and is subject to the rules, regulations and oversight by the applicable state DOI in the areas of licensing and solvency. Each of our health and prescription drug plans is required to report regularly on its operational and financial performance to the appropriate regulatory agency in the state in which it is licensed, which describes our HMO and insurance companies capital structure, ownership, financial condition, certain intercompany transactions and business operations. From time to time, each of our subsidiaries is selected to undergo periodic examinations and reviews by the applicable state to review our operational and financial assertions. The plans that we operate generally must obtain approval from or provide notice to the state in which it is domiciled before entering into certain transactions, such as declaring dividends in excess of certain thresholds or paying dividends to a related party, entering into other arrangements with related parties, and acquisitions or similar transactions involving an HMO or insurance company, or any other change in control. For purposes of these laws, in general, control commonly is presumed to exist when a person, group of persons or entity, directly or indirectly, owns, controls or holds the power to vote 10% or more of the voting securities of another entity. Each of our HMO and insurance subsidiaries must maintain a minimum statutory net worth in an amount determined by statute or regulation and we may only invest in types of investments approved by the state. The minimum statutory net worth requirements differ by state and are generally based on a percentage of annualized premium revenue, a percentage of annualized health care costs, a percentage of certain liabilities, a statutory minimum, or RBC requirements. The RBC requirements are based on guidelines established by the NAIC and are administered by the states. As of December 31, 2009, our Connecticut, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Louisiana, Missouri, Ohio, Texas and PFFS operations are subject to RBC requirements. The RBC requirements may be modified as each state legislature deems appropriate for that state. The RBC formula, based on asset risk, underwriting risk, credit risk, business risk and other factors, generates the authorized company action level, or CAL, which represents the amount of net worth believed to be required to support the regulated entity business. For states in which the RBC requirements have been adopted, the regulated entity typically must maintain a minimum of the greater of the required CAL or the minimum statutory net worth requirement calculated pursuant to pre-RBC guidelines. In addition to the foregoing requirements, our regulated subsidiaries are subject to restrictions on their ability to make dividend payments, loans and other transfers of cash. The statutory framework for our regulated subsidiaries minimum net worth may change over time. For instance, RBC requirements may be adopted by more of the states in which we operate. These subsidiaries are also subject to their state regulators overall oversight powers. For example, New York enacted regulations that increase the reserve requirement by 150% over an eight-year period. In addition, regulators could require our subsidiaries to maintain minimum levels of statutory net worth in excess of the amount required under the applicable state laws if the regulators determine that maintaining such additional statutory net worth is in the best interest of our members. For example, our Ohio HMO is required to maintain required statutory capital at an RBC level of 150% of CAL. Moreover, as we expand our plan offerings in new states or pursue new business opportunities, we may be required to make additional statutory capital contributions. At December 31, 2009, our consolidated RBC ratio for these states is estimated to be over 333% which is in excess of the required CAL of 223%. However, two of our subsidiaries were individually below the required CAL at December 31, 2009. These two subsidiaries underwrote our PFFS product and one also underwrote our products in Hawaii. As we are no longer offering PFFS plans, the amount of RBC required is substantially reduced in 2010 and we anticipate that these two subsidiaries will be in compliance in 2010. 67 Table of Contents In addition, our Medicaid and S-CHIP activities are regulated by each state department of health or equivalent agency, and our Medicare activities are regulated by CMS. These agencies typically require demonstration of the same capabilities mentioned above and perform periodic audits of performance, usually annually. State enforcement authorities, including state attorneys general and Medicaid fraud control units, have become increasingly active in recent years in their review and scrutiny of various sectors of the health care industry, including health insurers and managed care organizations. We routinely respond to requests for information from these entities and, more generally, we endeavor to cooperate fully with all government agencies that regulate our business. For a discussion of our material pending legal proceedings, see Part Item 3 Legal Proceedings. At December 31, 2009 and 2008, all of our restricted assets consisted of cash and cash equivalents, money market accounts, certificates of deposits, and U.S. Government Securities. As of December 31, 2009, we believe our subsidiaries were in compliance with the minimum capital requirements. Overview of Cash Flow Activities For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 our cash flows from operations are summarized as follows: For the Years Ended December 31, 2009 2008 2007 (In millions) Net cash provided by operations $ 57.9 $ 296.4 $ 277.6 Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities 63.6 (91.1 ) (186.2 ) Net cash used in financing activities (145.4 ) (31.8 ) (47.5 ) Net cash provided by operations The net cash inflow from operations for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 was primarily due to increased revenues from increased membership and changes in the receivables and liabilities due to timing of cash receipts and payments. Because we generally receive premium revenue in advance of payment for the related medical care costs, our cash typically has increased during periods of premium revenue growth. Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities In 2009, investing activities consisted primarily of net proceeds from the maturity of restricted investments totaling approximately $68.4 million and the net proceeds from the sale and maturities of investments totaling approximately $11.4 million, partially offset by increases in property, equipment and capitalized software totaling approximately $16.1 million. In 2008, investing activities consisted primarily of $124.8 million in proceeds from the sale and maturity of investments, net of investment purchases. An additional $109.8 million was used in investing activities to purchase restricted investments, net of proceeds received from the sale of restricted investments. Additions to property, equipment and capitalized software used approximately $19.6 million. Investing activities also consisted primarily of net cash used in Funds receivable for the benefit of members totaling $86.5 million. These funds, which represent PDP member subsidies and pass-through payments from government partners, are not accounted for in our results of operations since they represent pass-through payments from our government partners to fund deductibles, co-payments and other member benefits for certain of our members. In 2007, investing activities consisted primarily of the investment of excess cash generated by operations totaling approximately $127.5 million in various short-term investment instruments, and an additional $39.3 million was invested in restricted investment accounts to satisfy the requirements of various state statutes. An additional $22.9 million was invested in capitalized assets. Net cash used in financing activities In 2009, financing activities consisted primarily of the repayment in full of the outstanding amount of $152.8 million under the credit facility on its due date. 68 Table of Contents In 2008, financing activities consisted primarily of net cash used in funds held for the benefit of members totaling $31.8 million. These funds, which represent PDP member subsidies and pass-through payments from government partners, are not accounted for in our results of operations since they represent pass-through payments from our government partners to fund deductibles, co-payments and other member benefits for certain of our members In 2007, financing activities consisted of net proceeds from options exercised totaling $12.8 million, and the incremental tax benefit from options exercised of $23.1 million. Also included in financing activities are funds held for the benefit of others, which used approximately $81.9 million of cash as of December 31, 2007. These funds, which represent PDP member subsidies and pass-through payments from government partners, are not accounted for in our results of operations since they represent pass-through payments from our government partners to fund deductibles, co-payments and other member benefits for certain of our members. Off Balance Sheet Arrangements At December 31, 2009, we did not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements except for operating leases as described in the table below. Commitments and Contingencies The following table sets forth information regarding our contractual obligations. Payments due to period Contractual Obligations at December 31, 2009(1) Total Less Than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years (in millions) Operating leases $ 61.7 $ 15.6 $ 22.6 $ 12.0 $ 11.5 Purchase obligations 78.4 48.9 18.7 9.7 1.1 Unrecognized tax benefit 12.0 12.0 Total $ 152.1 $ 64.5 $ 41.3 $ 21.7 $ 24.6 ____________ (1) We have resolved our matters under investigation by the USAO and the State of Florida but remain in resolution discussions as to matters under review with the Civil Division and the OIG. Pursuant to the Consent and Final Judgment, we agreed to pay a penalty of $10.0 million to the SEC, of which $2.5 million remains to be paid. Based on the current status of matters and all information known to us to date, management estimates that we have a liability of approximately $60.0 million plus interest associated with the matters remaining under investigation. We anticipate these amounts will be payable in installments over a period of four to five years. In accordance with fair value accounting guidance, we discounted the liability and recorded it at its current fair value of approximately $55.9 million. This amount is accrued in our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2009 within the short and long term portions of Amounts accrued related to investigation resolution line items. The final timing, terms and conditions of a resolution of these matters may differ from those currently anticipated, which may result in a material adjustment to our recorded amounts. We cannot provide an estimable range of additional amounts, if any, nor can we provide assurances regarding the timing, terms and conditions of any potential negotiated resolution of pending investigations by the Civil Division or the OIG. In addition, putative class action complaints were filed against us, as well as certain of our past and present officers and directors in October and November 2007, alleging, among other things, numerous violations of securities laws. At this time, neither we nor any of our subsidiaries can predict the probable outcome of these claims. In addition, derivative actions, by their nature, do not seek to recover damages from the companies on whose behalf the plaintiff shareholders are purporting to act. We are not an obligor under or guarantor of any indebtedness of any other party; however, we may have to pay referral claims of health care providers under contract with us who are not able to pay costs of medical services provided by other providers. Recently Issued Accounting Standards In January 2010, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued authoritative guidance related to improving disclosures about fair value measurements. This standard requires reporting entities to make new disclosures about recurring or nonrecurring fair-value measurements including significant transfers into and out of Level 1 and Level 2 fair value measurements and information on purchases, sales, issuances and settlements on a gross basis in the reconciliation of Level 3 fair value measurements. This standard is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2009, except for Level 3 reconciliation disclosures which are effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2010. The adoption will not have a material impact on our financial statements in 2010. 69 Table of Contents In December 2009, the FASB issued an update to codify standards in the authoritative guidance it previously issued in June 2009, which addressed the modification of financial reporting by enterprises involved with variable interest entities ( VIE ). This update requires a qualitative approach to identifying a controlling financial interest in a VIE, and requires ongoing assessments of whether an entity is a VIE and whether an interest in a VIE makes the holder the primary beneficiary of the VIE. This pronouncement is effective for annual reporting periods beginning after November 15, 2009. The adoption of this guidance is not currently expected to have a material effect on our financial statements. In August 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance surrounding the fair value measurements and disclosures of liabilities. This guidance provides clarification in circumstances where a quoted market price in an active market for an identical liability is not available, a reporting entity is required to measure the fair value of the liability using either: (1) the quoted price of the identical liability when traded as an asset; (2) the quoted prices for similar liabilities or similar liabilities when traded as assets; or (3) another valuation technique, such as a present value calculation or the amount that the reporting entity would pay to transfer the identical liability or would receive to enter into the identical liability. This statement becomes effective for the first reporting period (including interim periods) beginning after issuance. We adopted this guidance during the third quarter of 2009, as required. The adoption did not have a material impact on our financial statements. In June 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance serving as the single source of authoritative non-governmental U.S. GAAP (the Codification ), superseding various existing authoritative accounting pronouncements. The Codification now establishes one level of authoritative GAAP. All other literature is considered non-authoritative. This Codification was launched on July 1, 2009 and is effective for financial statements issued for interim and annual periods ending after September 15, 2009. We have adopted the Codification during the third quarter of 2009. However, there were no changes to our consolidated financial statements due to the implementation of the Codification other than changes in reference to various authoritative accounting pronouncements in our consolidated financial statements. In June 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance to modify financial reporting by enterprises involved with variable interest entities by addressing the effects on certain provisions of previously issued guidance on the consolidation of a VIE, as a result of eliminating the qualifying special-purpose entity ( SPE ) concept in accounting for transfers of financial assets, and (2) constituent concerns about the application of certain key provisions of previously issued guidance on VIEs, including those in which the accounting and disclosures do not always provide timely and useful information about an enterprise involvement in a VIE. This guidance shall be effective as of January 1, 2010, our first annual reporting period beginning after November 15, 2009. Earlier application is prohibited. The adoption of this guidance is not currently expected to have a material effect on our financial statements. In June 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance modifying the relevance, representational faithfulness and comparability of the information that a reporting entity provides in its financial statements about a transfer of financial assets; the effects of a transfer on its financial position, financial performance, and cash flows; and a transferor continuing involvement, if any, in transferred financial assets. The FASB undertook this project to address: (1) practices that have developed since the issuance of previous guidance concerning the accounting for transfers and servicing of financial assets and extinguishments of liabilities, that are not consistent with the original intent and key requirements of that statement and (2) concerns of financial statement users that many of the financial assets (and related obligations) that have been derecognized should continue to be reported in the financial statements of transferors. This guidance must be applied as of January 1, 2010, the beginning of our first annual reporting period after November 15, 2009. Earlier application is prohibited. This guidance must also be applied to transfers occurring on or after the effective date. Additionally, on and after the effective date, the concept of a qualifying SPE is no longer relevant for accounting purposes. Therefore, a formerly qualifying SPE should be evaluated for consolidation by reporting entities on and after the effective date in accordance with the applicable consolidation guidance. If the evaluation on the effective date results in consolidation, the reporting entity should apply the transition guidance provided in the pronouncement that requires consolidation. The disclosure provisions of this guidance should be applied to transfers that occurred both before and after the effective date of this statement. The adoption is not currently expected to have a material effect on our financial statements. In May 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance that provides general standards of accounting for and disclosure of events that occur after the balance sheet date but before financial statements are issued or are available to be issued. The guidance sets forth the period after the balance sheet date during which management of a reporting entity should evaluate events or transactions that may occur for potential recognition or disclosure in the financial statements. The guidance also sets forth the circumstances under which an entity should recognize events or transactions occurring after the balance sheet date in its financial statements. Furthermore, this guidance identifies the disclosures that an entity should make about events or transactions that occurred after the balance sheet date. We adopted this guidance as required in the second quarter of 2009. 70 Table of Contents In April 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance on the recognition and presentation of other-than-temporary impairments ( OTTI ) modifying previous OTTI guidance for debt securities through increased consistency in the timing of impairment recognition and enhanced disclosures related to the credit and noncredit components of impaired debt securities that are not expected to be sold. In addition, increased disclosures are required for both debt and equity securities regarding expected cash flows, credit losses, and an aging of securities with unrealized losses. We adopted this guidance during the second quarter of 2009, as required. The adoption did not have a material impact on our financial statements. In April 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance that requires fair value disclosures for financial instruments that are not reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Prior to the issuance of this guidance, the fair values of those assets and liabilities were disclosed only once each year. We now disclose this information on a quarterly basis, providing quantitative and qualitative information about fair value estimates for all financial instruments not measured in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. We adopted this guidance during the second quarter of 2009, as required. The adoption did not have a material impact on our financial statements. In April 2009, the FASB issued authoritative guidance in regard to (1) determining fair value when the volume and level of activity for the asset or liability has significantly decreased and (2) identifying transactions that are considered not orderly. This guidance specifically clarifies the methodology used to determine fair value when there is no active market or where the price inputs being used represent distressed sales. The guidance also reaffirms the objective of a fair value measurement, which is to reflect how much an asset would be sold for in an orderly transaction. It also reaffirms the need to use judgment to determine if a formerly active market has become inactive, as well as to determine fair values when markets have become inactive. This guidance was adopted and applied prospectively during the second quarter of 2009, as required. The adoption did not have a material impact on our financial statements. 
