CIK: 1308161
Company Name: NEWS CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2012-08-14


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS This document contains statements that constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act ), and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The words expect, estimate, anticipate, predict, believe and similar expressions and variations thereof are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements appear in a number of places in this document and include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of the Company, its directors or its officers with respect to, among other things, trends affecting the Company financial condition or results of operations. The readers of this document are cautioned that any forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties. More information regarding these risks, uncertainties and other factors is set forth under the heading Risk Factors in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (the Annual Report ). The Company does not ordinarily make projections of its future operating results and undertakes no obligation (and expressly disclaims any obligation) to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Readers should carefully review this document and the other documents filed by the Company with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ). This section should be read together with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation and related notes set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report. INTRODUCTION Management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to help provide an understanding of News Corporation and its subsidiaries (together, News Corporation or the Company ) financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. This discussion is organized as follows: Overview of the Company Business This section provides a general description of the Company businesses, as well as developments that occurred either during fiscal 2012 or early fiscal 2013 that the Company believes are important in understanding its results of operations and financial condition or to disclose known trends. Results of Operations This section provides an analysis of the Company results of operations for the three fiscal years ended June 30, 2012. This analysis is presented on both a consolidated and a segment basis. In addition, a brief description is provided of significant transactions and events that impact the comparability of the results being analyzed. Liquidity and Capital Resources This section provides an analysis of the Company cash flows for the three fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, as well as a discussion of the Company outstanding debt and commitments, both firm and contingent, that existed as of June 30, 2012. Included in the discussion of outstanding debt is a discussion of the amount of financial capacity available to fund the Company future commitments and obligations, as well as a discussion of other financing arrangements. Critical Accounting Policies This section discusses accounting policies considered important to the Company financial condition and results of operations, and which require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in application. In addition, Note 2 to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation summarizes the Company significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policy discussion found in this section. OVERVIEW OF THE COMPANY S BUSINESS The Company regularly reviews its segment reporting and classification. In the first quarter of fiscal 2011, the Company aggregated the previously reported Book Publishing segment, Integrated Marketing Services segment and the Newspapers and Information Services segment to report a new Publishing segment because of changes in how the Company manages and evaluates these businesses as a result of evolving industry trends. 47 Table of Contents The Company is a diversified global media company, which manages and reports its businesses in the following six segments: Cable Network Programming , which principally consists of the production and licensing of programming distributed through cable television systems and direct broadcast satellite operators primarily in the United States, Latin America, Europe and Asia. Filmed Entertainment , which principally consists of the production and acquisition of live-action and animated motion pictures for distribution and licensing in all formats in all entertainment media worldwide, and the production and licensing of television programming worldwide. Television , which principally consists of the broadcasting of network programming in the United States and the operation of 27 full power broadcast television stations, including 9 duopolies, in the United States (of these stations, 17 are affiliated with the FOX Broadcasting Company ( FOX ) and 10 are affiliated with Master Distribution Service, Inc. ( MyNetworkTV )). Direct Broadcast Satellite Television , which consists of the distribution of basic and premium programming services via satellite and broadband directly to subscribers in Italy. Publishing , which principally consists of the Company newspapers and information services, book publishing and integrated marketing services businesses. The newspapers and information services business principally consists of the publication of national newspapers in the United Kingdom, the publication of approximately 140 newspapers in Australia, the publication of a metropolitan newspaper and a national newspaper (with international editions) in the United States and the provision of information services. The book publishing business consists of the publication of English language books throughout the world and the integrated marketing services business consists of the publication of free-standing inserts and the provision of in-store marketing products and services in the United States and Canada. Other , which principally consists of the Company digital media properties and Amplify, the Company education technology businesses. Television and Cable Network Programming The Company television operations primarily consist of FOX, MyNetworkTV and the 27 television stations owned by the Company. The television operations derive revenues primarily from the sale of advertising and to a lesser extent retransmission consent revenue. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues. The U.S. television broadcast environment is highly competitive and the primary methods of competition are the development and acquisition of popular programming. Program success is measured by ratings, which are an indication of market acceptance, with the top rated programs commanding the highest advertising prices. FOX is a broadcast network and MyNetworkTV is a programming distribution service, airing original and off-network programming. FOX and MyNetworkTV compete with broadcast networks, such as ABC, CBS, NBC and The CW Television Network, independent television stations, cable and DBS program services, as well as other media, including DVDs, Blu-rays, video games, print and the Internet for audiences, programming and, in the case of FOX, advertising revenues. In addition, FOX and MyNetworkTV compete with the other broadcast networks and other programming distribution services to secure affiliations with independently owned television stations in markets across the United States. ABC, NBC and CBS each broadcasts a significantly greater number of hours of programming than FOX and, accordingly, may be able to designate or change time periods in which programming is to be broadcast with greater flexibility than FOX. In addition, future technological developments may affect competition within the television marketplace. Retransmission consent rules provide a mechanism for the television stations owned by the Company to seek and obtain payment from multi-channel video programming distributors who carry broadcasters 48 Table of Contents signals. Retransmission consent revenue consists of per subscriber-based compensatory fees paid to the Company from cable and satellite distribution systems for FOX and MyNetworkTV as well as a portion of the retransmission consent revenue the affiliates generate for their retransmission of FOX. The television stations owned and operated by the Company compete for programming, audiences and advertising revenues with other television stations and cable networks in their respective coverage areas and, in some cases, with respect to programming, with other station groups, and in the case of advertising revenues, with other local and national media. The competitive position of the television stations owned by the Company is largely influenced by the quality and strength of FOX and MyNetworkTV programming, and, in particular, the prime-time viewership of the respective network. The Company U.S. cable network operations primarily consist of the Fox News Channel ( FOX News ), FX Networks, LLC ( FX ), Regional Sports Networks ( RSNs ), the National Geographic Channels, SPEED and the Big Ten Network. The Company international cable networks consist of the Fox International Channels ( FIC ) and STAR. FIC produces and distributes entertainment, factual, sports, and movie channels through distribution channels in Europe, Africa, Asia and Latin America using several brands, including Fox, Fox Crime, Fox Life and National Geographic Channel. STAR owned and affiliated channels are distributed in the following countries and regions: India; Greater China; Indonesia; the rest of South East Asia; Pakistan; the Middle East and Africa; the United Kingdom and Europe; and North America. Generally, the Company cable networks, which target various demographics, derive a majority of their revenues from monthly affiliate fees received from cable television systems and direct broadcast satellite operators based on the number of their subscribers. Affiliate fee revenues are net of the amortization of cable distribution investments (capitalized fees paid to multi-channel video programming distributors to typically facilitate the carriage of a cable network). The Company defers the cable distribution investments and amortizes the amounts on a straight-line basis over the contract period. Cable television and direct broadcast satellite are currently the predominant means of distribution of the Company program services in the United States. Internationally, distribution technology varies region by region. The Company cable networks compete for carriage on cable television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems and other distribution systems with other program services. A primary focus of competition is for distribution of the Company cable network channels that are not already distributed by particular cable television or direct broadcast satellite systems. For such program services, distributors make decisions on the use of bandwidth based on various considerations, including amounts paid by programmers for launches, subscription fees payable by distributors and appeal to the distributors subscribers. The most significant operating expenses of the Television segment and the Cable Network Programming segment are the acquisition and production expenses related to programming and the expenses related to operating the technical facilities of the broadcaster or cable network. Other expenses include promotional expenses related to improving the market visibility and awareness of the broadcaster or cable network and its programming. Additional expenses include sales commissions paid to the in-house advertising sales force, as well as salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead expenses. The Company has several multi-year sports rights agreements, including contracts with the National Football League ( NFL ) through fiscal 2022, contracts with the National Association of Stock Car Auto Racing ( NASCAR ) for certain races and exclusive rights for certain ancillary content through calendar year 2014, a contract with Major League Baseball ( MLB ) through calendar year 2013 and other sports rights contracts. These contracts provide the Company with the broadcast rights to certain U.S. national sporting events during their respective terms. The costs of these sports contracts are charged to expense based on the ratio of each period operating profit to estimated total operating profit for the remaining term of the contract. The profitability of these long-term U.S. national sports contracts is based on the Company best estimates at June 30, 2012 of attributable revenues and costs; such estimates may change in the future and such changes 49 Table of Contents may be significant. Should revenues decline from estimates applied at June 30, 2012, additional amortization of rights may be recorded. Should revenues improve as compared to estimated revenues, the Company may have an improved operating profit related to the contract, which may be recognized over the remaining contract term. While the Company seeks to ensure compliance with federal indecency laws and related Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) regulations, the definition of indecency is subject to interpretation and there can be no assurance that the Company will not broadcast programming that is ultimately determined by the FCC to violate the prohibition against indecency. Such programming could subject the Company to regulatory review or investigation, fines, adverse publicity or other sanctions, including the loss of station licenses. Filmed Entertainment The Filmed Entertainment segment derives revenue from the production and distribution of live-action and animated motion pictures and television series. In general, motion pictures produced or acquired for distribution by the Company are exhibited in U.S. and foreign theaters, followed by home entertainment, including sale and rental of DVDs and Blu-rays, video-on-demand and pay-per-view television, on-line and mobile distribution, premium subscription television, network television and basic cable and syndicated television exploitation. Television series initially produced for the networks and first-run syndication are generally licensed to domestic and international markets concurrently and subsequently released in seasonal DVD and Blu-ray box sets and made available via digital distribution platforms. More successful series are later syndicated in domestic markets. The length of the revenue cycle for television series will vary depending on the number of seasons a series remains in active production and, therefore, may cause fluctuations in operating results. License fees received for television exhibition (including international and U.S. premium television and basic cable television) are recorded as revenue in the period that licensed films or programs are available for such exhibition, which may cause substantial fluctuations in operating results. The revenues and operating results of the Filmed Entertainment segment are significantly affected by the timing of the Company theatrical and home entertainment releases, the number of its original and returning television series that are aired by television networks and the number of its television series in off-network syndication. Theatrical and home entertainment release dates are determined by several factors, including timing of vacation and holiday periods and competition in the marketplace. The distribution windows for the release of motion pictures theatrically and in various home entertainment products and services (including subscription rentals, rental kiosks and Internet streaming services), have been compressing and may continue to change in the future. A further reduction in timing between theatrical and home entertainment releases could adversely affect the revenues and operating results of this segment. The Company enters into arrangements with third parties to co-produce many of its theatrical productions. These arrangements, which are referred to as co-financing arrangements, take various forms. The parties to these arrangements include studio and non-studio entities, both domestic and foreign. In several of these agreements, other parties control certain distribution rights. The Filmed Entertainment segment records the amounts received for the sale of an economic interest as a reduction of the cost of the film, as the investor assumes full risk for that portion of the film asset acquired in these transactions. The substance of these arrangements is that the third-party investors own an interest in the film and, therefore, receive a participation based on the respective third-party investor interest in the profits or losses incurred on the film. Consistent with the requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) Accounting Standards Codification ( ASC ) 926 Entertainment Films ( ASC 926 ), the estimate of a third-party investor interest in profits or losses incurred on the film is determined by reference to the ratio of actual revenue earned to date in relation to total estimated ultimate revenues. Operating costs incurred by the Filmed Entertainment segment include: exploitation costs, primarily theatrical prints and advertising and home entertainment marketing and manufacturing costs; amortization of capitalized production, overhead and interest costs; and participations and talent residuals. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. 50 Table of Contents The Company competes with other film studios, such as Disney, Paramount, Sony, Universal, Warner Bros. and independent film producers in the production and distribution of motion pictures, DVDs and Blu-rays. As a producer and distributor of television programming, the Company competes with studios, television production groups and independent producers and syndicators, such as Disney, Sony, NBC Universal, Warner Bros. and Paramount Television, to sell programming both domestically and internationally. The Company also competes to obtain creative talent and story properties, which are essential to the success of the Company filmed entertainment businesses. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television The Direct Broadcast Satellite Television ( DBS ) segment operations consist of SKY Italia, which provides basic and premium programming services via satellite and broadband directly to subscribers in Italy. SKY Italia derives revenues principally from subscriber fees. The Company believes that the quality and variety of programming, audio and interactive programming including personal video recorders, quality of picture including high definition channels, access to service, customer service and price are the key elements for gaining and maintaining market share. SKY Italia competition includes companies that offer video, audio, interactive programming, telephony, data and other information and entertainment services, including broadband Internet providers, digital terrestrial transmission ( DTT ) services, wireless companies and companies that are developing new media technologies. SKY Italia was prohibited from owning a DTT frequency or providing a pay television DTT offer under a commitment made to the European Commission from April 30, 2003 through December 31, 2011. SKY Italia most significant operating expenses are those related to the acquisition of entertainment, movie and sports programming and subscribers and the expenses related to operating the technical facilities. Operating expenses related to sports programming are generally recognized over the course of the related sport season, which may cause fluctuations in the operating results of this segment. The continued challenging economic environment in Italy has contributed to a reduction in consumer spending and has posed challenges for subscriber retention and growth. If this trend continues, it could have a material effect on the operating results of the DBS segment. Publishing The Company Publishing segment consists of the Company newspapers and information services, book publishing and integrated marketing services businesses. Revenue is derived from the sale of advertising space, newspapers, books and subscriptions, as well as licensing. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues. Circulation and subscription revenues can be greatly affected by changes in the prices of the Company and/or competitors products, as well as by promotional activities. Operating expenses include costs related to paper, production, distribution, editorial, commissions and royalties. Selling, general and administrative expenses include promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. The Publishing segment advertising volume, circulation and the price of paper are the key variables whose fluctuations can have a material effect on the Company operating results and cash flow. The Company has to anticipate the level of advertising volume, circulation and paper prices in managing its businesses to maximize operating profit during expanding and contracting economic cycles. The Company continues to be exposed to risks associated with paper used for printing. Paper is a basic commodity and its price is sensitive to the balance of supply and demand. The Company expenses are affected by the cyclical increases and decreases in the price of paper. The Publishing segment products compete for readership and advertising with local and national 51 Table of Contents competitors and also compete with other media alternatives in their respective markets. Competition for circulation and subscriptions is based on the content of the products provided, service, pricing and, from time to time, various promotions. The success of these products depends upon advertisers judgments as to the most effective use of their advertising budgets. Competition for advertising is based upon the reach of the products, advertising rates and advertiser results. Such judgments are based on factors such as cost, availability of alternative media, distribution and quality of readership demographics. Like other newspaper publishing groups, the Company faces challenges to its traditional print business model from new media formats and shifting consumer preferences. The Company is also exposed to the impact of long-term structural movements in advertising spending, in particular, the move in classified advertising from print to digital. These new media formats could impact the Company performance, positively or negatively. As a multi-platform news provider, the Company recognizes the importance of maximizing revenues from new media, both in terms of paid-for content and in new advertising models, and continues to invest in its digital products. The development of technologies such as smartphones, tablets and similar devices and their related applications provides opportunities for the Company to make available its journalism to a new audience of readers, introduce new or different pricing schemes, develop its products to continue to attract advertisers and/or affect the relationship between publisher and consumer. The Company continues to develop and implement strategies to exploit its content in new media channels, including the introduction of paywalls around its newspaper websites. Other The Other segment consists primarily of: Digital Media Group The Company sells advertising, sponsorships and subscription services on the Company various digital media properties. Significant expenses associated with the Company digital media properties include development costs, advertising and promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits and other routine overhead. Education Group Amplify, the Company education technology businesses, is dedicated to improving K-12 education by creating digital products and services that empower teachers, students and parents in new ways. Amplify is focused on transforming teaching and learning by creating and scaling digital innovations in three areas: analytics and assessment, content and curriculum and distribution and delivery. Amplify focuses on educational analytics and formative assessment through Wireless Generation, Inc. ( Wireless Generation ). Significant expenses associated with the Company education technology businesses include salaries, employee benefits and other routine overhead. Other Business Developments In July 2011, the Company announced that it would close its publication, The News of the World , after allegations of phone hacking and payments to public officials. As a result of management approval of the shutdown of The News of the World , the Company has reorganized portions of the U.K. newspaper business and has recorded restructuring charges in fiscal 2012 primarily for termination benefits and certain organizational restructuring at the U.K. newspapers. (See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation) The Company is subject to several ongoing investigations by U.K. and U.S. regulators and governmental authorities, including investigations into whether similar conduct may have occurred at the Company subsidiaries outside of the U.K. The Company is fully cooperating with these investigations. In 52 Table of Contents addition, the Company has admitted liability in a number of civil cases related to the phone hacking allegations and has settled a number of cases. The Company has taken steps to solve the problems relating to The News of the World including the creation of an independently-chaired Management & Standards Committee (the MSC ), which operates independently from NI Group Limited ( News International ) and has full authority to ensure complete cooperation with all relevant investigations and inquiries into The News of the World matters and all other related issues across News International. The MSC conducts its own internal investigation where appropriate. The MSC has an independent Chairman, Lord Grabiner QC, and reports directly to Gerson Zweifach, Senior Executive Vice President and Group General Counsel of the Company. Mr. Zweifach reports to the independent members of the Board of Directors (the Board ) through their representative Viet Dinh, an independent director and Chairman of the Company Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee. The independent directors of the Board have retained independent outside counsel and are actively engaged in these matters. The MSC conducted an internal investigation of the three other titles at News International and engaged independent outside counsel to advise it on these investigations and all other matters it handles. News International has instituted governance reforms and issued certain enhanced policies to its employees. The Company has also engaged independent outside counsel to assist it in responding to U.S. governmental inquiries. (See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for a summary of the costs of The News of the World Investigations and Litigation.) In July 2011, the Company sold its majority interest in its outdoor advertising businesses in Russia and Romania ( News Outdoor Russia ) for cash consideration of approximately $360 million. In connection with the sale, the Company repaid $32 million of News Outdoor Russia debt. In December 2011, the Company acquired the 67% equity interest it did not already own in Fox Pan American Sports LLC ( FPAS ) for approximately $400 million. FPAS, an international sports programming and production entity, which owns and operates Fox Sports Latin America network, a Spanish and Portuguese-language sports network distributed to subscribers in certain Caribbean and Central and South American nations, and partially through its ownership in FPAS, a 53% interest in Fox Deportes, a Spanish-language sports programming service distributed in the United States. As a result of this transaction, the Company now owns 100% of FPAS and Fox Deportes. Accordingly, the results of FPAS are included in the Company consolidated results of operations beginning in December 2011. In February 2012, the Company agreed to backstop 300 million (approximately $395 million) of financing measures that are being initiated by Sky Deutschland AG ( Sky Deutschland ), of which 145 million (approximately $195 million) remains as of June 30, 2012. In March 2012, the Company and funds advised by Permira Advisers LLP signed an agreement to sell NDS Group Limited ( NDS ) to Cisco Systems Inc. for approximately $5 billion, including the assumption of debt. The Company owned approximately 49% of NDS. The transaction was completed in July 2012. In May 2012, the Company sold its former U.K. newspaper division headquarters located in East London, which it relocated from in August 2010, for consideration of approximately 150 million, of which 25 million was received on closing of the sale. The remaining 125 million is in the form of a secured note and the Company will receive 25 million on May 31, 2013, and annually thereafter until May 31, 2017. In May 2012, FOXTEL, a cable and satellite television service in Australia, in which the Company currently owns a 25% interest, purchased Austar United Communications Ltd ( Austar ) to create a national subscription television service in Australia. The transaction was funded by FOXTEL bank debt and FOXTEL shareholders made pro-rata capital contributions in the form of subordinated shareholder notes based on their respective ownership interest. The Company share of the funding contribution was approximately $230 million. The subordinated shareholder note has a maximum term of 15 years, with interest payable on June 30 th each year and at maturity. The subordinated shareholder note can be repaid in 10 years provided that FOXTEL senior debt has been repaid. Upon maturity, the principal advanced will be repayable. In June 2012, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire the remaining 50% interest in ESPN STAR Sports ( ESS ) it did not already own. ESS is the leading sports broadcaster in Asia. The acquisition is subject to 53 Table of Contents regulatory clearances and other customary closing conditions. Once this transaction is completed, the Company will own 100% of ESS and will include the results of ESS in its consolidated results. In June 2012, the Company made a conditional non-binding offer to acquire Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd. ( CMH ), a media investment company that operates in Australia, for approximately $2 billion. CMH has a 25% interest in FOXTEL and a 50% interest in Premier Media Group, a producer of sports channels, more commonly referred to as FOX Sports Australia. If the proposal is implemented, the Company would double its stakes in FOX Sports Australia and FOXTEL to 100% and 50%, respectively. The pre-conditions to the Company proposal include the board of CMH recommending the transaction to its shareholders, the completion of due diligence by the Company and final approval of the Company Board after regulatory approvals. In June 2012, the Company announced that it intends to pursue the separation of its publishing and its media and entertainment businesses into two distinct publicly traded companies. The global media and entertainment company would consist of the Company cable and television assets, filmed entertainment, and direct satellite broadcasting businesses. The global publishing company that would be created through the proposed transaction would consist of the Company current publishing businesses, as well as its education division. Following the separation, each company would maintain two classes of common stock: Class A Common and Class B Common Voting Shares. The separation is expected to be completed in approximately one year. In addition to final approval from the Board of Directors and stockholder approval, the completion of the separation will be subject to receipt of regulatory approvals, opinions from tax counsel and favorable rulings from certain tax jurisdictions regarding the tax-free nature of the transaction to the Company and to its stockholders, further due diligence as appropriate, and the filing and effectiveness of appropriate filings with the SEC. In July 2012, the Company acquired Thomas Nelson, Inc., one of the leading trade publishers in the United States, for approximately $200 million in cash. In August 2012, the Company entered into an agreement to acquire a 51% equity interest in Eredivisie Media & Marketing CV ( EMM ). EMM is a media company based in the Netherlands which holds the Dutch Premier League soccer rights and operates several channels in the Netherlands. EMM is owned by the 18 Dutch Premier League soccer clubs and the global TV production company Endemol. The acquisition is subject to regulatory clearances and other customary closing conditions. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Results of Operations Fiscal 2012 versus Fiscal 2011 The following table sets forth the Company operating results for fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 Change % Change (in millions, except %) Revenues $ 33,706 $ 33,405 $ 301 1 % Operating expenses (20,785 ) (21,058 ) 273 (1 )% Selling, general and administrative (6,363 ) (6,306 ) (57 ) 1 % Depreciation and amortization (1,179 ) (1,191 ) 12 (1 )% Impairment and restructuring charges (3,005 ) (313 ) (2,692 ) * * Equity earnings of affiliates 730 462 268 58 % Interest expense, net (1,034 ) (966 ) (68 ) 7 % Interest income 135 126 9 7 % Other, net 7 18 (11 ) (61 )% Income before income tax expense 2,212 4,177 (1,965 ) (47 )% Income tax expense (805 ) (1,029 ) 224 (22 )% Income from continuing operations 1,407 3,148 (1,741 ) (55 )% Loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of taxes (254 ) 254 (100 )% Net income 1,407 2,894 (1,487 ) (51 )% Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests (228 ) (155 ) (73 ) 47 % Net income attributable to News Corporation stockholders $ 1,179 $ 2,739 $ (1,560 ) (57 )% ** not meaningful 54 Table of Contents Overview The Company revenues increased 1% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to revenue increases at the Cable Network Programming and Filmed Entertainment segments. The revenue increases at the Cable Network Programming segment resulted primarily from higher net affiliate and advertising revenues. The Filmed Entertainment segment revenues increased due to the inclusion of revenues from Shine Limited ( Shine ), which was acquired in fiscal 2011, and higher digital distribution revenues for the licensing of the Company television content. These revenue increases were partially offset by decreased revenues at the Publishing and Other segments. The Publishing segment revenues decreased primarily due to lower revenues at the Company newspaper businesses in the U.K., principally resulting from the closure of The News of the World in July 2011 and lower revenues at the Australian newspapers. The decreases at the Other segment primarily resulted from the dispositions of Myspace, Fox Mobile and News Outdoor Russia. Operating expenses decreased 1% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the dispositions of News Outdoor Russia, Myspace and Fox Mobile, lower releasing costs at the Filmed Entertainment segment, the absence of programming costs at the Television segment related to the broadcast of the Super Bowl, which was broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2011, and a decrease at the Publishing segment primarily due to the closure of The News of the World . These decreases were partially offset by the inclusion of operating expenses related to Shine and FPAS, higher programming costs at the Cable Network Programming segment and higher prime-time entertainment and marketing costs in support of the launch of new series at the Television segment. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 1% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to $224 million of legal and professional fees related to The News of the World investigations and litigation and costs for related civil settlements and the inclusion of expenses related to Shine and FPAS. These increases were partially offset by decreased expenses at the Other segment resulting from the dispositions of Myspace, News Outdoor Russia and Fox Mobile, the positive impact from the absence of a litigation settlement charge of $125 million at the Publishing segment included in fiscal 2011 and cost saving initiatives at Dow Jones. Depreciation and amortization decreased 1% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to lower depreciation and amortization at the Other segment due to the dispositions of Myspace, News Outdoor Russia and Fox Mobile, partially offset by higher depreciation at the Publishing segment due to additional property, plant and equipment placed into service and additional depreciation and amortization from the acquisition of Shine at the Filmed Entertainment segment. Impairment and restructuring charges During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012, the Company completed its annual impairment review of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. As a result of the impairment review performed, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of approximately $2.8 billion ($2.4 billion, net of tax) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012. The charges consisted of a write-down of the Company goodwill of approximately $1.5 billion and a write-down of the indefinite-lived intangible assets (primarily newspaper mastheads and distribution networks) of approximately $1.3 billion. These impairment charges were primarily the result of adverse trends affecting several businesses in the Company Publishing segment, including secular declines in the economic environment in Australia, a decline in in-store advertising spend by consumer packaged goods manufacturers in the U.S. and lower forecasted revenues from certain businesses utilizing various trade names owned by the Company newspaper operations. The charges also reflected the pending sale of certain businesses at values below their respective carrying values. In fiscal 2012, the Company recorded restructuring charges of $197 million, of which $175 million related to the newspaper businesses. The Company commenced the reorganization of portions of the newspaper businesses and recorded restructuring charges primarily for termination benefits as a result of the shutdown of The News of the World, certain organizational restructurings at other newspapers and the shutdown of a regional newspaper. 55 Table of Contents In fiscal 2011, the Company performed an interim impairment assessment of the Digital Media Group reporting unit goodwill. As a result of the review performed, the Company recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $168 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. The Company recorded restructuring charges of approximately $145 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. The restructuring charges primarily consisted of a $115 million charge related to the Company digital media properties and $25 million related to termination benefits recorded at the newspaper businesses. The charges at the Company digital media properties were a result of an organizational restructuring to align resources more closely with business priorities and consisted of facility related costs of $95 million, termination benefits of $18 million and other associated costs of $2 million. Equity earnings of affiliates Equity earnings of affiliates increased $268 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to improved results from British Sky Broadcasting Group plc ( BSkyB ) and Sky Deutschland and a gain on the sale of a portion of the Company BSkyB investment in accordance with its share repurchase program of $270 million. These increases were partially offset by the absence of gains recognized by NDS and BSkyB on the sale of certain of their businesses in fiscal 2011. For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 Change (in millions) DBS equity affiliates $ 732 $ 305 $ 427 Cable channel equity affiliates 19 42 (23 ) Other equity affiliates (21 ) 115 (136 ) Total Equity earnings of affiliates $ 730 $ 462 $ 268 Interest expense, net Interest expense, net increased $68 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the $2.5 billion in senior notes issued in February 2011, partially offset by the fiscal 2011 partial repayment of the $500 million senior debentures due February 2013. Other, net For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 (in millions) Gain on FPAS transaction (a) $ 158 $ Gain on Hathway Cable transaction (b) 23 BSkyB termination fee (b) (63 ) Change in fair value of Sky Deutschland convertible securities (b) (61 ) 46 Loss on sale of U.K. newspaper headquarters (a) (22 ) Gain on STAR China transaction (a) 55 Loss on disposal of Fox Mobile (a) (29 ) Loss on early extinguishment of debt (c) (36 ) Gain on the financial indexes business transaction (a) 43 Other (28 ) (61 ) Total Other, net $ 7 $ 18 (a) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (b) See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (c) See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. 56 Table of Contents Income tax expense The Company tax provision and related tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 were higher than the statutory rate primarily due to the non-deductible portion of goodwill impairment, partially offset by permanent differences, the sale of interests in subsidiaries, and the non-taxable gain on the consolidation of FPAS. The Company tax provision and related tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 were lower than the statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences, the sale of interests in subsidiaries and the resolution of tax matters. Loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax In June 2011, the Company transferred the equity and related assets of Myspace to a digital media company in exchange for an equity interest in the acquirer. The loss on this transaction was approximately $254 million, net of a tax benefit of $61 million, or ($0.10) per diluted share and was included in Loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax in the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. Net income Net income decreased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to higher impairment and restructuring charges, partially offset by the revenue increases and higher equity earnings of affiliates, as noted above. Also impacting earnings per share was the Company share repurchase program which resulted in a $0.03 increase. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to higher results at the Company majority-owned businesses and the issuance of a noncontrolling interest in a majority-owned subsidiary. Segment Analysis The following table sets forth the Company revenues and segment operating income for fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 Change % Change (in millions, except %) Revenues: Cable Network Programming $ 9,132 $ 8,037 $ 1,095 14 % Filmed Entertainment 7,302 6,899 403 6 % Television 4,734 4,778 (44 ) (1 )% Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 3,672 3,761 (89 ) (2 )% Publishing 8,248 8,826 (578 ) (7 )% Other 618 1,104 (486 ) (44 )% Total revenues $ 33,706 $ 33,405 $ 301 1 % Segment operating income (loss): Cable Network Programming $ 3,295 $ 2,760 $ 535 19 % Filmed Entertainment 1,132 927 205 22 % Television 706 681 25 4 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 254 232 22 9 % Publishing 597 864 (267 ) (31 )% Other (605 ) (614 ) 9 (1 )% Total segment operating income $ 5,379 $ 4,850 $ 529 11 % 57 Table of Contents Management believes that total segment operating income is an appropriate measure for evaluating the operating performance of the Company business segments because it is the primary measure used by the Company chief operating decision maker to evaluate the performance and allocate resources within the Company businesses. Total segment operating income provides management, investors and equity analysts a measure to analyze operating performance of each of the Company business segments and its enterprise value against historical data and competitors data, although historical results may not be indicative of future results (as operating performance is highly contingent on many factors, including customer tastes and preferences). The following table reconciles total segment operating income to income from continuing operations before income tax expense. For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 (in millions) Total segment operating income $ 5,379 $ 4,850 Impairment and restructuring charges (3,005 ) (313 ) Equity earnings of affiliates 730 462 Interest expense, net (1,034 ) (966 ) Interest income 135 126 Other, net 7 18 Income from continuing operations before income tax expense $ 2,212 $ 4,177 Cable Network Programming (27% and 24% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2012 and 2011, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, revenues at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $1,095 million, or 14%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to higher net affiliate and advertising revenues. Domestic net affiliate revenues increased 12% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, primarily due to higher average rates per subscriber at the RSNs, FOX News and FX. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, domestic advertising revenues increased 9% primarily due to higher pricing and volume at FX and FOX News. The increases in domestic net affiliate and advertising revenues were partially offset by allowances at the RSNs and fewer NBA telecasts, respectively, related to the NBA lockout during the 2011-2012 NBA season. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, international net affiliate revenues increased 27%, with approximately two thirds of the increase primarily due to higher subscribers at FIC and the remaining increase resulting from the consolidation of FPAS. International advertising revenues increased 13% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, primarily due to improved advertising revenues in Latin America and Asia and an increase at STAR in India due to higher pricing, increased market share and improved ratings. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, operating income at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $535 million, or 19%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, partially offset by a $560 million increase in expenses, due to higher programming costs, including rights fees for the Ultimate Fighting Championship, which was not broadcast in fiscal 2011, and the consolidation of FPAS. Filmed Entertainment (22% and 21% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2012 and 2011, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment increased $403 million, or 6%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the inclusion of revenues from Shine, which was acquired in fiscal 2011, an increase in license fees for How I Met Your Mother and higher licensing revenues for 58 Table of Contents Avatar . Also contributing to the revenue increase was approximately $300 million in digital distribution revenues from the licensing of the Company television content. The revenue increases were partially offset by decreased home entertainment revenues and worldwide theatrical revenues. Fiscal 2012 included the worldwide theatrical and home entertainment success of Rise of the Planet of the Apes and Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked , the worldwide theatrical success of Prometheus and the home entertainment and pay television performances of Rio and X-Men: First Class as compared to fiscal 2011 which included the successful worldwide theatrical and home entertainment release of The Chronicles of Narnia: Voyage of the Dawn Treader and Black Swan , the worldwide theatrical release of Rio and X-Men: First Class and the home entertainment and pay television performances of Avatar . For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, operating income at the Filmed Entertainment segment increased $205 million, or 22%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, lower releasing costs and lower production amortization costs, partially offset by the inclusion of expenses at Shine. Television (14% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2012 and 2011) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, revenues at the Television segment decreased $44 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the absence of advertising revenues generated from the broadcast of the Super Bowl, which was broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2011, lower ratings for American Idol , and lower political advertising revenues at the Company television stations due to the 2010 mid-term elections in fiscal 2011. Partially offsetting this decrease was higher retransmission consent revenues, higher pricing and improved ratings, primarily for the launch of the new series The X-Factor and New Girl , and higher NFL and MLB advertising revenues. The NFL advertising revenue increased due to higher pricing and the MLB advertising revenue increased due to the broadcast of two additional post-season games during fiscal 2012. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, operating income at the Television segment increased $25 million, or 4%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above and the absence of programming costs related to the broadcast of the Super Bowl, partially offset by higher prime-time entertainment and sports programming costs and higher marketing costs in support of the launch of the new series. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (11% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2012 and 2011) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, SKY Italia revenues decreased $89 million, or 2%, as compared to fiscal 2011. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, revenues, on a local currency basis, were relatively consistent with fiscal 2011. SKY Italia had a net decrease of approximately 71,000 subscribers during fiscal 2012, which decreased SKY Italia total subscriber base to 4.9 million at June 30, 2012, reflecting the continued challenging economic environment in Italy. The total churn for fiscal 2012 was approximately 641,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.9 million, as compared to churn of approximately 508,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.9 million in fiscal 2011. Subscriber churn for the period represents the number of SKY Italia subscribers whose service was disconnected during the period. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro resulted in a revenue decrease of approximately $78 million as compared to fiscal 2011. Average revenue per subscriber ( ARPU ) of approximately 41 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 decreased from approximately 43 reported in fiscal 2011, primarily due to the negative impact of subscriber discounts. SKY Italia calculates ARPU by dividing total subscriber-related revenues for the period by the average subscribers for the period and dividing that amount by the number of months in the period. Subscriber-related revenues are comprised of total subscription revenue, pay-per-view revenue and equipment rental revenue for the period. Average subscribers are calculated for the respective periods by adding the beginning and ending subscribers for the period and dividing by two. 59 Table of Contents Subscriber acquisition costs per subscriber ( SAC ) of approximately 400 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 increased from fiscal 2011, primarily due to higher marketing costs on a per subscriber basis. SAC is calculated by dividing total subscriber acquisition costs for a period by the number of gross SKY Italia subscribers added during the period. Subscriber acquisition costs include the cost of the commissions paid to retailers and other distributors, the cost of equipment sold directly by SKY Italia to subscribers and the costs related to installation and acquisition advertising net of any upfront activation fee. SKY Italia excludes the value of equipment capitalized under SKY Italia equipment lease program, as well as payments and the value of returned equipment related to disconnected lease program subscribers from subscriber acquisition costs. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, SKY Italia operating income increased $22 million, or 9%, as compared to fiscal 2011. On a local currency basis, expenses were lower by 1% primarily due to lower installation costs, lower programming costs resulting from the absence of the FIFA World Cup, and the absence of the prior year rebranding campaign. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro resulted in an operating income decrease of approximately $2 million as compared to fiscal 2011. Publishing (24% and 27% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2012 and 2011, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, revenues at the Publishing segment decreased $578 million, or 7%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to lower revenues in the U.K., principally resulting from the absence of $226 million in revenue resulting from the shutdown of The News of the World in July 2011, lower revenues at the Australian newspapers and lower advertising revenues at the integrated marketing services business resulting from lower volume of in-store and coupon marketing products. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against local currencies, primarily the Australian dollar, resulted in a revenue increase of approximately $104 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, operating income at the Publishing segment decreased $267 million, or 31%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the revenue decreases noted above and the absence of $122 million in operating profit resulting from the shutdown of The News of the World , partially offset by lower litigation settlement charges and Dow Jones cost saving initiatives. The fiscal 2012 litigation settlement related to eBooks pricing was lower than the litigation settlement charge of $125 million at the integrated marketing services business included in fiscal 2011. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against local currencies, primarily the Australian Dollar, resulted in an operating income increase of approximately $11 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. Other (2% and 3% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2012 and 2011, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012, revenues at the Other segment decreased approximately $486 million, or 44%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the dispositions of Myspace, News Outdoor Russia and Fox Mobile, partially offset by the inclusion of revenues from Wireless Generation, which was acquired in fiscal 2011. Operating results at the Other segment for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 improved $9 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to the net impact of the dispositions noted above, partially offset by the impact of legal and professional fees related to The News of the World investigations and litigation and costs for related civil settlements. 60 Table of Contents Results of Operations Fiscal 2011 versus Fiscal 2010 The following table sets forth the Company operating results for fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Change % Change (in millions, except %) Revenues $ 33,405 $ 32,778 $ 627 2 % Operating expenses (21,058 ) (21,015 ) (43 ) Selling, general and administrative (6,306 ) (6,619 ) 313 (5 )% Depreciation and amortization (1,191 ) (1,185 ) (6 ) 1 % Impairment and restructuring charges (313 ) (253 ) (60 ) 24 % Equity earnings of affiliates 462 448 14 3 % Interest expense, net (966 ) (991 ) 25 (3 )% Interest income 126 91 35 38 % Other, net 18 69 (51 ) (74 )% Income before income tax expense 4,177 3,323 854 26 % Income tax expense (1,029 ) (679 ) (350 ) 52 % Income from continuing operations 3,148 2,644 504 19 % Loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of taxes (254 ) (254 ) * * Net income 2,894 2,644 250 9 % Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests (155 ) (105 ) (50 ) 48 % Net income attributable to News Corporation stockholders $ 2,739 $ 2,539 $ 200 8 % ** not meaningful Overview The Company revenues increased 2% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was primarily due to revenue increases at the Cable Network Programming, Television and Publishing segments. The Cable Network Programming segment revenues increased primarily due to increases in net affiliate and advertising revenues. The increase at the Television segment was primarily due to advertising revenues from the Super Bowl which was broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2011, higher pricing resulting from improvements in the advertising markets and higher comparative political advertising due to the 2010 mid-term elections. The revenue increase at the Publishing segment was primarily due to favorable foreign exchange fluctuations and higher advertising and circulation revenues at The Wall Street Journal. These revenue increases were partially offset by revenue decreases at the Filmed Entertainment and Other segments. Revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment decreased primarily due to lower worldwide theatrical and home entertainment revenues resulting principally from the inclusion in fiscal 2010 of the releases of Avatar and Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs with no comparable releases in fiscal 2011 . The decrease at the Other segment was primarily the result of lower advertising and search revenues at Myspace. Operating expenses increased $43 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to higher programming costs at the Cable Network Programming segment as well as higher programming costs at the Television segment due to the broadcast of the Super Bowl partially offset by lower amortization of production costs and lower participation costs at the Filmed Entertainment segment due to the fiscal 2010 releases of Avatar and Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs with no comparable releases in fiscal 2011. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 5% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 due to lower litigation settlement costs at the Publishing segment. Depreciation and amortization for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 increased $6 million as compared to fiscal 2010 as additional depreciation and amortization from the fiscal 2011 acquisitions was partially offset by certain assets becoming fully depreciated or amortized and the absence of depreciation and amortization related to businesses disposed of in fiscal 2010 and 2011. 61 Table of Contents Impairment and restructuring charges During the second quarter of fiscal 2011, the Company performed an interim impairment assessment of the Digital Media Group reporting unit goodwill. As a result of the review performed, the Company recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $168 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. The Company recorded restructuring charges of approximately $145 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. The restructuring charges primarily reflect a $115 million charge related to the Company digital media properties and $25 million related to termination benefits recorded at the newspaper businesses. The charges at the Company digital media properties were a result of an organizational restructuring to align resources more closely with business priorities and consisted of facility related costs of $95 million, termination benefits of $18 million and other associated costs of $2 million. During fiscal 2010, the Company determined that it was more likely than not that it would sell or dispose its News Outdoor and Fox Mobile businesses which were considered reporting units under ASC 350 Intangibles Goodwill and Other ( ASC 350 ). In connection with such potential sales, the Company reviewed these businesses for impairment and recognized a non-cash impairment charge of $200 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010. The impairment charge consisted of a write-down of $52 million in finite-lived intangible assets, a write-down of $137 million in goodwill and a write-down of fixed assets of $11 million. Fox Mobile was sold in December 2010 and News Outdoor was sold in July 2011. During fiscal 2010, the Company recorded approximately $53 million of restructuring charges in the consolidated statements of operations. The restructuring charges reflect an $18 million charge related to the sales and distribution operations of the STAR channels, a $19 million charge related to termination benefits recorded at the newspaper businesses, a $7 million charge related to the restructuring program at Fox Mobile and $9 million of accretion on facility termination obligations. Equity earnings of affiliates Equity earnings of affiliates for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 increased $14 million as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase in equity earnings from the Company Other equity affiliates of $74 million was primarily due to a gain related to the disposal of a business at NDS during fiscal 2011. The decrease in equity earnings from the Company DBS equity affiliates of $36 million was primarily due to lower contributions from BSkyB resulting from the absence of a gain related to the partial sale of its ITV investment and the absence of a favorable litigation settlement in fiscal 2010, partially offset by higher subscription revenues and a gain related to a business disposal in fiscal 2011. The decrease in equity earnings from the Company Cable channel equity affiliates of $24 million was primarily due to higher sports programming costs. For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Change % Change (in millions, except %) DBS equity affiliates $ 305 $ 341 $ (36 ) (11 )% Cable channel equity affiliates 42 66 (24 ) (36 )% Other equity affiliates 115 41 74 * * Total equity earnings of affiliates $ 462 $ 448 $ 14 3 % ** not meaningful Interest expense, net Interest expense, net for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 decreased $25 million as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to the redemption of the Company 0.75% Senior Exchangeable BUCS and 5% TOPrS in fiscal 2010. This decrease was partially offset by interest expense related to the $2.5 billion in senior notes issued in February 2011. Interest income Interest income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 increased by $35 million as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to higher cash balances. 62 Table of Contents Other, net For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 (in millions) Gain on STAR China transaction (a) $ 55 $ Loss on disposal of Fox Mobile (a) (29 ) Loss on early extinguishment of debt (b) (36 ) Gain on the sale of eastern European television stations (a) 195 Gain (loss) on the financial indexes business transaction (a) 43 (23 ) Loss on Photobucket transaction (a) (32 ) Change in fair value of exchangeable and convertible securities (c)(d) 46 3 Other (61 ) (74 ) Total Other, net $ 18 $ 69 (a) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (b) See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (c) See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (d) The Company had certain exchangeable debt securities which contained embedded derivatives. Pursuant to ASC 815, these embedded derivatives were not designated as hedges and, as such, changes in their fair value were recognized in Other, net in the consolidated statements of operations. The Company redeemed the exchangeable debt securities in fiscal 2010. Income tax expense The Company tax provision and related tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 were lower than the statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences, the sale of interests in subsidiaries and the resolution of tax matters. The Company tax provision and related tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 were lower than the statutory rate primarily due to the recognition of prior year tax credits, permanent differences and the recognition of tax assets on the disposition of certain assets. The recognition of prior year tax credits relates to the Company election to credit certain prior year taxes instead of claiming deductions. Loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax In June 2011, the Company transferred the equity and related assets of Myspace to a digital media company in exchange for an equity interest in the acquirer. The loss on this transaction was approximately $254 million, net of a tax benefit of $61 million, or ($0.10) per diluted share and was included in Loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax in the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. Net income Net income increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to the higher revenues and lower litigation settlement costs noted above, partially offset by the loss on the Myspace transaction. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to higher results at the Company majority owned businesses. 63 Table of Contents Segment Analysis The following table sets forth the Company revenues and segment operating income for fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Change % Change (in millions, except %) Revenues: Cable Network Programming $ 8,037 $ 7,038 $ 999 14 % Filmed Entertainment 6,899 7,631 (732 ) (10 )% Television 4,778 4,228 550 13 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 3,761 3,802 (41 ) (1 )% Publishing 8,826 8,548 278 3 % Other 1,104 1,531 (427 ) (28 )% Total revenues $ 33,405 $ 32,778 $ 627 2 % Segment operating income (loss): Cable Network Programming $ 2,760 $ 2,268 $ 492 22 % Filmed Entertainment 927 1,349 (422 ) (31 )% Television 681 220 461 * * Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 232 230 2 1 % Publishing 864 467 397 85 % Other (614 ) (575 ) (39 ) 7 % Total segment operating income $ 4,850 $ 3,959 $ 891 23 % ** not meaningful Management believes that total segment operating income is an appropriate measure for evaluating the operating performance of the Company business segments because it is the primary measure used by the Company chief operating decision maker to evaluate the performance and allocate resources within the Company businesses. Total segment operating income provides management, investors and equity analysts a measure to analyze operating performance of each of the Company business segments and its enterprise value against historical data and competitors data, although historical results may not be indicative of future results (as operating performance is highly contingent on many factors, including customer tastes and preferences). The following table reconciles total segment operating income to income from continuing operations before income tax expense. For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 (in millions) Total segment operating income $ 4,850 $ 3,959 Impairment and restructuring charges (313 ) (253 ) Equity earnings of affiliates 462 448 Interest expense, net (966 ) (991 ) Interest income 126 91 Other, net 18 69 Income from continuing operations before income tax expense $ 4,177 $ 3,323 Cable Network Programming (24% and 21% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) 64 Table of Contents For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, revenues at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $999 million, or 14%, as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to higher net affiliate and advertising revenues. Domestic net affiliate and advertising revenues increased 10% and 17%, respectively, primarily due to increases at the RSNs, FOX News and FX. International net affiliate and advertising revenues increased 20% and 22%, respectively. The domestic net affiliate revenue increase for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 was primarily due to higher average rates per subscriber and a higher number of subscribers. The increase in domestic advertising revenues was primarily due to higher pricing, ratings growth and additional commercial spots sold. The increase in international net affiliate revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 was primarily due to higher net affiliate revenues at FIC resulting primarily from increases in the number of subscribers at existing channels. The increase in international advertising revenues was primarily due to increases at STAR and FIC. The higher advertising revenues at STAR were primarily due to the strengthening of the advertising market in India and higher ratings. The strengthening of the worldwide advertising markets led to improvements at existing FIC channels in Asia and Latin America. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, operating income at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $492 million, or 22%, as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above. The revenue increases were partially offset by a $507 million increase in expenses, primarily due to higher sports rights amortization and higher entertainment programming costs. Filmed Entertainment (21% and 23% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment decreased $732 million, or 10%, as compared to fiscal 2010. The revenue decrease was primarily driven by the successful worldwide theatrical and home entertainment releases of Avatar , Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs and Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Squeakquel during fiscal 2010 as compared to the worldwide theatrical and home entertainment releases of The Chronicles of Narnia: Voyage of the Dawn Treader, and Black Swan and the worldwide theatrical release of Rio in fiscal 2011. The revenue decreases noted above were partially offset by higher contributions from Twentieth Century Fox Television and the inclusion of revenues from Shine which was acquired in fiscal 2011. The revenue increase at Twentieth Century Fox Television was primarily due to higher home entertainment, international television and digital distribution revenues from Glee, Modern Family, Sons of Anarchy, initial syndication revenues from How I Met Your Mother and American Dad and revenues from the Glee concert tour. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, the Filmed Entertainment segment operating income decreased $422 million, or 31%, as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to the revenue decreases noted above, partially offset by lower amortization of production and participation costs. Television (14% and 13% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, Television segment revenues increased $550 million, or 13%, as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was primarily due to increased advertising revenues at the television stations owned by the Company and at FOX as well as higher retransmission consent revenues. The advertising revenue increase reflects the broadcast of the Super Bowl, which was not broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2010, higher revenues from NFL regular season games, higher pricing resulting from improvements in the advertising markets, particularly in the automotive and financial sectors and higher comparative political advertising due to the 2010 mid-term elections. These revenue increases were partially offset by the absence of revenue from the broadcast of the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) games which were broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2010 and lower MLB advertising revenues due to lower post-season ratings and the broadcast of one less post-season game. 65 Table of Contents The Television segment reported an increase in operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 of $461 million as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, lower prime-time entertainment programming costs and the absence of BCS programming costs, partially offset by higher NFL programming costs due to the broadcast of the Super Bowl. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (11% and 12% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, SKY Italia revenues decreased $41 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2010, due to unfavorable foreign exchange movements. SKY Italia had an increase of approximately 230,000 subscribers during fiscal 2011, bringing the total subscriber base to 4.97 million at June 30, 2011. Revenue, on a local currency basis, was consistent with fiscal 2010 as higher subscription revenues were offset by lower advertising revenues, primarily due to the absence of the FIFA World Cup. The total churn for fiscal 2011 was approximately 508,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.9 million, as compared to churn of approximately 630,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.8 million in fiscal 2010. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro resulted in a decrease in revenues of approximately 2% as compared to fiscal 2010. ARPU of approximately 43 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 was consistent with fiscal 2010. SAC of approximately 335 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 increased from fiscal 2010, primarily due to higher average installation costs related to an increased penetration of high definition personal video recorder set-top boxes. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, SKY Italia operating income increased $2 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2010, as lower programming expenses related to FIFA World Cup and Olympic Games which occurred in fiscal 2010, were offset by the lower revenues noted above and higher installation costs. Publishing (27% and 26% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, revenues at the Publishing segment increased $278 million, or 3%, as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase in revenues was primarily due to increased revenues at the Australian newspapers due to favorable foreign exchange fluctuations and higher advertising and circulation revenues at The Wall Street Journal . These revenue increases were partially offset by the absence of revenues from the financial indexes business which was disposed of in fiscal 2010, lower book sales due to fewer new releases and lower licensing fees resulting from a settlement received at HarperCollins in fiscal 2010. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar and British pound sterling resulted in a revenue increase of approximately $309 million, or 4%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, operating income at the Publishing segment increased $397 million, or 85%, as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase in operating income was primarily due to lower litigation settlement costs at the Company integrated marketing services business and favorable foreign exchange fluctuations at the Australian and United Kingdom newspapers. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar and British pound sterling resulted in an operating income increase of approximately $50 million, or 11%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. Other (3% and 5% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) Revenues at the Other segment decreased $427 million, or 28%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, as compared to fiscal 2010. The decrease was primarily due to decreased revenues from the Company digital media properties of $342 million, principally due to lower advertising and search revenues at Myspace. The decrease was also due to the absence of revenue related to the eastern European television stations disposed of in 66 Table of Contents fiscal 2010 of $86 million and lower revenues from Fox Mobile of $146 million due to its fiscal 2011 disposition. The revenue decreases were partially offset by increased revenues at News Outdoor and the inclusion of revenues from Wireless Generation which was acquired in fiscal 2011. Operating results for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 decreased $39 million, or 7%, as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to lower operating results from the Company digital media properties, principally resulting from the revenue declines noted above. These decreases were partially offset by lower operating losses from Fox Mobile and Fox Audience Network resulting from their fiscal 2011 dispositions and improved operating results at News Outdoor. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Current Financial Condition The Company principal source of liquidity is internally generated funds. The Company also has a five-year unused $2 billion revolving credit facility, which expires in May 2017, and has access to various film co-production alternatives to supplement its cash flows. In addition, the Company has access to the worldwide capital markets, subject to market conditions. As of June 30, 2012, the Company was in compliance with all of the covenants under the revolving credit facility, and it does not anticipate any violation of such covenants. The Company internally generated funds are highly dependent upon the state of the advertising markets and public acceptance of its film and television products. As of June 30, 2012, the Company consolidated assets included $9.6 billion in cash and cash equivalents, of which $2.1 billion was held by the Company foreign subsidiaries. The Company earns income outside the U.S., which is deemed to be permanently reinvested in certain foreign jurisdictions. The Company does not currently intend nor foresee a need to repatriate these funds. Should the Company require more capital in the U.S. than is generated by or available to its domestic operations, the Company could elect to repatriate funds held in foreign jurisdictions which may result in higher effective tax rates and higher cash paid for income taxes for the Company. The principal uses of cash that affect the Company liquidity position include the following: investments in the production and distribution of new feature films and television programs; the acquisition of and payments under programming rights for entertainment and sports programming; paper purchases; operational expenditures including employee costs; capital expenditures; interest expenses; income tax payments; investments in associated entities; dividends; acquisitions; debt repayments; and stock repurchases. The capitalization of the global publishing company that would be created through the proposed separation of the Company publishing and media and entertainment businesses into two distinct publicly traded companies may affect the Company liquidity position. In addition to the acquisitions, sales and possible acquisitions disclosed elsewhere, the Company has evaluated, and expects to continue to evaluate, possible acquisitions and dispositions of certain businesses. Such transactions may be material and may involve cash, the Company securities or the assumption of additional indebtedness. Sources and Uses of Cash Fiscal 2012 vs. Fiscal 2011 Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012 and 2011 was as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 3,790 $ 4,471 67 Table of Contents The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 was primarily due to lower receipts at the Publishing and Television segments and higher programming payments at the Direct Broadcast Satellite Television segment, as well as higher tax, pension and interest payments and the costs incurred for the U.K. and related investigations. This decrease was partially offset by higher receipts at the Cable Network Programming and Filmed Entertainment segments. The decrease at the Publishing segment was due to lower advertising receipts and the absence of contributions from The News of the World and the decrease at the Television segment was due to the absence of the broadcast of the Super Bowl. The increase at the Cable Network Programming segment was due to higher affiliate receipts and the increase at the Filmed Entertainment segment was due to lower production spending along with higher licensing revenue of television product. Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012 and 2011 was as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 Net cash used in investing activities $ (1,421 ) $ (2,247 ) The decrease in net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 was primarily due to the sale of a portion of the Company BSkyB investment in accordance with BSkyB share repurchase program, lower capital expenditures and lower cash paid for acquisitions. In fiscal 2012, the Company acquired the portion of FPAS it did not own and in fiscal 2011, the Company acquired Shine and Wireless Generation. Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012 and 2011 was as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities $ (5,115 ) $ 1,360 The change in net cash used in financing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012 as compared to net cash provided by financing activities in fiscal 2011 was primarily due to share repurchases of approximately $4.6 billion during fiscal 2012, with no comparable share repurchases in fiscal 2011. The Company currently has approximately $5 billion remaining of the $10 billion stock repurchase program. The Company may repurchase the remaining amount under the stock repurchase program in fiscal 2013 and expects to fund this through a combination of cash generated by operations and cash on hand. The total dividends declared related to fiscal 2012 results were $0.17 per share of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. In August 2012, the Company declared the final dividend on fiscal 2012 results of $0.085 per share for Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. This together with the interim dividend of $0.085 per share of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock constitute the total dividend relating to fiscal 2012. Based on the number of shares outstanding as of June 30, 2012, the total aggregate cash dividends expected to be paid to stockholders in fiscal 2013 is approximately $400 million. Sources and Uses of Cash Fiscal 2011 vs. Fiscal 2010 Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011 and 2010 was as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 4,471 $ 3,854 68 Table of Contents The increase in net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 was primarily due to higher affiliate receipts at the Cable Network Programming segment, higher collections at the DBS segment, higher advertising receipts at the Television segment, lower litigation settlement payments at the Publishing segment and lower pension contributions. These increases were partially offset by lower worldwide theatrical receipts, due to the absence of Avatar, and higher production spending at the Filmed Entertainment segment, lower receipts at the digital media properties due to lower advertising and search revenues and higher tax payments. Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011 and 2010 was as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Net cash used in investing activities $ (2,247 ) $ (313 ) The increase in net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 was primarily due to the absence of proceeds from the sale of the financial indexes businesses and the majority of the Company eastern European television stations which were sold in fiscal 2010, cash utilized for the Company acquisitions of Shine and Wireless Generation in fiscal 2011 and higher capital expenditures. The increase in capital expenditures was primarily due to higher equipment purchases at the DBS segment and higher facility and equipment purchases at the Publishing segment. Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011 and 2010 was as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities $ 1,360 $ (1,445 ) The change in net cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to the net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2010 was primarily due to higher borrowings and lower repayments of borrowings. During fiscal 2011, News America Incorporated, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, ( NAI ), issued $2.5 billion in senior notes as compared to fiscal 2010 which included the issuance of $1.0 billion in senior notes. During fiscal 2011, NAI redeemed a portion of its 9.25% Senior Debentures due in February 2013 for $262 million and $82 million of its LYONs. The Company also repaid approximately $134 million assumed as part of the Shine acquisition in fiscal 2011. In fiscal 2010, NAI redeemed its 0.75% Senior Exchangeable BUCS for $1.6 billion, its 5% TOPrS for $134 million and its 4.75% Senior Notes due March 2010 for $150 million. 69 Table of Contents Debt Instruments The following table summarizes borrowings and repayments for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2012, 2011 and 2010. For the years ended June 30, 2012 2011 2010 (in millions) Borrowings (a) Notes due February 2041 $ $ 1,469 $ Notes due February 2021 984 Notes due August 2039 593 Notes due August 2020 396 All other 18 38 Total borrowings $ $ 2,471 $ 1,027 Repayments of borrowings Senior Debentures due February 2013 $ $ (262 ) $ Debt assumed in Shine acquisition (b) (134 ) LYONs (82 ) BUCS (1,655 ) TOPrS (134 ) Notes due March 2010 (150 ) Bank loans (32 ) (46 ) (82 ) All other (3 ) (33 ) (59 ) Total repayment of borrowings $ (35 ) $ (557 ) $ (2,080 ) (a) See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to borrowings. (b) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to the Shine acquisition. Ratings of the Public Debt The table below summarizes the Company credit ratings as of June 30, 2012. Rating Agency Senior Debt Outlook Moody Baa1 Stable S&P BBB+ CreditWatch/Negative Revolving Credit Agreement In May 2012, the Company refinanced the $2.25 billion revolving credit agreement ( the Prior Credit Agreement ) with a new $2 billion unsecured revolving credit facility (the New Credit Agreement ), among NAI as Borrower, the Company as Parent Guarantor, the lenders named therein (the Lenders ), the initial issuing banks named therein, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. ( JPMorgan Chase ) and Citibank, N.A. ( Citibank ) as Co-Administrative Agents, JPMorgan Chase as Designated Agent and Bank of America, N.A. ( Bank of America ) as Syndication Agent. The New Credit Agreement has a sub-limit of $400 million (or its equivalent in Euros) available for the issuance of letters of credit and a maturity date of May 2017. Under the New Credit Agreement, the Company may request an increase in the amount of the credit facility up to a maximum amount of $2.5 billion and the Company may request that the maturity date be extended for up to two additional one-year periods. Borrowings are issuable in U.S. dollars only, while letters of credit are issuable in U.S. dollars or Euros. The significant terms of the agreement include the requirement that the Company maintain specific leverage 70 Table of Contents ratios and limitations on secured indebtedness. Fees under the New Credit Agreement will be based on the Company long-term senior unsecured non-credit enhanced debt ratings. Given the current debt ratings, NAI pays a facility fee of 0.125% and an initial drawn cost of LIBOR plus 1.125%. Commitments and Guarantees The Company has commitments under certain firm contractual arrangements ( firm commitments ) to make future payments. These firm commitments secure the future rights to various assets and services to be used in the normal course of operations. The following table summarizes the Company material firm commitments as of June 30, 2012. As of June 30, 2012 Payments Due by Period Total 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years (in millions) Contracts for capital expenditure $ 243 $ 191 $ 41 $ 11 $ Operating leases (a) Land and buildings 2,558 363 652 553 990 Plant and machinery 1,423 239 371 309 504 Other commitments Borrowings 15,455 273 903 600 13,679 Sports programming rights (b) 36,309 3,367 7,295 5,725 19,922 Entertainment programming rights 3,927 1,466 1,395 856 210 Other commitments and contractual obligations (c) 3,729 1,061 1,204 505 959 Total commitments, borrowings and contractual obligations $ 63,644 $ 6,960 $ 11,861 $ 8,559 $ 36,264 The Company also has certain contractual arrangements in relation to certain investees that would require the Company to make payments or provide funding if certain circumstances occur ( contingent guarantees ). The Company does not expect that these contingent guarantees will result in any material amounts being paid by the Company in the foreseeable future. The timing of the amounts presented in the table below reflect when the maximum contingent guarantees will expire and does not indicate that the Company expects to incur an obligation to make payments during that time frame. As of June 30, 2012 Total Amounts Committed Amount of Guarantees Expiration Per Period Contingent guarantees: 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years (in millions) Sports programming rights (d) $ 450 $ 65 $ 385 $ $ Indemnity (e) 774 27 54 54 639 Letters of credit and other 158 158 $ 1,382 $ 250 $ 439 $ 54 $ 639 (a) The Company leases transponders, office facilities, warehouse facilities, printing plants, equipment and microwave transmitters used to carry broadcast signals. These leases, which are classified as operating leases, expire at certain dates through fiscal 2090. (b) Under the Company contract with NFL, remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast certain football games are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2022. 71 Table of Contents The Company contract with MLB gives the Company rights to broadcast certain regular season and post season games, as well as exclusive rights to broadcast MLB World Series and All-Star Game through the 2013 MLB season. The Company contracts with NASCAR give the Company rights to broadcast certain races and ancillary content through calendar year 2014. Under the Company contracts with certain collegiate conferences, remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast certain sporting events are payable over the remaining terms of the contracts. Under the Company contract with Italy National League Football, remaining future minimum payments for programming rights to broadcast National League Football matches are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2017. Under the Company contract with the Board of Control for Cricket in India ( BCCI ), remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast international and domestic cricket matches and series are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2018. In addition, the Company has certain other local sports broadcasting rights. (c) Primarily includes obligations relating to third party printing contracts, television rating services and paper purchase obligations. (d) ESPN STAR Sports, a joint-venture in which the Company owns a 50% equity interest, entered into an agreement for global programming rights to International Cricket Council Events. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company and the other joint-venture partner have jointly guaranteed the programming rights obligation. Additionally, under the terms of the agreement with BCCI, the Company was required to obtain a bank guarantee covering the programming rights obligation. (e) In connection with the transaction related to the Dow Jones financial index businesses, the Company agreed to indemnify CME Group Inc. ( CME ) with respect to any payments of principal, premium and interest CME makes under its guarantee of the venture financing. (See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for further discussion of this transaction.) The table excludes the Company pension, other postretirement benefits ( OPEB ) obligations and the gross unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions as the Company is unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount and timing. The Company made contributions of $255 million and $158 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2012 and fiscal 2011, respectively. The majority of these contributions were voluntarily made to improve the funding status of the plans. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns and interest rates and statutory requirements. Assuming that actual plan asset returns are consistent with the Company expected plan returns in fiscal 2012 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant, the Company would not be required to make any material contributions to its U.S. pension plans for the immediate future. The Company expects to make a required contribution of approximately $50 million to its pension plans and may make a voluntary contribution in fiscal 2013. Payments due to participants under the Company pension plans are primarily paid out of underlying trusts. Payments due under the Company OPEB plans are not required to be funded in advance, but are paid as medical costs are incurred by covered retiree populations, and are principally dependent upon the future cost of retiree medical benefits under the Company pension plans. The Company expects its net OPEB payments to approximate $20 million in fiscal 2013. (See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for further discussion of the Company pension and OPEB plans.) 72 Table of Contents Contingencies Other than as disclosed in the notes to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation, the Company is party to several other purchase and sale arrangements which become exercisable over the next ten years by the Company or the counter-party to the agreement. None of these arrangements that become or are exercisable in the next twelve months are material. Purchase arrangements that are exercisable by the counter-party to the agreement, and that are outside the sole control of the Company, are accounted for in accordance with ASC 480-10-S99-3A, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Accordingly, the fair values of such purchase arrangements are classified in redeemable noncontrolling interests. As disclosed in the notes to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation, U.K. and U.S. regulators and governmental authorities are conducting investigations after allegations of phone hacking and inappropriate payments to public officials at our former publication, The News of the World , and other related matters, including investigations into whether similar conduct may have occurred at the Company subsidiaries outside of the U.K. The Company is cooperating fully with these investigations. It is possible that these proceedings could damage our reputation and might impair our ability to conduct our business. The Company is not able to predict the ultimate outcome or cost associated with these investigations. Violations of law may result in civil, administrative or criminal fines or penalties. The Company has admitted liability in a number of civil cases related to the phone hacking allegations and has settled a number of cases. At June 30, 2012, the Company has provided for its best estimate of the liability for the claims that have been filed. The Company has announced a process under which parties can pursue claims against the Company, and management believes that it is probable that additional claims will be filed. It is not possible to estimate the liability for such additional claims given the information that is currently available to the Company. If more claims are filed and additional information becomes available, the Company will update the liability provision for such matters. Any fees, expenses, fines, penalties, judgments or settlements which might be incurred by the Company in connection with the various proceedings could affect the Company results of operations and financial condition. The Company operations are subject to tax in various domestic and international jurisdictions and as a matter of course, the Company is regularly audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. The Company believes it has appropriately accrued for the expected outcome of all pending tax matters and does not currently anticipate that the ultimate resolution of pending tax matters will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition, future results of operations or liquidity. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it is important to the Company financial condition and results and if it requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application. The development and selection of these critical accounting policies have been determined by management of the Company and the related disclosures have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Company Board of Directors. For the Company summary of significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. Use of Estimates The preparation of the Company consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts that are reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying disclosures. Although these estimates are based on management best knowledge of current events and actions that the Company may undertake in the future, actual results may differ from the estimates. 73 Table of Contents Revenue Recognition Television, Cable Network Programming and Direct Broadcast Satellite Advertising revenue is recognized as the commercials are aired, net of agency commissions. Subscriber fees received from subscribers, cable systems and DBS operators are recognized as revenue in the period that services are provided, net of amortization of cable distribution investments, in the case of Cable Network Programming revenues. The Company defers the cable distribution investments and amortizes the amounts on a straight-line basis over the contract period. Filmed Entertainment Revenues from distribution of feature films are recognized in accordance with ASC 926. Revenues from the theatrical distribution of motion pictures are recognized as they are exhibited and revenues from DVD and Blu-ray sales, net of a reserve for estimated returns, are recognized on the date that DVD and Blu-ray units are made widely available for sale by retailers and all Company-imposed restrictions on the sale of DVD and Blu-ray units have expired. Revenues from television distribution are recognized when the motion picture or television program is made available to the licensee for broadcast. Management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue for each film on the historical performance of similar films, incorporating factors such as the past box office record of the lead actors and actresses, the genre of the film, pre-release market research (including test market screenings) and the expected number of theaters in which the film will be released. Management updates such estimates based on information available on the actual results of each film through its life cycle. License agreements for the broadcast of theatrical and television product in the broadcast network, syndicated television and cable television markets are routinely entered into in advance of their available date for broadcast. Cash received and amounts billed in connection with such contractual rights for which revenue is not yet recognizable is classified as deferred revenue. Because deferred revenue generally relates to contracts for the licensing of theatrical and television product which have already been produced, the recognition of revenue for such completed product is principally only dependent upon the commencement of the availability period for broadcast under the terms of the related licensing agreement. Filmed Entertainment and Television Programming Costs Accounting for the production and distribution of motion pictures and television programming is in accordance with ASC 926, which requires management judgment as it relates to total revenues to be received and costs to be incurred throughout the life of each program or its license period. These judgments are used to determine the amortization of capitalized filmed entertainment and television programming costs, the expensing of participation and residual costs associated with revenues earned and any fair value adjustments. In accordance with ASC 926, the Company amortizes filmed entertainment and television programming costs using the individual-film-forecast method. Under the individual-film-forecast method, such programming costs are amortized for each film or television program in the ratio that current period actual revenue for such title bears to management estimated ultimate revenue as of the beginning of the current fiscal year to be recognized over approximately a six year period or operating profits to be realized from all media and markets for such title. Management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue for each film on factors such as historical performance of similar films, the star power of the lead actors and actresses and once released actual results of each film. For each television program, management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue on the performance of the television programming in the initial markets, the existence of future firm commitments to sell additional episodes of the program and the past performance of similar television programs. Management regularly reviews, and revises when necessary, its total revenue estimates on a title-by-title basis, which may result in a change in the rate of amortization and/or a write-down of the asset to fair value. The costs of national sports contracts at FOX and for international sports rights agreements are charged to expense based on the ratio of each period operating profit to estimated total remaining operating profit of the contract. Estimates of total operating profit can change and accordingly, are reviewed periodically and amortization is adjusted as necessary. Such changes in the future could be material. 74 Table of Contents The costs of local and regional sports contracts for a specified number of events are amortized on an event-by-event basis, while costs for local and regional sports contracts for a specified season are amortized over the season on a straight-line basis. In the first quarter of fiscal 2012, the Company voluntarily changed its method of recognizing losses on its multi-year U.S. national sports agreements by no longer accruing for estimated future losses. The Company will, however, continue to recognize programming rights at the lower of unamortized cost or estimated net realizable value in accordance with ASC 920, Entertainment Broadcasters ( ASC 920 ). The Company believes that this method is preferable because the change will (1) align the Company policy with peer companies in the media industry; (2) result in better correspondence with the substance of the event being recognized as estimated future losses will no longer be recognized; and (3) limit the effect of judgment on any potential impairment loss because the impairment analysis, which involves significant judgment about future revenue and revenue allocations, will only affect programming rights recorded on the balance sheet. Retrospective application of the change in accounting policy had no effect on the consolidated financial statements of the Company for any of the periods presented. Original cable programming is amortized on an accelerated basis. Management regularly reviews, and revises when necessary, its total revenue estimates on a contract basis, which may result in a change in the rate of amortization and/or a write-down of the asset to fair value. Property, Plant and Equipment Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost and are depreciated on a straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of such assets. Changes in circumstances, such as technological advances, changes to the Company business model or capital strategy, could result in the actual useful lives differing from the Company estimates. In those cases, where the Company determines that the useful life of buildings and equipment should be shortened, the Company would depreciate the asset over its revised remaining useful life thereby increasing depreciation expense. Intangible Assets The Company has a significant amount of intangible assets, including goodwill, FCC licenses, and other copyright products and trademarks. Intangible assets acquired in business combinations are recorded at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. Goodwill is recorded as the difference between the cost of acquiring an entity and the estimated fair values assigned to its tangible and identifiable intangible net assets and is assigned to one or more reporting units for purposes of testing for impairment. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of intangible assets acquired, their reporting unit, as well as their useful lives can significantly impact net income. The Company accounts for its business acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting. The total cost of acquisitions is allocated to the underlying net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the tangible net assets acquired is recorded as intangibles. Amounts recorded as goodwill are assigned to one or more reporting units. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other items. Identifying reporting units and assigning goodwill to them requires judgment involving the aggregation of business units with similar economic characteristics and the identification of existing business units that benefit from the acquired goodwill. The Company allocates goodwill to disposed businesses using the relative fair value method. Carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are reviewed at least annually for possible impairment in accordance with ASC 350. The Company impairment review is based on, among other methods, a discounted cash flow approach that requires significant management judgments. The Company uses 75 Table of Contents its judgment in assessing whether assets may have become impaired between annual valuations. Indicators such as unexpected adverse economic factors, unanticipated technological change or competitive activities, loss of key personnel and acts by governments and courts, may signal that an asset has become impaired. The Company uses direct valuation methods to value identifiable intangibles for purchase accounting and impairment testing. The direct valuation method used for FCC licenses requires, among other inputs, the use of published industry data that are based on subjective judgments about future advertising revenues in the markets where the Company owns television stations. This method also involves the use of management judgment in estimating an appropriate discount rate reflecting the risk of a market participant in the U.S. broadcast industry. The resulting fair values for FCC licenses are sensitive to these long-term assumptions and any variations to such assumptions could result in an impairment to existing carrying values in future periods and such impairment could be material. The Company goodwill impairment reviews are determined using a two-step process. The first step of the process is to compare the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. In performing the first step, the Company determines the fair value of a reporting unit by primarily using a discounted cash flow analysis and market-based valuation approach methodologies. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including judgments about appropriate discount rates, long-term growth rates, relevant comparable company earnings multiples and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. The cash flows employed in the analyses are based on the Company estimated outlook and various growth rates have been assumed for years beyond the long-term business plan period. Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting units. In assessing the reasonableness of its determined fair values, the Company evaluates its results against other value indicators, such as comparable public company trading values. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is not impaired and the second step of the impairment review is not necessary. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the second step of the goodwill impairment review is required to be performed to estimate the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill. The implied fair value of goodwill is determined in the same manner as the amount of goodwill recognized in a business combination. That is, the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of that unit (including any unrecognized intangible assets) as if the reporting unit had been acquired in a business combination and the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was the purchase price paid. The implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is compared with the carrying amount of that goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. As a result of the fiscal 2012 annual impairment review performed, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of approximately $2.8 billion ($2.4 billion, net of tax) during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2012. The charges consisted of a write-down of goodwill of $1.5 billion and a write-down of indefinite-lived intangible assets of $1.3 billion. The Publishing and Other segments have reporting units with goodwill that continue to be at risk for future impairment. Goodwill was $2.2 billion as of June 30, 2012 at these reporting units where goodwill is at risk for future impairment. The Company will continue to monitor its goodwill and intangible assets for possible future impairment. Income Taxes The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions in which it operates. The Company computes its annual tax rate based on the statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to it in the various jurisdictions in which it earns income. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company tax expense and in evaluating its tax positions including evaluating uncertainties under ASC 740, Income Taxes . 76 Table of Contents The Company records valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In making this assessment, management analyzes future taxable income, reversing temporary differences and ongoing tax planning strategies. Should a change in circumstances lead to a change in judgment about the realizability of deferred tax assets in future years, the Company would adjust related valuation allowances in the period that the change in circumstances occurs, along with a corresponding increase or charge to income. Employee Costs The measurement and recognition of costs of the Company various pension and other postretirement benefit plans require the use of significant management judgments, including discount rates, expected return on plan assets, future compensation and other actuarial assumptions. The Company maintains defined benefit pension plans covering a significant number of its employees and retirees. The primary plans are closed to new participants. For financial reporting purposes, net periodic pension expense (income) is calculated based upon a number of actuarial assumptions, including a discount rate for plan obligations and an expected rate of return on plan assets. The Company considers current market conditions, including changes in investment returns and interest rates, in making these assumptions. In developing the expected long-term rate of return, the Company considered the pension portfolio past average rate of returns, and future return expectations of the various asset classes. The expected long-term rate of return is based on an asset allocation assumption of 44% equities, 41% fixed-income securities and 15% in cash and other investments. The discount rate reflects the market rate for high-quality fixed-income investments on the Company annual measurement date of June 30 and is subject to change each fiscal year. The discount rate assumptions used to account for pension and other postretirement benefit plans reflect the rates at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled. The rate was determined by matching the Company expected benefit payments for the primary plans to a hypothetical yield curve developed using a portfolio of several hundred high-quality non-callable corporate bonds. The key assumptions used in developing the Company fiscal 2012, 2011 and 2010 net periodic pension expense for its plans consist of the following: 2012 2011 2010 ($ in millions) Discount rate used to determine net periodic benefit cost 5.7 % 5.7 % 7.0 % Assets: Expected rate of return 7.0 % 7.0 % 7.0 % Expected return $ 185 $ 171 $ 138 Actual return $ 68 $ 326 $ 237 (Loss)/Gain $ (117 ) $ 155 $ 99 One year actual return 2.6 % 13.7 % 12.7 % Five year actual return 2.3 % 4.4 % 3.9 % The weighted average discount rate is volatile from year to year because it is determined based upon the prevailing rates in the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia as of the measurement date. The Company will utilize a weighted average discount rate of 4.3% in calculating the fiscal 2013 net periodic pension expense for its plans. The Company will use a weighted average long-term rate of return of 6.9% for fiscal 2013 based principally on a combination of asset mix and historical experience of actual plan returns. The accumulated net pre-tax losses on the Company pension plans at June 30, 2012 were approximately $1.5 billion which increased from approximately $800 million at June 30, 2011. This increase of approximately $700 million was due primarily to a decrease in the discount rate used to measure the benefit obligation at June 30, 2012. The 77 Table of Contents accumulated pre-tax net losses at June 30, 2012 were primarily the result of changes in discount rates and deferred asset losses. Lower discount rates increase present values of benefit obligations and increase the Company deferred losses and also increase subsequent-year pension expense. Higher discount rates decrease the present values of benefit obligations and reduce the Company accumulated net loss and also decrease subsequent-year pension expense. These deferred losses are being systematically recognized in future net periodic pension expense in accordance with ASC 715, Compensation Retirement Benefits. Unrecognized losses in excess of 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or the plans projected benefit obligation are recognized over the average future service of the plan participants. The Company made contributions of $255 million, $158 million and $338 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The majority of these contributions were voluntarily made to improve the funding status of the plans which were impacted by the economic conditions noted above. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns, statutory requirements and interest rate movements. Assuming that actual plan returns are consistent with the Company expected plan returns in fiscal 2012 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant, the Company would not be required to make any material statutory contributions to its primary U.S. pension plans for the immediate future. The Company will continue to make voluntary contributions as necessary to improve funded status. Changes in net periodic pension expense may occur in the future due to changes in the Company expected rate of return on plan assets and discount rate resulting from economic events. The following table highlights the sensitivity of the Company pension obligations and expense to changes in these assumptions, assuming all other assumptions remain constant: Changes in Assumption Impact on Annual Pension Expense Impact on PBO 0.25 percentage point decrease in discount rate Increase $16 million Increase $155 million 0.25 percentage point increase in discount rate Decrease $15 million Decrease $146 million 0.25 percentage point decrease in expected rate of return on assets Increase $7 million 0.25 percentage point increase in expected rate of return on assets Decrease $7 million Fiscal 2013 net periodic pension expense for the Company pension plans is expected to be approximately $205 million as compared to $150 million for fiscal 2012. The increase is primarily related to higher amortization of deferred losses as a result of the change in the discount rate. Recent Accounting Pronouncements See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for discussion of recent accounting pronouncements. 78 Table of Contents 
