CIK: 1308161
Company Name: NEWS CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-09-01


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS This document contains statements that constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Exchange Act and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The words expect, estimate, anticipate, predict, believe and similar expressions and variations thereof are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements appear in a number of places in this document and include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of the Company, its directors or its officers with respect to, among other things, trends affecting the Company financial condition or results of operations. The readers of this document are cautioned that any forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties. More information regarding these risks, uncertainties and other factors is set forth under the heading Risk Factors on pages 25 through 27 of Item 1 of this Annual Report. The Company does not ordinarily make projections of its future operating results and undertakes no obligation (and expressly disclaims any obligation) to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Readers should carefully review this document and the other documents filed by the Company with the SEC. This section should be read together with the audited consolidated financial statements of the Company and related notes set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report. FISCAL-YEAR HIGHLIGHTS News Corporation (together with its subsidiaries, the Company ) fiscal 2005 revenue was $23.9 billion, a 15% increase over fiscal 2004 revenue. The Company fiscal 2005 consolidated operating income was $3.6 billion, a 22% increase over fiscal 2004 consolidated operating income. The year-on-year operating income growth was driven principally by increases at the Filmed Entertainment, Newspapers, Direct Broadcast Satellite Television and Cable Network Programming segments. Net income for fiscal 2005 was $2.1 billion, an increase of $595 million from fiscal 2004 net income, primarily driven by increased consolidated operating income, an improvement in earnings from the Company equity affiliates, and the increase in the change in fair value of certain outstanding exchangeable debt securities. Financial Highlights Operating income grew at the Cable Network Programming, Filmed Entertainment, Television, Newspapers, Magazines and Inserts and Book Publishing segments. Cable Network Programming operating income increased 44% on advertising and affiliate revenue growth at all major cable channels. Home entertainment sales of film and television titles drove a 17% increase in Filmed Entertainment operating income. Television segment operating income increased slightly as the operating income growth at STAR was offset by higher programming costs at the FOX network and a soft U.S. advertising market. All print segments reported higher earnings contributions led by advertising growth and the inclusion of Queensland Press Pty Limited ( QPL ) results within Australian newspapers, as well as strong advertising at Magazines and Inserts InStore division. SKY Italia operating results improved $104 million with the addition of more than 650,000 net subscribers. Strategic Transaction Highlights The Company completed its reorganization into the United States and acquired the outstanding 58% controlling interest in QPL (see below). The Company acquired the outstanding 18% interest in Fox Entertainment Group, Inc. 37 Table of Contents The Company took full ownership of SKY Italia by acquiring Telecom Italia S.p.A. ( Telecom Italia ) 20% stake. The Company restructured the regional sports network partnership with Cablevision resulting in full ownership of Fox Sports Networks Ohio and Fox Sports Networks Florida. The Company agreed to sell its direct-to-home satellite TV platforms in Latin America to The DIRECTV Group, Inc., the Company 34% investee, who plans to consolidate the direct broadcast satellite ( DBS ) entities into a single platform in each major territory served. The Company implemented a stock repurchase program authorizing the acquisition of up to an aggregate of $3 billion of Class A and Class B Common Stock. Subsequent to year-end, the Company formed Fox Interactive Media and signed an agreement to acquire Intermix Media, Inc., including MySpace.com. REORGANIZATION Effective November 12, 2004, the Company changed its corporate domicile from Australia to the United States and its reporting currency from the Australian dollar to the U.S. dollar ( the Reorganization ). As a result, the Company accompanying consolidated financial statements are stated in U.S. dollars as opposed to Australian dollars, which was the currency the Company previously used to present its financial statements, and have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. In the Reorganization, all outstanding News Corporation Limited ( TNCL ) ordinary shares and preferred limited voting ordinary shares were cancelled and shares of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock were issued in exchange, respectively, on a one-for-two share basis. The financial statements have been presented as if the one for two share exchange took place on July 1, 2002. INTRODUCTION Management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations ( MD&A ) is intended to help provide an understanding of the Company financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. MD&A is organized as follows: Overview of Our Business - This section provides a general description of the Company businesses, as well as recent developments that have occurred either during fiscal 2005 or early fiscal 2006 that the Company believes are important in understanding the results of operations and financial condition or to disclose known trends. Results of Operations - This section provides an analysis of the Company results of operations for the three fiscal years ended June 30, 2005. This analysis is presented on both a consolidated and a segment basis. In addition, a brief description is provided of significant transactions and events that have an impact on the comparability of the results being analyzed. Liquidity and Capital Resources - This section provides an analysis of the Company cash flows for the three fiscal years ended June 30, 2005, as well as a discussion of the Company outstanding debt and commitments, both firm and contingent, that existed as of June 30, 2005. Included in the discussion of outstanding debt is a discussion of the amount of financial capacity available to fund the Company future commitments and obligations, as well as a discussion of other financing arrangements. Critical Accounting Policies - This section discusses accounting policies considered important to the Company financial condition and results of operations, and which require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in application. In addition, Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and footnotes summarizes the Company significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policy discussion found herein. 38 Table of Contents OVERVIEW OF OUR BUSINESS The Company is a diversified entertainment company, which manages and reports its businesses in eight segments: Filmed Entertainment , which principally consists of the production and acquisition of live-action and animated motion pictures for distribution and licensing in all formats in all entertainment media worldwide, and the production of original television programming in the United States and Canada. Television , which principally consists of the operation of 35 full power broadcast television stations, including nine duopolies, in the United States (of these stations, 25 are affiliated with the FOX network, nine with the UPN network and one is an independent station); the broadcasting of network programming in the United States, and the development, production and broadcasting of television programming in Asia. Cable Network Programming , which principally consists of the production and licensing of programming distributed through cable television systems and DBS operators in the United States. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television , which principally consists of the distribution of premium programming services via satellite directly to subscribers in Italy. Magazines and Inserts , which principally consists of the publication of free standing inserts, which are promotional booklets containing consumer offers distributed through insertion in local Sunday newspapers in the United States, and providing in-store marketing products and services, primarily to consumer packaged goods manufacturers, in the United States and Canada. Newspapers , which principally consists of the publication of four national newspapers in the United Kingdom, the publication of more than 110 newspapers in Australia, and the publication of a mass circulation, metropolitan morning newspaper in the United States. Book Publishing , which principally consists of the publication of English language books throughout the world. Other , which includes NDS Group plc ( NDS ), a Company engaged in the business of supplying digital technology and services, enabling and supporting digital pay-television platform operators and content providers and Global Cricket Corporation ( GCC ), which has the exclusive rights to broadcast the Cricket World Cup and other related International Cricket Council events through 2007. The Company competes with many different entities and media in various markets worldwide. In addition to competition in each business, the Company competes for opportunities in the entertainment business with other diversified international entertainment companies such as Time Warner, Viacom, Sony Corporation, The Walt Disney Company and NBC Universal. As new technologies for delivering content and services evolve, the Company is pursuing opportunities to distribute content to consumers through various media including the Internet, mobile devices, video-on-demand, interactive television and video games. Filmed Entertainment The Filmed Entertainment segment derives revenue from the production and distribution of feature motion pictures and television series. In general, motion pictures produced or acquired for distribution by the Company are exhibited in U.S. and foreign theaters followed by DVDs (which continue to be a growing revenue stream in the filmed entertainment industry), pay-per-view television, premium subscription television, network television and basic cable and syndicated television exploitation. Television series initially produced for the networks and first-run syndication are generally licensed to domestic and international markets concurrently. The more successful series are typically released in seasonal DVD box sets and later syndicated in domestic markets and international markets. The length of the revenue cycle for television series will vary depending on the number of seasons a series remains in active production and therefore may cause fluctuations in operating results. 39 Table of Contents The revenues and operating results of the Filmed Entertainment segment are significantly affected by the timing of the Company theatrical and home entertainment releases, the number of its original and returning television series that are aired by television networks, and the number of its television series in off-network syndication. Theatrical release dates are determined by several factors, including timing of vacation and holiday periods and competition in the marketplace. In seeking to manage its risk, the Company has pursued a strategy of entering into agreements to share the financing of certain films with other parties. The parties to these arrangements include studio and non-studio entities, both domestic and foreign. In several of these agreements, other parties control certain distribution rights. Operating costs incurred by the Filmed Entertainment segment include exploitation costs, primarily theatrical prints and advertising and home entertainment marketing and manufacturing costs; the amortization of capitalized production, overhead and interest costs; and participations and talent residuals. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. Feature film and television production and distribution are speculative businesses since the revenues derived from the production and distribution of a feature film or television series depends primarily upon their acceptance by the public, which is difficult to predict. Operating results derived from the Company motion picture and television production businesses fluctuate depending upon cost of such productions, the commercial success of the feature films and television series produced and the timing of the recognition of related revenues. Motion picture and television production has experienced cycles in which increased costs for talent and other factors have resulted in higher production costs. The commercial success of a feature film or television series also depends upon the quality and acceptance of other competing films and television series released into the marketplace at or near the same time, the availability of alternative forms of entertainment and leisure time activities, general economic conditions and other tangible and intangible factors, all of which can change and cannot be predicted with certainty. Further, the theatrical success of a feature film and the audience ratings for a television series are generally key factors in generating revenues from other distribution channels, such as home entertainment and premium pay television, with respect to feature films, and syndication and home entertainment, with respect to television series. License fees received for television exhibition (including international and U.S. premium television and basic cable television) are recorded as revenue in the period that licensed films or programs are available for such exhibition, which may cause substantial fluctuations in operating results. The Company competes with other major studios, such as Disney, DreamWorks, Paramount, Sony, Universal and Warner Bros. and independent film producers in the production and distribution of motion pictures and DVDs. As a producer and distributor of television programming, the Company competes with studios, television production groups, and independent producers and syndicators such as Disney, Sony, NBC Universal, Warner Bros. and Paramount Television to sell programming both domestically and internationally. The Company also competes to obtain creative talent and story properties which are essential to the success of the Company filmed entertainment businesses. Developments in technology, including digital copying and file compression, and the growing penetration of high-bandwidth Internet connections, increase the threat of content piracy by making it easier to duplicate and widely distribute pirated material. The Company has taken, and will continue to take, a variety of actions to combat piracy, both individually and together with industry associations. To the extent that piracy in the filmed entertainment industry continues or increases, the Company revenues in this segment may be materially adversely impacted. In the operation of its businesses, the Company engages the services of writers, directors, actors and others, which are subject to collective bargaining agreements. Work stoppages and/or higher costs in connection with these agreements could adversely impact the Company operations. 40 Table of Contents Television and Cable Network Programming The Company U.S television operations consist of the FOX Broadcast Network ( FOX ) and the 35 television stations owned by the Company. The Company International television operations consist primarily of STAR Group Limited ( STAR ). The Television segment derives revenues principally from the sale of advertising time. The Cable Network Programming segment also derives a portion of its revenues from advertising sales. The sale of advertising time is affected by viewer demographics, program ratings, major sporting events, major political elections and general market conditions. Adverse changes in the general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues and operating results. Expenditures by advertisers tend to be cyclical, reflecting overall economic conditions, as well as buying patterns. A decline in the economic prospects of advertisers or the economy in general could alter current or prospective advertisers spending priorities. This could cause the Company revenues and operating results to decline significantly in any given period. Rating points for the Television segment and Cable Network Programming segment are also factors that are weighed when deciding on the advertising rates and the renegotiation of affiliate rates that the Company receives. Poor ratings can lead to a reduction in pricing and advertising spending. The television broadcast environment is highly competitive. The primary methods of competition in broadcast television are the development and acquisition of popular programming and the development of audience interest through programming promotion, in order to sell advertising at profitable rates. FOX competes for audience, advertising revenues and programming with other broadcast networks such as CBS, ABC, NBC, UPN and the WB, independent television stations, cable program services as well as other media, including DBS television services, DVDs, print and the Internet. In addition, FOX competes with the other broadcast networks to secure affiliations with independently owned television stations in markets across the country. The television stations owned and operated by the Company compete for programming, audiences and advertising revenues with other television stations and cable networks in their respective coverage areas and, in some cases, with respect to programming, with other station groups, and in the case of advertising revenues, with other local and national media. The competitive position of the television stations owned by the Company is largely influenced by the strength of FOX, and, in particular, the primetime viewership of FOX, as well as the quality of the syndicated programs and local news programs in time periods not programmed by FOX. In 2002, Nielsen Media Research ( Nielsen ) began to transition the existing local television ratings system to the use of Local People Meters ( LPMs ) in certain large markets. The transition to LPMs has adversely impacted the ratings of the television stations owned by the Company in the markets where the transition has occurred. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005, Nielsen introduced LPMs in the Philadelphia and Washington D.C. markets. In fiscal 2006, Nielsen plans to introduce LPMs in the Dallas and Detroit markets. Newer technologies, including video on demand, personal video recorders and other devices that allow users to view television or motion pictures from a remote location or on a time-delayed basis, and technologies which implement the ability for users to fast-forward, rewind, pause and skip programming may cause changes in consumer behavior that could affect the attractiveness of the Company offerings to viewers, advertisers and/or distributors and could, therefore, have an adverse effect on the Company businesses, particularly its Television and Cable Network Programming businesses. Generally, the Company cable networks, which target various demographics, derive a majority of their revenues from monthly affiliate fees received from cable television systems and DBS operators based on the number of its subscribers, net of the amortization of cable distribution investments (capitalized fees paid to a cable operator or DBS operator to facilitate the launch of a cable network). Cable television and DBS are currently the predominant means of distribution of the Company program services in the United States. Internationally, distribution technology varies region by region. 41 Table of Contents The Company cable networks compete for carriage on cable television systems, DBS operators and other distributors with other program services, as well as other uses of bandwidth, such as retransmission of free over-the-air broadcast networks, telephony and data transmission. A primary focus of competition is for distribution of the Company cable networks that are not already distributed within a particular cable television or DBS system. For such program services, distributors make decisions on the use of bandwidth based on various considerations, including amounts paid by programmers for launches, subscription fees payable by distributors and appeal to the distributors subscribers. FOX is dependent upon the maintenance of affiliation agreements with third party owned television stations, and there can be no assurance that these affiliation agreements will be renewed in the future on terms acceptable to the Company. The loss of a significant number of these affiliation arrangements could reduce the distribution of FOX thereby adversely affecting the Company ability to sell national advertising time. Similarly, the Company cable networks maintain affiliation and carriage arrangements that enable them to reach a large percentage of cable television and direct broadcast satellite households across the United States. The loss of a significant number of these arrangements or the loss of carriage on basic programming tiers could reduce the distribution of the Company cable networks, which may also adversely affect such cable networks revenues from subscriber fees and ability to sell national and local advertising time. In Asia, STAR programming is primarily distributed via satellite to local cable operators or other pay TV platform operators for distribution to their subscribers. STAR derives its revenue from the sale of advertising time as well as affiliate fees from these pay TV platform operators. The most significant operating expenses of the Television segment and the Cable Network Programming segment are expenses related to acquiring and producing programming and the production and technical expenses related to operating the technical facilities of the broadcaster or cable network. Other expenses include promotional expenses related to improving the market visibility and awareness of the broadcaster or cable network and sales commissions paid to the in-house advertising sales force, as well as salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. Sports programming rights contracts between the Company, on the one hand, and various professional sports leagues and teams, on the other, have varying duration and renewal terms. As these contracts expire, the Company may seek renewals on commercial terms; however, third parties may outbid the current rights holders for such rights contracts. In addition, professional sports leagues or teams may create their own networks or the renewal costs could substantially exceed the original contract cost. The loss of rights could impact the extent of the sports coverage offered by FOX and its affiliates, and the Company regional sports networks ( RSNs ), and could adversely affect its advertising and affiliate revenues. Conversely, if the Company is able to renew these contracts, the results could be adversely affected if escalations in sports programming rights costs are unmatched by increases in advertising rates and, in the case of cable networks, subscriber fees. The Company has several multi-year sports rights agreements, including contracts with the National Football League ( NFL ) through fiscal 2012, contracts with the National Association of Stock Car Auto Racing ( NASCAR ) for certain races through calendar year 2006 and exclusive rights for certain ancillary content through calendar year 2012, and a contract with Major League Baseball ( MLB ) through calendar year 2006. These contracts provide the Company with the broadcast rights to certain national sporting events during their respective terms. In June 2005, NASCAR exercised an early termination clause in one of its contracts. Prior to the early termination, the Company had the right to broadcast certain races through calendar year 2008. The Company still maintains certain exclusive NASCAR ancillary content rights through calendar year 2012. The costs of these sports contracts are charged to expense based on the ratio of each period operating profits to estimated total remaining operating profit of the contract. The profitability of these long-term national sports contracts, as discussed above, is based on the Company best estimates at June 30, 2005 of directly attributable revenues and costs; such estimates may change in the future, and such changes may be significant. Should revenues decline from estimates applied at June 30, 2005, a loss will 42 Table of Contents be recorded. Should revenues improve as compared to estimated revenues, the Company will have a positive operating profit related to the contract, which will be recognized over the estimated remaining contract term. In general, the television broadcasting and multichannel video programming and distribution industries in the United States are highly regulated by federal laws and regulations issued and administered by various federal agencies, including the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ). The FCC generally regulates, among other things, the ownership of media (including ownership by non-U.S. citizens), broadcast and multichannel video programming and technical operations of broadcast and satellite licensees. Further, the United States Congress and the FCC currently have under consideration, and may in the future adopt, new laws, regulations and policies regarding a wide variety of matters that could, directly or indirectly, affect the operations and ownership of the Company U.S. media properties. Similarly, changes in regulations imposed by governments in other jurisdictions in which the Company, or entities in which it has an interest, operate could adversely affect the Company business and results of operations. While the Company seeks to ensure compliance with federal indecency laws and related FCC regulations, the definition of indecency is subject to interpretation and there can be no assurance that the Company will not broadcast programming that is ultimately determined by the FCC to violate the prohibition against indecency. Such programming could subject the Company to regulatory review or investigation, fines, adverse publicity or other sanctions, including the loss of station licenses. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television SKY Italia derives revenues principally from subscriber fees. The Company believes that the quality and variety of video, audio and interactive programming, quality of picture, access to service, customer service and price are the key elements for gaining and maintaining market share. SKY Italia competition includes companies that offer video, audio, interactive programming, telephony, data and other information and entertainment services, including broadband Internet providers, digital terrestrial transmission ( DTT ) services, wireless companies and companies that are developing new technologies. During the fiscal year, competitive DTT services in Italy expanded to include pay-per-view offering of soccer games previously available exclusively on the SKY Italia platform. The Company is currently prohibited from providing a DTT service under regulations of the European Commission. In addition, the Italian government offers a subsidy on DTT decoders. As a result, DTT operators could entice potential SKY Italia subscribers to their system. SKY Italia most significant operating expenses are those related to acquiring entertainment, movie and sports programming and subscribers and the production and technical expenses related to operating the technical facilities. Magazines and Inserts The Magazine and Inserts segment derives revenues from the sale of advertising space in free standing inserts, in-store promotional advertising, subscriptions and production fees. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues. Operating expenses for the Magazine and Inserts segment include paper costs, promotional, printing, retail commissions, distribution expenses and production costs. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. Newspapers The Newspapers segment derives revenues from the sale of advertising space and the sale of published newspapers. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues. Circulation revenues can be greatly affected by changes in competitors cover prices and by promotion activities. Operating 43 Table of Contents expenses for the Newspapers segment include costs related to newsprint, ink, printing costs and editorial content. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. The Newspapers segment advertising volume and the price of newsprint are the key uncertainties whose fluctuations can have a material effect on the Company operating results and cash flow. The Company has to anticipate the level of advertising volume and newsprint prices in managing its businesses to maximize operating profit during expanding and contracting economic cycles. Newsprint is a basic commodity and its price is sensitive to the balance of supply and demand. The Company costs and expenses are affected by the cyclical increases and decreases in the price of newsprint. The newspapers published by the Company compete for readership and advertising with local and national newspapers and also compete with television, radio and other communications media in their respective locales. Competition for newspaper circulation is based on the news and editorial content of the newspaper, cover price and, from time to time, various promotions. The success of the newspapers published by the Company in competing with other newspapers and media for advertising depends upon advertisers judgments as to the most effective use of their advertising budgets. Competition for advertising among newspapers is based upon circulation levels, reader demographics, advertising rates and advertiser results. Such judgments are based on factors, such as cost, availability of alternative media, circulation and quality of readership demographics. Book Publishing The Book Publishing segment derives revenues from the sale of adult and children books in the United States and internationally. The revenues and operating results of the Book Publishing segment are significantly affected by the timing of the Company releases and the number of its books in the marketplace. The book publishing marketplace is subject to increased periods of demand in the summer months and during the end-of-year holiday season. Each book is a separate and distinct product, and its financial success depends upon many factors, including public acceptance. Major new title releases represent a significant portion of the Company sales throughout the year. Consumer books are generally sold on a fully returnable basis, resulting in the return of unsold books. In the domestic and international markets, the Company is subject to global trends and local economic conditions. Operating expenses for the Book Publishing segment include costs related to paper, printing, authors royalties, editorial, art and design expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses include promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. The book publishing business operates in a highly competitive market and has been affected by consolidation trends. This market continues to change in response to technological innovations and other factors. Recent years have brought a number of significant mergers among the leading book publishers. The book superstore remains a significant factor in the industry contributing to the general trend toward consolidation in the retail channel. There have also been a number of mergers completed in the distribution channel. The Company must compete with other publishers such as Random House, Penguin Group and Simon & Schuster for the rights to works by well-known authors and public personalities. Although the Company currently has strong positions in each of its markets, further consolidation in the book publishing industry could place us at a competitive disadvantage with respect to scale and resources. Other Recent Business Developments In July 2005, the Company announced the formation of Fox Interactive Media ( FIM ), a new unit that will manage the Company entertainment, news and sports brands, including foxsports.com, foxnews.com and fox.com, and the Company owned television station web properties, across the Internet. FIM will focus on leveraging the Company current and archive video assets, while building an integrated web domain with multiple points of entry and navigation capabilities that users will be able to customize and personalize. 44 Table of Contents In July 2005, the Company also announced that it signed a definitive agreement to acquire Intermix Media, Inc. ( Intermix ) for approximately $580 million in cash, or the equivalent of $12 per common share. In a related transaction, the Company agreed to loan approximately $70 million to Intermix, which may be used by Intermix to exercise its option to acquire the 47% of MySpace.com that it does not already own. Upon completion of the transactions, both MySpace.com and Intermix websites will become part of News Corporation newly formed Fox Interactive Media unit, as discussed above. This transaction is expected to close in the second quarter of fiscal 2006 and is subject to certain customary conditions including the approval of the Intermix common and preferred stockholders. In August 2005, the Company announced that it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire Scout Media, Inc., the parent company of Scout.com, the country leading independent online sports network, and Scout Publishing, producer of widely read local sports magazines in the U.S., for approximately $60 million. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Results of Operations Fiscal 2005 versus Fiscal 2004 The following table sets forth the Company operating results for fiscal 2005 as compared to fiscal 2004. For the year ended June 30, 2005 2004 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues $ 23,859 $ 20,802 $ 3,057 15 % Expenses: Operating $ 15,901 $ 13,942 $ 1,959 14 % Selling, general and administrative 3,697 3,364 333 10 % Depreciation and amortization 648 565 83 15 % Other operating expense 49 49 ** Total operating income $ 3,564 $ 2,931 $ 633 22 % Interest expense, net $ (536 ) $ (532 ) $ (4 ) (1 )% Equity earnings of affiliates 355 170 185 ** Other, net 178 186 (8 ) (4 )% Income before income tax expense and minority interest in subsidiaries $ 3,561 $ 2,755 $ 806 29 % Income tax expense (1,220 ) (1,014 ) (206 ) (20 )% Minority interest in subsidiaries, net of tax (213 ) (208 ) (5 ) (2 )% Net income $ 2,128 $ 1,533 $ 595 39 % ** not meaningful Overview For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, the Company revenues increased $3,057 million from $20,802 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2004 to $23,859 million. This 15% increase was primarily due to revenue increases at the Filmed Entertainment, Newspaper, Direct Broadcast Satellite Television, Television and Cable Network Programming segments. Operating expenses increased approximately 14% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 from fiscal 2004, primarily due to increased theatrical releasing costs, home entertainment marketing and manufacturing costs and amortization of production and participation costs at the Filmed Entertainment segment, and increased sports programming and entertainment programming costs at the Television, Cable Network Programming and Direct Broadcast Satellite Television segments. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased approximately 10% from fiscal 2004 primarily due to increased subscriber acquisition costs at SKY Italia and increased employee costs in support of the Company growing businesses. 45 Table of Contents Depreciation and amortization increased approximately 15% primarily due to accelerated depreciation recognized on printing plant assets in the United Kingdom and amortization on the intangible assets acquired in the Fox Entertainment Group acquisition. In fiscal 2005, the Company also recognized Other operating expense of $49 million in relation to the Reorganization into the United States. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, Operating income increased $633 million to $3,564 million from fiscal 2004. These increases were primarily due to improved revenue increases noted above. Interest expense, net Interest expense increased $4 million from fiscal 2004 due primarily to interest on the Company issuance of $1.75 billion in Senior Notes in December 2004 partially offset by increased interest income on higher cash balances. Equity earnings of affiliates Equity earnings of affiliates of $355 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 increased $185 million from $170 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2004 primarily due to increased contributions from British Sky Broadcasting Group plc ( BSkyB ) and the comparatively favorable impact from foreign currency fluctuations reported by the Latin America DBS platforms, partially offset by increased losses at The DIRECTV Group, Inc. ( DIRECTV ). For the year ended June 30, 2005 2004 Change % Change ($ millions) The Company share of equity earnings (losses) of affiliates principally consists of: British Sky Broadcasting Group plc $ 374 $ 265 $ 109 (41 )% The DIRECTV Group, Inc. (186 ) (57 ) (129 ) ** Sky Brasil 49 (37 ) 86 ** Innova 27 (10 ) 37 ** FOXTEL (20 ) (19 ) (1 ) (5 )% Other equity affiliates 111 28 83 ** Total Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates $ 355 $ 170 $ 185 ** ** not meaningful The Company share of DIRECTV losses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 was $186 million and includes the Company share of DIRECTV increased loss from its sale of PanAmSat resulting from a reduction in the sales proceeds, the Company portion of the SPACEWAY program impairment and the amortization of certain finite-lived assets and liabilities as of December 22, 2003 and, as required, exclude certain items that were recognized by DIRECTV as income and expense within its results. Other, net For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, the Company reported income of $178 million in Other, net primarily comprised of the unrealized gain in fair value on the Company exchangeable securities in the amount of approximately $246 million and a gain on the sale of Rogers Sportsnet of approximately $39 million, partially offset by an $85 million loss on the exchange of the Company investment in Regional Programming Partners ( RPP ) and a $55 million loss on the sale of a Latin American DBS business to DIRECTV. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2004, Other, net of $186 million was primarily comprised of a gain on the sale of SKY PerfecTV! of approximately $105 million, the receipt of a $52 million dividend from Monarchy Enterprises Holdings, B.V., a cost based investment, a gain of $26 million related to the settlement of the Company insurance claim primarily for the September 2001 loss of its broadcast tower at the World Trade Center in New York, and the unrealized gain in fair value on the Company exchangeable securities in the amount of $18 million. Income tax expense The effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 is 34% as compared to the effective tax rate of 37% for fiscal 2004. The effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 is lower than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the resolution of foreign income tax audits during fiscal 2005. 46 Table of Contents Excluding this tax benefit, the effective tax rate was 38% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 and is higher than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to state and foreign income taxes. Net income For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, the Company reported net income of $2,128 million as compared to $1,533 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2004. This increase was primarily due to the operating income increase noted above. Segment Analysis: The following table sets forth the Company revenues and operating income by segment, for fiscal 2005 as compared to fiscal 2004. For the year ended June 30, 2005 2004 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues: Filmed Entertainment $ 5,919 $ 5,187 $ 732 14 % Television 5,338 5,027 311 6 % Cable Network Programming 2,688 2,409 279 12 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 2,313 1,665 648 39 % Magazines & Inserts 1,068 979 89 9 % Newspapers 4,083 3,425 658 19 % Book Publishing 1,327 1,276 51 4 % Other 1,123 834 289 35 % Total revenues $ 23,859 $ 20,802 $ 3,057 15 % Operating income (loss): Filmed Entertainment $ 1,058 $ 905 $ 153 17 % Television 952 950 2 Cable Network Programming 702 488 214 44 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (173 ) (277 ) 104 38 % Magazines & Inserts 298 271 27 10 % Newspapers 740 565 175 31 % Book Publishing 164 157 7 4 % Other (177 ) (128 ) (49 ) (38 )% Total operating income $ 3,564 $ 2,931 $ 633 22 % Filmed Entertainment (25% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2005 and 2004) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment increased from $5,187 million to $5,919 million or 14%. This increase was primarily due to higher worldwide home entertainment revenues and worldwide theatrical revenues. Higher home entertainment revenues reflect the strong worldwide performances of The Day After Tomorrow, Garfield, Dodgeball, Alien vs. Predator , I, Robot, the Star Wars Trilogy, and the distribution fees earned for The Passion of the Christ. In addition, television titles such as 24, The Simpsons and Family Guy also contributed to this increase. The Company DVD revenues rose approximately 32% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 over fiscal 2004, with 81% and 19% of DVD revenues generated from the sale and distribution of film titles and television titles, respectively. The theatrical revenue increase was driven by several strong worldwide theatrical releases including I, Robot, Alien vs. Predator, Robots, Hide & Seek , Sideways , and Kingdom of Heaven as well as continued contributions from fiscal 2004 releases including Dodgeball, Garfield and The Day After Tomorrow . Fiscal 2004 included the theatrical releases League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Cheaper by the Dozen, Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World, 28 Days Later , Man on Fire, The Day After Tomorrow, Garfield, and Dodgeball . 47 Table of Contents For the year ended June 30, 2005, the Filmed Entertainment segment reported Operating income of $1,058 million as compared to $905 million in fiscal 2004. This improvement was due to the revenue increases noted above as well as the distribution fees earned for Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith and Mr. and Mrs. Smith , partially offset by increased theatrical releasing costs, home entertainment marketing and manufacturing costs, amortization of production and participation costs directly associated with the increase in revenues noted above and the disappointing theatrical release of Flight of the Phoenix . Television (22% and 24% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2005 and 2004, respectively) The Television segment reported revenue of $5,338 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 as compared to $5,027 million in fiscal 2004. Operating income at the Television segment was $952 million as compared to $950 million in fiscal 2004. Revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 at the Company U.S. television operations increased approximately 6% from fiscal 2004. The Company experienced increased advertising revenues from the telecast of the Super Bowl and Daytona 500, which were not telecast on FOX in fiscal 2004 and higher pricing for NFL regular season and prime time broadcasts. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in prime time ratings as compared to fiscal 2004, advertising weakness in the U.S. markets as well as the adverse impact of the transition to LPMs on ratings. Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 at the Company U.S. television operations decreased approximately 7% as compared to fiscal 2004. This is due primarily to increased sports programming costs for the Super Bowl and Daytona 500 and increased entertainment program costs for returning series. Partially offsetting this increase in Operating loss are lower advertising expenses, lower priced renewals of expired syndicated product and lower music license fees. Revenues and operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 at the Company international television operations increased from fiscal 2004. These increases were primarily driven by increased advertising revenues due to growth in India and increased subscription revenues due to the launch of new channels in India. Cable Network Programming (11% and 12% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2005 and 2004, respectively) Total revenues for the Cable Network Programming segment increased by $279 million or approximately 12% from $2,409 million to $2,688 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005. This increase reflected improved results across all of the Cable Network Programming channels. Fox News Channel ( Fox News ), the FX Network ( FX ) and the RSN revenues increased 20%, 18%, and 9%, respectively, over fiscal 2004. At Fox News, advertising revenues increased 22% over fiscal 2004 primarily driven by higher national pricing and higher volume. Net affiliate revenue increased 14%, which can be attributed to an increase in subscribers and higher rates per subscriber as compared to fiscal 2004. As of June 30, 2005, Fox News reached approximately 88 million Nielsen households, a 3% increase over fiscal 2004. At FX, advertising revenues increased 18% over fiscal 2004 due to higher ratings and improved pricing. Net affiliate revenue increased 18% over fiscal 2004, reflecting an increase in subscribers and higher average rates per subscriber. As of June 30, 2005, FX reached approximately 87 million Nielsen households, a 4% increase over fiscal 2004. At the RSNs, net affiliate revenue increased 11% over fiscal 2004 primarily due to an increase in DBS subscribers and higher average rates per subscriber, net of allowances related to the cancellation of the 2004-05 National Hockey League ( NHL ) season, as well as the additional revenue from the consolidation of the RSNs in Florida and Ohio in April 2005. Advertising revenues increased 3% due to the consolidation of RSNs in Florida and Ohio in April 2005, which more than offset the negative impact from the absence of NHL telecasts as a result of the cancellation of the NHL season. 48 Table of Contents The Cable Network Programming segment reported operating income of $702 million, an increase of $214 million over fiscal 2004. This improvement was primarily driven by the revenue increases noted above as well as lower programming costs at the RSNs due to the NHL season cancellation and the absence of losses from the Los Angeles Dodgers ( Dodgers ) due to the its sale in fiscal 2004. Partially offsetting these improvements were higher programming expenses for original series and movies at FX, higher programming and news gathering costs at Fox News and for additional MLB and National Basketball Association ( NBA ) events at the RSNs. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (10% and 8% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2005 and 2004, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, SKY Italia revenues increased to $2,313 million from $1,665 million in fiscal 2004. The 39% revenue growth was primarily driven by the addition of approximately 650,000 net new subscribers during fiscal 2005 which resulted in SKY Italia subscriber base growing to approximately 3.3 million at June 30, 2005. SKY Italia also improved its subscriber churn rate to approximately 9% from approximately 19% in fiscal 2004. Subscriber churn for the period represents the number of SKY Italia subscribers who terminate service during the period divided by the average SKY Italia subscribers for that period. Also contributing to revenue growth during the year ended June 30, 2005 was an increase in average rate per subscriber ( ARPU ) from approximately 42 in fiscal 2004 to approximately 44 in fiscal 2005. This increase was driven by subscribers opting for more premium programming. SKY Italia calculates ARPU by dividing total subscriber-related revenues for the period by the average subscribers for the period, and dividing that amount by the number of months in the period. Subscriber-related revenues are comprised of total subscription revenue, pay-per-view revenue and equipment rental revenue for the period. Average subscribers are calculated for the period by adding the beginning and ending subscribers for the period and dividing by two. Subscriber acquisition costs per subscriber ( SAC ) increased from 204 in fiscal 2004 to 243 in fiscal 2005 primarily due to the Company free installation program implemented in fiscal 2005. SAC is calculated by dividing total subscriber acquisition costs for a period by the number of gross new Sky Italia subscribers during the period. Subscriber acquisition costs include the cost of the commissions paid to retailers and other distributors, the cost of equipment sold directly by SKY Italia to subscribers and the costs related to installation and acquisition advertising, net of any upfront activation fee. SKY Italia excludes the value of equipment capitalized under SKY Italia equipment lease program as well as payments and the value of returned equipment related to disconnected lease program subscribers from subscriber acquisition costs. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, the operating loss at SKY Italia of $173 million, improved by 38% as compared to the loss of $277 million in fiscal 2004. The revenue growth was partially offset by increased programming spending primarily due to the broadcast of additional soccer matches and movie titles as well as the addition of ten new entertainment and news channels on the basic programming tier. Additionally, the Company incurred costs associated with the one-time swap-out of set-top boxes which were using outdated encryption software. In fiscal 2005, the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro resulted in approximately 6% of the increase in revenue and operating loss as compared to fiscal 2004. Magazines and Inserts (4% and 5% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2005 and 2004, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, revenues at the Magazines and Inserts segment increased $89 million to $1,068 million from $979 million in fiscal 2004. This was primarily the result of a volume increase in the Company InStore advertising business due to higher demand for its at-shelf advertising products in supermarkets in the United States. Operating income increased to $298 million in fiscal 2005 from $271 million in fiscal 2004. This increase is primarily due to the revenue increases noted above. Newspapers (17% and 16% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2005 and 2004, respectively) 49 Table of Contents The Newspapers segment reported revenue of $4,083 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 as compared to $3,425 million in fiscal 2004. For the year ended June 30, 2005, Operating income at the Newspapers segment was $740 million, an increase of 31% from $565 million in fiscal 2004 resulting from increases at the Company Australian operations and a recovery related to the refurbishment of its U.S. printing plant, partially offset by decreases at the Company U.K. operations. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, U.K. newspapers revenues increased approximately 11% primarily due to increased circulation and advertising revenues and the weakening of the U.S. dollar against Sterling. Circulation revenue increased over the corresponding period of fiscal 2004 due to the national rollout of the compact product at The Times , as well as cover price increases on the Company other U.K. national papers. This increase in circulation revenue was partly offset by lower net circulation at The Sun, The Sunday Times and The News of the World . Advertising revenue was higher due to increases at the Company U.K. national newspapers primarily due to a higher volume on color advertisements and increased commercial inserts. This increase in advertising revenue was partially offset by a decrease at The Times due to lower volumes and prices. Operating income decreased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 as compared to fiscal 2004. This decrease is primarily due to increased depreciation and other costs associated with the development of new printing plants in the United Kingdom over the next four to five years. Also contributing to the decrease in operating income are increased operating costs resulting from increased production, increased pagination and higher newsprint costs. These additional costs were partly offset by lower promotion costs in fiscal 2005 as well as the weakening of the U.S. dollar against Sterling. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, the weakening of the U.S. dollar against Sterling resulted in approximately 7% increases to both revenues and operating income as compared to fiscal 2004. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, the Company Australian newspapers revenues increased 34% due to the consolidation of the results of QPL in November 2004, improved display and classified revenues and the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar. The advertising revenue increases were driven by the continued strong economic conditions in Australia and new sales initiatives, resulting in gains in national, retail and employment display and the employment and real estate classified sections. Operating income increased 58% as compared to fiscal 2004 primarily due to the revenue increases noted above. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, the weakening U.S. dollar resulted in increases of approximately 5% in revenues and operating income, noted above, as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2004. Book Publishing (6% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2005 and 2004) HarperCollins recorded revenues of $1,327 million in fiscal 2005, a $51 million or 4% increase from revenues of $1,276 million in fiscal 2004. The revenue increase is primarily attributable to strong performances in the General Books, Childrens and United Kingdom divisions including the strong sales of the 11 titles in Lemony Snicket A Series of Unfortunate Events . In fiscal 2005, HarperCollins had 103 titles on the New York Times Bestseller List with 15 titles reaching the number one position compared to 97 titles on the New York Times Bestseller List for fiscal 2004. Other notable releases and strong titles in fiscal 2005 included The Purpose Driven Life by Rick Warren, State Of Fear by Michael Crichton, YOU: The Owners Manual by Michael F. Roizen and Mehmet C. Oz, American Soldier by Tommy Franks, Winning by Jack Welch, and Freakonomics by Steven Levitt and Stephen Dunbar. Operating income was $164 million in fiscal 2005, an increase of 4% from fiscal 2004 due to the revenue increases noted above. Other (5% and 4% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2005 and 2004, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005, revenues at the Other segment increased from $834 million for fiscal 2004 to $1,123 million. Included in this increase were higher revenues at NDS and GCC. The increase in NDS revenues was due to increased smartcard shipments as well as an increase in total authorized smartcards in use as compared to fiscal 2004. The increase in GCC revenues was due to the International Cricket Council Champions Trophy 2004 that was held in September 2004 with no comparable event in fiscal 2004. For the fiscal 50 Table of Contents year ended June 30, 2005, the Other segment reported Operating losses of $177 million as compared to $128 million in fiscal 2004. The increased loss was due to costs related to the Reorganization and increased research and development costs at NDS, partially offset by the revenue increases noted above. Results of Operations Fiscal 2004 versus Fiscal 2003 The following table sets forth the Company operating results for fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal 2003. For the year ended June 30, 2004 2003 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues $ 20,802 $ 17,380 $ 3,422 20 % Expenses: Operating $ 13,942 $ 11,894 $ 2,048 17 % Selling, general and administrative 3,364 2,692 672 25 % Depreciation and amortization 565 414 151 36 % Total operating income $ 2,931 $ 2,380 $ 551 23 % Interest expense, net $ (532 ) $ (524 ) $ (8 ) (2 )% Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates 170 (344 ) 514 ** Gain on issuance of subsidiary/affiliate shares 163 (163 ) ** Other, net 186 (9 ) 195 ** Income before income tax expense and minority interest in subsidiaries $ 2,755 $ 1,666 $ 1,089 65 % Income tax expense (1,014 ) (629 ) (385 ) (61 )% Minority interest in subsidiaries, net of tax (208 ) (215 ) 7 3 % Net income $ 1,533 $ 822 $ 711 86 % ** not meaningful Overview For the year ended June 30, 2004, the Company revenues increased $3,422 million from $17,380 million for the year ended June 30, 2003 to $20,802 million. This 20% increase was primarily due to revenue increases at the Filmed Entertainment, Television, Cable Network Programming, Direct Broadcast Satellite Television and Newspapers segments. Operating expenses increased approximately 17% for the year ended June 30, 2004 primarily due to the inclusion of twelve months of operating results of SKY Italia as compared to only two months of results in fiscal 2003, higher film amortization and increased home entertainment manufacturing and marketing costs at the Filmed Entertainment segment, increased sports programming costs for MLB at the Television segment and system integration costs at the Direct Broadcast Satellite Television segment. For the year ended June 30, 2004, Operating income increased $551 million to $2,931 million from fiscal 2003. These increases were primarily due to improved results at the Filmed Entertainment, Television, Cable Network Programming and Newspapers segments partially offset by the inclusion of twelve months of operating losses of SKY Italia as compared to only two months of losses in fiscal 2003. Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates Equity earnings of affiliates of $170 million improved $514 million from losses of $344 million in fiscal 2003. This improvement is primarily due to improved results at BSkyB and the absence of losses due to the consolidation of Stream (now SKY Italia) in fiscal 2004. Also in fiscal 2003, the Company recorded a $305 million charge to recognize an other-than-temporary decline in value of the investment in Gemstar-TV Guide International, Inc. ( Gemstar-TV Guide ). Also contributing to the increases noted above were favorable results at RPP, due to income it recognized from the termination of certain MLB rights agreements. These improvements were partially offset by the inclusion of the Company share of losses from DIRECTV, which was acquired in December 2003. 51 Table of Contents For the year ended 30 June, 2004 2003 Change % Change ( $ millions) The Company share of equity earnings (losses) of affiliates principally consists of: British Sky Broadcasting Group plc $ 265 $ 128 $ 137 ** Gemstar - TV Guide (39 ) (298 ) 259 87 % The DIRECTV Group, Inc. (57 ) (57 ) ** Stream (198 ) 198 ** Other associated entities 1 24 (23 ) (96 )% Total Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates $ 170 $ (344 ) $ 514 ** ** not meaningful Gain on issuance of subsidiary/affiliate shares In November 2002, Fox Entertainment Group, Inc. ( FEG ), a subsidiary of the Company sold 50 million shares of its Class A common stock in a public offering. The net proceeds received by FEG were approximately $1.2 billion and were used to repay intercompany indebtedness to the Company and its affiliates. This offering reduced the Company equity ownership and voting percentage in FEG from 85% and 98% to 81% and 97%, respectively, and increased minority interest in subsidiaries. In accordance with SAB No. 51, the Company recognized a gain of approximately $71 million in connection with this transaction in Gain on sale of subsidiary/affiliate shares in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations for the year ended June 30, 2003. This gain was limited because the Company ownership interest in FEG increased since the time of FEG initial public offering in fiscal year 1999. Also in fiscal 2003, BSkyB, an affiliate of the Company issued 43.2 million new shares as consideration related to its purchase of an interest in British Interactive Broadcasting Holdings Limited. In accordance with SAB No. 51, the Company recognized a gain of approximately $92 million in connection with this transaction in Gain on sale of subsidiary/affiliate shares in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations for the year ended June 30, 2003. As a result of this transaction, the Company ownership in BSkyB was diluted to 35%. No such transactions occurred during fiscal 2004. Other, net Other, net was a gain of $186 million for the year ended June 30, 2004. Other, net included a gain of $105 million on the sale of the Company interest in Sky PerfecTV!, a DBS service provider. Also, during fiscal 2004, the Company received a special dividend from Monarchy Enterprises Holdings B.V., a cost based investment. The portion of the dividend representing a distribution of the Company share of cumulative earnings of the investee of $52 million is reflected as Other, net while the balance was reflected as a return of capital. Other, net also included a gain of $26 million related to the settlement in fiscal 2004 of the Company insurance claim primarily for for the September 2001 loss of its broadcast tower at the World Trade Center in New York, New York. The fiscal 2003 amount primarily includes a gain on the settlement of the Company exchangeable debt securities embedded derivatives, as discussed below, which was more than offset by a charge of $92 million to write down the Company investment in Knowledge Enterprises. The charge was based on Knowledge Enterprises planned equity rights offering and reflects the estimated recoverable value of this investment. The Company has certain outstanding exchangeable debt securities which contain embedded derivatives. Pursuant to SFAS No. 133, these embedded derivatives are not designated as hedges, and, as such, changes in their fair value are recognized in Other, net. Fiscal 2004 and fiscal 2003, Other, net included gains on the change in fair value of exchangeable securities of $18 million and loss of $14 million, respectively. (See Notes 2 and 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for a more detailed description of the Company exchangeable securities and their corresponding embedded derivatives.) 52 Table of Contents Income tax expense The effective tax rate for the year ended June 30, 2004 was 37% as compared to the fiscal 2003 effective tax rate of 38%. The change in the effective tax rate was principally from the non-recognition of a tax benefit on the Gemstar-TV Guide impairment charge in fiscal 2003 with no comparable charge in fiscal 2004. Minority interest expense. For the year ended June 30, 2004, Minority interest expense decreased $7 million from $215 million for fiscal year 2003 to $208 million. This decrease was primarily due to the allocation of losses of SKY Italia to its minority shareholder, partially offset by improved results at FEG. Net income Net income for the year ended June 30, 2004 was $1,533 million, an improvement of $711 million from $822 million for fiscal 2003. This improvement was due to the increased operating results noted above for the year ended June 30, 2004 as compared to fiscal 2003. Segment Analysis: The following table sets forth the Company revenues and operating income by segment, for fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal 2003. For the year ended June 30, 2004 2003 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues: Filmed Entertainment $ 5,187 $ 4,486 $ 701 16 % Television 5,027 4,763 264 6 % Cable Network Programming 2,409 2,145 264 12 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 1,665 220 1,445 ** Magazines & Inserts 979 923 56 6 % Newspapers 3,425 2,718 707 26 % Book Publishing 1,276 1,162 114 10 % Other 834 963 (129 ) (13 )% Total revenues $ 20,802 $ 17,380 $ 3,422 20 % Operating income (loss): Filmed Entertainment $ 905 $ 661 $ 244 37 % Television 950 859 91 11 % Cable Network Programming 488 300 188 63 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (277 ) (81 ) (196 ) ** Magazines & Inserts 271 257 14 5 % Newspapers 565 401 164 41 % Book Publishing 157 131 26 20 % Other (128 ) (148 ) 20 14 % Total operating income $ 2,931 $ 2,380 $ 551 23 % Filmed Entertainment (25% and 26% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively) For the year ended June 30, 2004, revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment increased from $4,486 million to $5,187 million, or 16%. This increase was primarily due to higher worldwide home entertainment revenues reflecting the strong worldwide performances of previously successful theatrical releases, X-2: X-Men United, Daredevil, League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, and Cheaper by the Dozen, and improved performance from various library titles on DVD as compared to fiscal 2003. Television titles, including The Simpsons , 24 , Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Dharma & Greg, and Family Guy, also contributed to the increase in home entertainment 53 Table of Contents revenue. The Company DVD revenues rose approximately 54% for the year ended June 30, 2004 over fiscal 2003, with 78% and 22% of DVD revenues generated from the sale and distribution of film titles and television titles, respectively. In addition, a stronger film lineup and more feature films available during fiscal 2004 contributed higher revenues from worldwide pay and free television. Fiscal 2003 home entertainment titles included the successes of Ice Age, Minority Report, and Shallow Hal. The year ended June 30, 2004 also included several strong theatrical releases, including Day After Tomorrow, Dodgeball, Man on Fire, Garfield, and Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World. Fiscal 2003 theatrical releases included X-2: X-Men United, Daredevil, Minority Report , Road to Perdition , and Drumline. For the year ended June 30, 2004, the Filmed Entertainment segment reported Operating income of $905 million as compared to $661 million in fiscal 2003. These improvements were due to the revenue increases noted above, partially offset by increased home entertainment marketing and manufacturing costs directly associated with the increase in worldwide home entertainment revenues. Television (24% and 27% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively) For the year ended June 30, 2004, the Television segment reported revenues of $5,027 million as compared to $4,763 million in fiscal 2003. This increase was primarily due to advertising revenue increases at the television stations owned by the Company and FOX driven by an increased number of MLB games televised and improved ratings and pricing for the MLB 2003 post season, the 2004 broadcast of the Emmy Awards, which were not telecast on FOX in fiscal 2003, higher pricing and strong sales for NFL broadcasts, and strong sales for American Idol. Additionally, the television stations owned by the Company experienced strong advertising sales for their local morning newscasts. Also contributing to the increase, STAR advertising revenues increased approximately 20% primarily due to increasing popularity of STAR channels in China and STAR Plus maintaining its strong ratings in India. These increases were partially offset by a ratings decline of 14% at FOX primarily due to fewer episodes of American Idol being broadcast in fiscal 2004, the success in fiscal 2003 of Joe Millionaire , and the non-renewal of the Boston Red Sox broadcasts with the Company owned television station in the Boston market. Operating income for the television segment for the year ended June 30, 2004 increased $91 million from $859 million in fiscal 2003 to $950 million. This increase was primarily due to the revenue increases discussed above, offset by increased MLB, NFL and primetime programming costs at FOX. Cable Network Programming (12% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2004 and 2003) Total revenues for the Cable Network Programming segment increased by $264 million or approximately 12% from $2,145 million to $2,409 million for the year ended June 30, 2004. This increase reflected improved results across all of the Cable Network Programming channels. Fox News , the FX and the RSN revenues increased 24%, 10%, and 14%, respectively, over fiscal 2003. At Fox News, advertising revenues increased 34% from fiscal 2003 primarily due to improved pricing and volume. Affiliate revenue increased 5%, which can be attributed to an increase in subscribers from fiscal 2003. As of June 30, 2004, Fox News reached 85 million Nielsen households, a 3% increase over fiscal 2003. At FX, advertising revenues increased 14% over fiscal 2003 due to higher ratings and improved pricing. Affiliate revenues increased 6% over fiscal 2003, reflecting an increase in subscribers and average rates per subscriber. As of June 30, 2004, FX reached approximately 84 million Nielsen households, a 5% increase over fiscal 2003. 54 Table of Contents At the RSNs, affiliate revenues increased 14% over fiscal 2003 primarily due to an increase in DBS subscribers and higher average rates per subscriber. Advertising revenues increased 11% primarily due to higher pricing per game for MLB telecasts resulting from an improved sports advertising market, more NHL and NBA events and improved news and collegiate advertising sales. The Cable Network Programming segment had Operating income of $488 million, an increase of $188 million from fiscal 2003. These improvements were primarily driven by the revenue increases noted above as well as decreased losses resulting from the sale of the Dodgers in February 2004 and the recovery of approximately $15 million of certain receivable claims against Adelphia Communications Corporation in November 2003. Partially offsetting these improvements were higher expenses for programming enhancements at Fox News, higher average sports rights fees and higher entertainment programming costs. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (8% and 1% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively) In April 2003, the Company and Telecom Italia acquired Telepiu, Vivendi Universal satellite pay-television platform in Italy, for approximately $874 million, consisting of the assumption of approximately $388 million in outstanding indebtedness and a cash payment of approximately $486 million. As a result of the transaction, the Company and Telecom Italia combined Telepiu with Stream to form SKY Italia, resulting in the Company owning 80% of SKY Italia and Telecom Italia owning the remaining 20%. The platform was launched on July 31, 2003. For the year ended June 30, 2004, Sky Italia revenues were $1,665 million as compared to only two months of revenues in fiscal 2003 of $220 million. During fiscal 2004, Sky Italia increased its subscriber base to nearly 2.7 million. Over 90% of the new subscribers during the year opted for a premium programming tier which includes movies and/or sports programming. In addition to acquiring over 1 million new subscribers, over 1.7 million subscribers of Telepiu or Stream migrated to Sky Italia programming during the year. Sky Italia operating losses were $277 million in fiscal 2004 as compared to $81 million in fiscal 2003 reflecting initial losses from the integration of the two platforms and only reflecting two months of results in fiscal 2003. Magazines and Inserts (5% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2004 and 2003) For the year ended June 30, 2004, revenues at the Magazines and Inserts segment increased $56 million to $979 million from $923 million in fiscal 2003. This increase was primarily due to an increase in volume from the Free Standing Insert ( FSI ) business because of increased market share and a volume increase in the Company InStore advertising business due to an increase in demand for its at-shelf advertising products in supermarkets in the U.S. Operating income increased to $271 million in fiscal 2004 from $257 million in fiscal 2003. This increase resulted primarily from the revenue increases noted above. Newspapers (16% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2004 and 2003) For the year ended June 30, 2004, the Newspapers segment reported revenues of $3,425 million, an increase of $707 million over $2,718 million in fiscal 2003. The Newspaper segment reported operating income of $565 million, an increase of $164 million over fiscal 2003 resulting from increases in the Company U.K. and Australian operations, partially offset by a $27 million charge relating to the refurbishment of its U.S. printing plant. For the year ended June 30, 2004, UK newspapers revenues increased 22% due to higher circulation, advertising revenues and the weakening of the U.S. dollar against Sterling. Circulation revenues increased following the cessation of fiscal 2003 cover price reductions at The Sun , increased circulation revenues at The Times and The News of the World following cover price increases and the successful launch of The Times 55 Table of Contents Compact . The increase in advertising revenue was driven by growth across all titles, primarily at The Sun, due to higher classified and display advertisements. Operating income at the UK Newspapers increased 43% in fiscal 2004 as a result of increased circulation and advertising revenues, partially offset by increased promotion, editorial and production costs as a result of product development initiatives and increased employee costs. In fiscal 2004, the weakening of the U.S. dollar against Sterling resulted in 11% and 13% of the increases to revenue and operating income noted above, respectively. For the year ended June 30, 2004, the Australian newspapers revenues were 33% higher. This increase was due to increases in advertising and classified revenues and the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar. Advertising revenues increased due to increases in display advertising revenue driven by the strong, national, retail and real estate categories. Classified revenues increased due to the growing Australian economy. The Australian newspapers Operating income was 40% higher in fiscal 2004 as compared to fiscal 2003. This increase was due to the revenue increases noted above. In fiscal 2004, the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar resulted in 24% and 25% of the increases to revenue and operating income noted above, respectively. Book Publishing (6% and 7% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively) HarperCollins recorded revenues of $1,276 million, a $114 million or 10% increase from fiscal 2003 revenues of $1,162 million. Increased revenues are primarily attributable to strong performances at the Zondervan, Canadian and the Australian / New Zealand divisions. In fiscal year 2004, HarperCollins had 97 titles on the New York Times Bestseller List, with 9 titles reaching the number one position compared to 111 titles on the New York Times Bestseller List in fiscal 2003. Notable releases and strong titles in fiscal 2004 included The Purpose Driven Life by Rick Warren, The Proper Care and Feeding of Husbands by Laura Schlessinger, Good to Great by Jim Collins, Deliver Us From Evil by Sean Hannity, One Hundred Years Of Solitude by Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Dr. Atkins New Diet Revolution by Robert Atkins, I Already Know I Love You by Billy Crystal and My Side by David Beckham. In addition, the 10th book in the successful Lemony Snicket Childrens series, The Slippery Slope , achieved bestseller status after its release. Fiscal 2004 Operating income was $157 million, an increase of 20% due to the revenue increases noted above. Other (4% and 6% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal years 2004 and 2003, respectively) For the year ended June 30, 2004, Other revenues decreased $129 million to $834 million from $963 million in fiscal 2003. This decrease is primarily due to the revenue generated from the broadcast of the Cricket World Cup in fiscal 2003 with no comparable broadcast revenue in fiscal 2004. Other Operating loss decreased to $128 million in fiscal 2004 from $148 million in fiscal 2003. This decrease resulted primarily from the revenue decreases noted above coupled with a decrease in expenses. In fiscal 2003, expenses were higher due to the expenses associated with the Cricket World Cup played. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Current Financial Condition The Company principal source of liquidity is internally generated funds; however, the Company has access to the worldwide capital markets, a $1.75 billion Revolving Credit Facility and various film financing alternatives to supplement its cash flows. The availability under the Revolving Credit Facility as of June 30, 2005 was reduced by letters of credit issued which totaled $168 million. Also as of June 30, 2005, the Company had consolidated cash and cash equivalents of approximately $6.5 billion. The Company believes that cash flows from operations will be adequate for the Company to conduct its operations. The Company internally generated funds are highly dependent upon the state of the advertising market and public acceptance of film and television products. Any significant decline in the advertising market or the performance of its films could adversely impact its cash flows from operations which could require the Company to seek other sources of funds including proceeds from the sale of certain assets or other alternative sources. 56 Table of Contents The principal uses of cash that affect the Company liquidity position include the following: investments in the production and distribution of new feature films and television programs; the acquisition of and payments under programming rights for entertainment and sports programming; paper purchases; operational expenditures; capital expenditures; interest expense; income tax payments; investments in associated entities; dividends; acquisitions and stock repurchases. Sources and Uses of Cash Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2005 and 2004 is as follows (in millions): Year Ended June 30, 2005 2004 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 3,371 $ 2,395 The increase in net cash provided by operating activities reflects higher operating results and resulting cash collections primarily from increased sale of home entertainment product and lower cash spent on the production of feature films at the Filmed Entertainment segment during the year ended June 30, 2005. These increases were offset by higher sports rights and film participation payments and higher interest due to an increase in total borrowings. The higher sports rights payments reflects contractually scheduled increases on our national and international sports contracts as well as the renewal of several sports teams local rights agreements. Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 and 2004 is as follows (in millions): Year Ended June 30, 2005 2004 Cash flows (used in) provided by investing activities: Purchases of property, plant and equipment $ (901 ) $ (361 ) Acquisitions, net of cash acquired (69 ) (202 ) Investments in associated entities, net (106 ) (3,237 ) Proceeds from sale of investments, non-current assets and business disposals 800 869 Other (27 ) (91 ) Net cash used in investing activities $ (303 ) $ (3,022 ) Cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2005 was lower than fiscal 2004 due to the Company purchase of a 34% investment in DIRECTV for approximately $6.8 billion of which $3.1 billion represented the cash consideration in fiscal 2004. Property, plant and equipment acquired primarily represents cash used for the purchase of equipment that is rented to customers at the Direct Broadcast Satellite Television segment and cash used by the Newspaper segment in connection with the investment in new printing presses as discussed below. Proceeds from the sale of non-current assets primarily represent cash received in advance on the sale of Sky Brasil to DIRECTV and the sale of other non-strategic investments during fiscal 2005 and cash received on the sale of SKY PerfecTV! during fiscal 2004. In fiscal 2005, the Company announced its intentions to invest in new printing plants in the United Kingdom and Australia to take advantage of technological and market changes. The Company intends to invest approximately $1 billion in the U.K. printing plants for The Sun , the News of the World , The Times and The Sunday Times and $500 million for the Australian printing plants. The Company plans to fully fund the investment out of its operating cash flow. Depreciation expense on plant and equipment that will be replaced will be accelerated over the next four to five years. The Company has evaluated, and expects to continue to evaluate, possible acquisitions and dispositions of certain businesses. Such transactions may be material and may involve cash, the Company securities or the assumption of additional indebtedness. 57 Table of Contents Net cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2005 and 2004 is as follows (in millions): Year Ended June 30, 2005 2004 Cash flows (used in) provided by financing activities: Issuance of debt $ 1,841 $ 548 Repayment of debt (2,110 ) (943 ) Issuances of shares 88 580 Repurchase of shares (535 ) Dividends paid (240 ) (202 ) Cash on deposit 275 162 Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities $ (681 ) $ 145 Net cash used in financing activities during fiscal 2005 changed from net cash provided by financing activities in the corresponding period of fiscal 2004 primarily due to the implementation of the stock repurchase program in fiscal 2005 and the absence of the stock offering that occurred in fiscal 2004. The debt repayments during fiscal 2005 included the retirement of debt assumed in the acquisition of the Cruden Group of companies, the Eurobonds, the perpetual preference shares and the film financing facility. (See Notes 3, 8 and 10 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail.) In fiscal 2004, the Company issued $1.75 billion in Senior Notes which offset the repayments noted above. The cash received for the issuance of shares was due to stock options exercised by employees. Included in this amount was approximately $12 million for options issued over NDS shares. The total dividends declared related to fiscal 2005 results were $0.12 per share of Class A Common Stock and $0.10 per share of Class B Common Stock. In August 2005, the Company declared the final dividend on fiscal 2005 results of $0.07 per share for Class A Common Stock and $0.08 per share for Class B Common Stock. This together with the interim dividend of $0.05 per share of Class A Common Stock and a dividend of $0.02 per share of Class B Common Stock constitute the total dividend relating to fiscal 2005. Based on the number of shares outstanding as of June 30, 2005 the total aggregate cash dividends expected to be paid to shareholders in fiscal 2006 is approximately $425 million. The higher aggregate dividend payment is primarily related to an increase in the annual dividend rate in fiscal 2006 as compared to the aggregate dividends paid in fiscal 2005. Issuances of Shares Transaction Approximate amount of issuance Number of Class A shares Number of Class B shares Fiscal 2005 (in millions) Fox Entertainment Group (a) $ 14,293 1,988 Queensland Press (a) $ 6,359 61 308 Fiscal 2004 DIRECTV (b) $ 3,728 261 Liberty Media (c) $ 500 47 FOOTNOTES: (a) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (b) See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to the DIRECTV transaction. (c) See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to the Liberty Media transaction. 58 Table of Contents Debt Instruments and Guarantees (1) Debt Instruments (1) Issuance of debt during the year ended June 30, 2005 Amount of indebtedness (in millions) 5.3% Senior debentures $ 748 6.2% Senior debentures $ 995 All other $ 98 Total issuance of debt $ 1,841 Repayment of debt during the year ended June 30, 2005 Cruden Group assumed debt (2) $ 654 New Millennium (3) $ 659 Preferred Perpetual Shares $ 345 All other $ 452 Total repayment of debt $ 2,110 FOOTNOTES: (1) See Note 8 Borrowings to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to the issuance and repayment of debt. (2) Represents the retirement of debt assumed in the acquisition of the Cruden Group of companies. See Note 3 Acquisitions and Disposals to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation with reference to the acquisition of the Cruden Group of companies. (3) See Note 10 Film Production Financing to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation with reference to the retirement of the New Millennium debt. LYONs In February of 2006, the holders of the Liquid Yield Option TM Notes ( LYONs ) have the right to require the Company to redeem all or a portion of their LYONs at which time the LYONs will have an aggregate scheduled redemption value of approximately $900 million. The Company, at its election, may satisfy the redemption amounts in cash, shares of Class A Common Stock or any combination thereof. Ratings of the Public Debt The table below summarizes the Company credit ratings as of June 30, 2005. Rating Agency Senior Debt Outlook Moody Baa 3 Positive S&P BBB- Positive Revolving Credit Agreement On June 27, 2003, News America Incorporated, a subsidiary of the Company entered into a new $1.75 billion Five Year Credit Agreement (the Credit Agreement ) with Citibank N.A., as administrative agent, JP Morgan Chase Bank, as syndication agent, and the lenders named therein. News Corporation, FEG Holdings, Inc., Fox Entertainment Group, Inc., News America Marketing FSI, Inc., News Publishing Australia Limited and News Australia Holdings Pty Limited are guarantors (the Guarantors ) under the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement provides a $1.75 billion revolving credit facility with a sub-limit of $600 million available for the issuance of letters of credit, and expires on June 30, 2008. Borrowings are in U.S. dollars only, while letters of 59 Table of Contents credit are issuable in U.S. dollars or Euros. The significant terms of the agreement include the requirement that the Company maintain specific gearing and interest coverage ratios and limitations on secured indebtedness. The Company pays a facility fee of 0.20% regardless of facility usage. The Company pays interest for borrowings and a letter of credit fee of LIBOR plus 0.675%. The Company pays additional fees of 0.125% if borrowings under the facility exceed 25% of the committed facility. The interest and fees are based on the Company current debt rating. At June 30, 2005, letters of credit representing $168 million were issued under the Credit Agreement. Commitments and Guarantees The Company has commitments under certain firm contractual arrangements ( firm commitments ) to make future payments. These firm commitments secure the future rights to various assets and services to be used in the normal course of operations. The following table summarizes the Company material firm commitments at June 30, 2005. As of June 30, 2005 Payments Due by Period Total 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years (in millions) Contracts for Capital Expenditure Land and buildings $ 150 $ 84 $ 56 $ 10 $ Plant and machinery 747 637 110 Operating leases (a) Land and buildings 2,529 215 361 306 1,647 Plant and machinery 1,001 172 281 172 376 Other commitments Borrowings 9,484 912 415 404 7,753 Exchangeable securities 1,516 1,389 127 News America Marketing (b) 238 73 75 34 56 Sports programming rights (c) 12,273 3,343 3,925 2,633 2,372 Entertainment programming rights 4,585 1,649 1,698 797 441 Other commitments and contractual obligations 511 230 135 97 49 Total commitments, borrowings and contractual obligations $ 33,034 $ 7,315 $ 7,056 $ 5,842 $ 12,821 The Company also has certain contractual arrangements in relation to certain equity affiliates that would require the Company to make payments or provide funding if certain circumstances occur ( contingent guarantees ). The Company does not expect that these contingent guarantees will result in any material amounts being paid by the Company in the foreseeable future. The timing of the amounts presented in the table below reflect when the maximum contingent guarantees will expire and does not indicate that the Company expects to incur an obligation to make payments during that time frame. As of June 30, 2005 Total Amounts Committed Amount of Guarantees Expiration Per Period Contingent Guarantees 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years (in millions) Transponder leases (d) $ 441 $ 40 $ 76 $ 73 $ 252 Star Channel Japan (e) 40 40 Sky Brasil credit agreement (f) 210 210 Innova credit agreement (g) 46 46 Other (h) 6 6 $ 743 $ 86 $ 286 $ 73 $ 298 60 Table of Contents (a) The Company leases transponders, office facilities, warehouse facilities, equipment and microwave transmitters used to carry broadcast signals. These leases, which are classified as operating leases, expire at certain dates through fiscal 2036. In addition, the Company leases various printing plants, which expire at various dates through fiscal 2095. (b) News America Marketing ( NAMG ), a leading provider of in-store marketing products and services primarily to consumer packaged goods manufacturers, enters into agreements with retailers to rent space for the display of point of service advertising. (c) The Company contract with MLB grants the Company rights to telecast certain regular season and all post-season MLB games. The contract began with the 2001 MLB season and ends with the 2006 MLB season. For the duration of the term of its contract with MLB, the Company has sublicensed telecast rights to certain MLB post-season games to The Walt Disney Company, and is entitled to be paid a sublicense fee over the remaining term. The amounts reflected on this schedule have not been reduced by the sublicense. Under the Company contract with the NFL, remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast certain football games are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2012 The Company contracts with NASCAR give the Company rights to broadcast certain races through calendar year 2006 and exclusive rights for certain ancillary content through calendar year 2012. In June 2005, NASCAR exercised an early termination clause in one of its contracts. Prior to the early termination, the Company had the right to broadcast certain races through calendar year 2008. The Company maintains exclusive NASCAR ancillary content rights through calendar year 2012. The Company acquired the exclusive rights to transmit and exploit the broadcast of the 2003 and 2007 Cricket World Cups and other related International Cricket Council cricket events through fiscal 2007. The Company has guaranteed its subsidiaries obligations under this contract and has been granted the first right of refusal and the last right to match the highest bid received for the broadcast rights in their respective territories. In addition, the Company has certain other local sports broadcasting rights, with the total value of sports programming commitments at June 30, 2005 of approximately $12 billion. (d) The Company has guaranteed various transponder leases for certain associated companies operating in Latin America. The aggregate of these guarantees at June 30, 2005 was approximately $441 million and the final guarantee expires in fiscal 2019. Upon the closing of the Latin American DBS reorganization transactions, the Company will be released from the transponder lease guarantees (See Note 5 Investments to the consolidated financial statements). (e) The Company has guaranteed a bank loan facility of $40 million for an equity affiliate. The facility covers a term loan of $25 million ( 2.8 billion) which matures in September 2005, and an agreement for an overdraft with $15 million ( 1.7 billion) outstanding. The Company would be liable under this guarantee, to the extent of default by the equity affiliate. (f) In August 2004, the Company guaranteed the obligations of Sky Brasil, an equity affiliate of the Company, under a $210 million three-year credit agreement with JP Morgan Chase Bank and Citibank N.A. Upon the closing of the Latin American DBS reorganization transactions, the Company will be released from this guarantee (See Note 5 Investments to the consolidated financial statements). (g) The Company guaranteed $46 million of the obligations of Innova, an equity affiliate of the Company, under a credit agreement. Upon the closing of the Latin American DBS reorganization transactions, the Company will be released from this guarantee (See Note 5 Investments to the consolidated financial statements). (h) The Company has guaranteed $6 million of a credit agreement that matures in January 2006 for an equity affiliate. In October 2004, the Company announced its intentions to invest in new printing plants in the United Kingdom and Australia to take advantage of technological and market changes. The Company intends to expend a total of $1 billion in the United Kingdom for new printing plants and related costs for its U.K. newspapers and 61 Table of Contents $500 million for the Australian printing plants. As of June 30, 2005 the Company was contractually obligated to approximately $350 million and $110 million in the United Kingdom and Australia, respectively. All firm commitments related to these projects are included in the capital expenditure lines disclosed in the commitments table above. In accordance with SFAS No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions, and SFAS No. 106, Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions, the total accrued benefit liability for pension and other postretirement benefit plans recognized as of June 30, 2005 was $461 million and is included within Non-current other liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet (See Note 15 Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits to the consolidated financial statements). This amount is impacted by, among other items, statutory funding levels, changes in plan demographics and assumptions, and investment return on plan assets. Because of the current overall funded status of the Company material plans, the accrued liability does not represent expected near-term liquidity needs and accordingly the Company did not include this amount in the contractual obligations table. The Company funds its U.S. qualified pension plans in accordance with Employee Retirement Income Security Act regulations for determining the minimum annual required contribution and in accordance with Internal Revenue Service regulations for determining the maximum annual allowable tax deduction. The minimum required contribution for the Company primary qualified U.S. pension plans for the 2005 plan year is $0 and is anticipated to remain $0 for at least the next several years due to voluntary contributions made to the plan over the past two years. Therefore, the Company did not include any amounts as a contractual obligation in the above table. The Company does however anticipate contributing an additional voluntary amount but such contribution will not be more than the maximum deductible amount to the primary U.S. qualified pension plans in 2006, which is estimated to be approximately $95 million. The Company international pension plans are funded in accordance with local laws and income tax regulations. The Company does not expect minimum annual requirements to be material in 2006. Therefore, no amounts have been included in the table above. The Company does however anticipate making additional voluntary contributions to qualified pension plans in 2006, but not more than the maximum deductible amounts, which is estimated to be approximately $60 million. As of June 30, 2005, the projected benefit obligation of the pension plans was $2,074 million, and the fair value of plan assets was $1,609 million. A portion of this underfunding is attributable to the unfunded U.S. nonqualified pension plans. These U.S. nonqualified pension plans provide supplemental executive retirement benefits that are not permitted to be funded through a qualified plan because of limits imposed by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Disclosure of amounts in the above table regarding expected benefit payments for the Company pension plans and its other postretirement benefit plans cannot be properly reflected for 2010 and thereafter due to the ongoing nature of the obligations of these plans. Please see Note 15 to the financial statements for additional information on expected future benefit payments. Contingencies The Company is party to several purchase and sale arrangements which become exercisable over the next ten years by the Company or the counter-party to the agreement. Total contingent receipts/payments under these agreements (including cash and stock) have not been included in the Company financial statements. In fiscal 2006, the Company has one significant arrangement that becomes exercisable. The Company owns 75% of News Out of Home, a joint venture with an affiliate of Capital International, Inc ( Capital ). News Out of Home owns and operates outdoor advertising companies located in Eastern Europe and also owns 68% of Media Support Services Limited, an outdoor advertising company with operating subsidiaries located in Russia. In fiscal 2006, the minority shareholders of Media Support Services Limited have the right to put their interests to News Out of Home and Capital also has the right to put a portion of its interest in News Out of Home to the Company. The Company believes that none of the purchase and sale arrangements will have a material effect on its consolidated financial condition, future results of operations or liquidity. 62 Table of Contents The Company experiences routine litigation in the normal course of its business. The Company believes that none of its pending litigation will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition, future results of operations or liquidity. Related Party Transactions Immediately prior to and as part of the Reorganization, the Company acquired from certain trusts the beneficiaries of which include Mr. K.R. Murdoch, members of his family and certain charities ( the Murdoch Trusts ) the 58% shareholding in QPL which was not already owned by the Company predecessor through the acquisition of the Cruden Group of companies ( the Cruden/QPL Transaction ). The principal assets of the Cruden Group were shares of News Corporation and a 58% interest in QPL. QPL owns a publishing business which includes two metropolitan and eight regional newspapers in Queensland, Australia, as well as shares in News Corporation. Following this transaction, Mr. K.R. Murdoch and the Murdoch Trusts own approximately 29.5% of the Company Class B Common Stock. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it is important to the Company financial condition and results, and if it requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application. The development and selection of these critical accounting policies have been determined by management of the Company and the related disclosures have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. For a summary of all of the Company significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. Use of Estimates The preparation of the Company Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts that are reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying disclosures. Although these estimates are based on management best knowledge of current events and actions that the company may undertake in the future, actual results may differ from the estimates. Revenue Recognition Filmed Entertainment Revenues from distribution of feature films are recognized in accordance with Statement of Position No. 00-2, Accounting by Producers or Distributors of Films ( SOP 00-2 ). Revenues from the theatrical distribution of motion pictures are recognized as they are exhibited and revenues from home video and DVD sales, net of a reserve for estimated returns, together with related costs, are recognized on the date that video and DVD units are made widely available for sale by retailers and all Company-imposed restrictions on the sale of video and DVD units have expired. Revenues from television distribution are recognized when the motion picture or television program is made available to the licensee for broadcast. Management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue for each film on the historical performance of similar films, incorporating factors such as the past box office record of the lead actors and actresses, the genre of the film, pre-release market research (including test market screenings) and the expected number of theaters in which the film will be released. Management updates such estimates based on information available on the actual results of each film through its life cycle. License agreements for the telecast of theatrical and television product in the broadcast network, syndicated television and cable television markets are routinely entered into in advance of their available date for telecast. Cash received and amounts billed in connection with such contractual rights for which revenue is not yet 63 Table of Contents recognizable is classified as deferred revenue. Because deferred revenue generally relates to contracts for the licensing of theatrical and television product which have already been produced, the recognition of revenue for such completed product is principally only dependent upon the commencement of the availability period for telecast under the terms of the related licensing agreement. Television, Cable Network Programming and Direct Broadcast Satellite Advertising revenue is recognized as the commercials are aired, net of agency commissions. Subscriber fees received from subscribers, cable systems and DBS operators are recognized as revenue in the period that services are provided, net of amortization of cable distribution investments. Filmed entertainment and programming costs Accounting for the production and distribution of motion pictures and television programming is in accordance with SOP 00-2, which requires management judgment as it relates to total revenues to be received and costs to be incurred throughout the life of each program or its license period. These judgments are used to determine the amortization of capitalized filmed entertainment and television programming costs, the expensing of participation and residual costs associated with revenues earned and any fair value adjustments. In accordance with GAAP, the Company amortizes Filmed Entertainment and television programming costs using the individual-film-forecast method. Under the individual-film-forecast method, such programming costs are amortized for each film or television program in the ratio that current period actual revenue for such title bears to management estimated remaining unrecognized ultimate revenue as of the beginning of the current fiscal year to be recognized over approximately a six year period or operating profits to be realized from all media and markets for such title. Management regularly reviews, and revises when necessary, its total revenue estimates on a title-by-title basis, which may result in a change in the rate of amortization and/or a write down of the asset to fair value. The costs of national sports contracts at the FOX and Cable Network Programming segment and for international sports rights agreements are charged to expense based on the ratio of each period operating profits to estimated total remaining operating profit of the contract. Estimates of total operating profit can change and accordingly, are reviewed periodically and amortization is adjusted as necessary. Such changes in the future could be material. The costs of local and regional sports contracts, which are for a specified number of events, are amortized on an event-by-event basis. Those costs, which are for a specified season, are amortized over the season on a straight-line basis, and if applicable, a portion of the cost is allocated to rebroadcasts. Original cable programming is amortized on an accelerated basis. Management regularly reviews, and revises when necessary, its total revenue estimates on a contract basis, which may result in a change in the rate of amortization and/or a write down of the asset to fair value. Property, Plant and Equipment Property, plant and equipment is recorded at cost and are depreciated on a straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of such assets. Changes in circumstances such as technological advances, changes to the Company business model or capital strategy could result in the actual useful lives differing from the Company estimates. In those cases where the Company determines that the useful life of buildings and equipment should be shortened, the Company would depreciate the asset over its revised remaining useful life thereby increasing depreciation expense. Intangible Assets The Company has a significant amount of intangible assets, including goodwill, FCC licenses, and other copyright products and trademarks. Intangible assets acquired in business combinations are recorded at their 64 Table of Contents estimated fair market value at the date of acquisition. Goodwill is recorded as the difference between the cost of acquiring an entity as compared to estimated fair values assigned to their tangible and identifiable intangible net assets. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of intangible assets acquired as well as their useful lives can significantly impact net income. The Company accounts for its business acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting. The total cost of acquisitions is allocated to the underlying net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the tangible net assets acquired is recorded as intangibles. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives, and market multiples, among other items. Carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are reviewed periodically for possible impairment in accordance with SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets ( SFAS No. 142 ). The Company impairment review is based on, among other methods, a discounted cash flow approach that requires significant management judgments. Impairment occurs when the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the discounted present value of the cash flows for that reporting unit. An impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the net present value of estimated future cash flows, which represents the estimated fair value of the asset. The Company uses its judgment in assessing whether assets may have become impaired between annual valuations. Indicators such as unexpected adverse economic factors, unanticipated technological change or competitive activities, loss of key personnel and acts by governments and courts, may signal that an asset has become impaired. For all of its television station acquisitions through June 30, 2005, the Company utilized the residual method to estimate the fair value of the stations FCC licenses. Under the residual method, a portion of a station purchase price is allocated to its tangible net assets and certain identifiable intangible assets in accordance with independent third party appraisals with any remaining excess purchase price allocated to the FCC license. This results in goodwill being included in the FCC license value. In addition to utilizing the residual method to estimate the fair value of its FCC licenses for allocating the purchase price of its television station acquisitions, the Company also utilized this method to estimate the fair value of its FCC licenses for subsequent SFAS No. 142 impairment tests. The residual method of estimating the fair value of FCC licenses will no longer be permissible in future years. (See Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements below for discussion of the new requirement and its impact to the Company.) Income Taxes The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions in which it operates. Significant judgment is required in evaluating its tax positions and determining its provision for income taxes. During the normal course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. The Company establishes reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on evaluations of the probability of whether additional taxes and related interest and penalties will be due. The Company adjusts these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances. An estimated effective tax rate for a year is applied to quarterly operating results. In the event there is a significant or unusual item recognized in the quarterly operating results, the tax attributable to that item is separately calculated and recorded in the same quarter. A number of years may elapse before a tax return containing tax matters, for which a reserve has been established, is audited and finally resolved. During fiscal 2005, the Company recognized $125 million of tax benefits related to the resolution of a certain prior year foreign tax audits. The Company estimates a valuation allowance to reduce the amount of its deferred tax assets to an amount the Company believes will more likely than not be realized. In making this estimate, management analyzes future 65 Table of Contents taxable income, reversing temporary differences and ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event management determines the Company would not be able to realize all or part of the net deferred tax asset in the future, a valuation allowance would be recorded against the deferred tax asset with a corresponding charge to Provision for income tax expense recognized in the period such determination was made. Employee Costs The Company maintains defined benefit pension plans covering a majority of its employees and retirees. For financial reporting purposes, net periodic pension expense (income) is calculated based upon a number of actuarial assumptions including a discount rate for plan obligations and an expected rate of return on plan assets. The Company considers current market conditions, including changes in investment returns and interest rates, in making these assumptions. In developing the expected long-term rate of return, the Company considered the pension portfolio past average rate of returns, and future return expectations of the various asset classes. The expected long-term rate of return is based on an asset allocation assumption of 63% equities, 35% fixed-income securities and 2% in real estate. The expected rate of return on plan assets is a long-term assumption and generally does not change annually. The discount rate reflects the market rate for high-quality fixed-income investments on the Company annual measurement date of June 30, 2005 and is subject to change each year. The discount rate assumptions used to account for pension and other postretirement benefit plans reflect the rates at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled. These rates were determined based on various high quality investment grade indices and using a cash flow matching technique whereby a hypothetical portfolio of high quality debt securities was constructed that mirrors the specific benefit obligations for each of the Company primary plans where appropriate. The key assumptions used in developing the Company fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003 net periodic pension expense (income) for its plans consists of the following: 2005 2004 2003 ($ in millions) Discount rate 5.7 % 5.6 % 6.3 % Assets: Expected rate of return 7.5 % 7.5 % 7.6 % Expected return $ 110 $ 90 $ 80 Actual return $ 160 $ 150 $ (20 ) Due to continuing declines in long-term interest rates, the Company will use a weighted average discount rate of 5.1% in calculating the fiscal 2006 net periodic pension expense for its plans. As equity markets have stabilized, the Company plans to continue to use a weighted average long term rate of return of 7.5% for 2006 net periodic pension expense for its plans. The unrecognized net losses on the Company pension plans were $615 million at June 30, 2005, an increase from $463 million at June 30, 2004. These unrecognized losses mainly result from the utilization of lower discount rates, and recent mortality tables as compared to previous years and from the actual plan asset returns being below expected rates of return during fiscal years 2003 and 2002. These deferred losses are being systematically recognized in future net periodic pension expense in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions (SFAS No. 87). Unrecognized losses in excess of 10 percent of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or the plans projected benefit obligation are recognized over the average future service of the plan participants. The Company made contributions of $236 million, $214 million and $70 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. These were primarily voluntary contributions made to improve the funded status of the plans which have been impacted by declining interest rate environment as well as the poor performance of the equity markets as noted above. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns and interest rate movements. Assuming that actual plan returns are consistent with the Company 66 Table of Contents expected plan returns in fiscal 2005 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant, the Company would not be required to make any statutory contributions to its U.S. pension plans for the foreseeable future. Changes in net periodic pension expense may occur in the future due to changes in the Company expected rate of return on plan assets and discount rate resulting from economic events. The following table highlights the sensitivity of the Company pension obligations and expense to changes in these assumptions, assuming all other assumptions remain constant: Changes in Assumption Impact on Annual Pension Expense Impact on PBO 0.25 percentage point decrease in discount rate Increase $10 million Increase $80 million 0.25 percentage point increase in discount rate Decrease $10 million Decrease $80 million 0.25 percentage point decrease in expected rate of return on assets Increase $4 million 0.25 percentage point increase in expected rate of return on assets Decrease $4 million SFAS No. 87 requires recognition of an additional minimum pension liability if the fair value of plan assets is less than the accumulated benefit obligation at the end of the plan year. In fiscal 2005, the Company recorded a non-cash adjustment to equity through accumulated other comprehensive income of approximately $100 million which increased the additional minimum pension liability to approximately $400 million. The increase was due to the current year discount rate and mortality change. In fiscal 2004, the Company recorded a non-cash adjustment to equity through accumulated other comprehensive income of approximately $100 million which reduced the additional minimum pension liability to approximately $300 million. In fiscal 2003, due to the poor performance of the equity markets which adversely affected the Company pension assets and a decline in the discount rate, the Company recorded a non-cash adjustment to equity through accumulated other comprehensive income of approximately $300 million which increased the accumulated additional minimum pension liability to approximately $400 million. Equity market returns and interest rates significantly impact the funded status of the Company pension plans. Based on future plan asset performance and interest rates, additional adjustments to equity may be required. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In September 2004, the Emerging Issues Task Force issued Topic No. D-108, Use of the Residual Method to Value Acquired Assets Other Than Goodwill ( Topic D-108 ) which will impact the Company carrying value of its acquired FCC licenses. Topic D-108 prohibits the use of the residual method and precludes companies from reclassifying to goodwill any goodwill that was originally included in the value of FCC licenses as determined under the residual method of valuation. Pursuant to the provisions of Topic D-108, the Company will utilize a direct method of valuation for an impairment test under SFAS 142 to be performed as of July 1, 2005, the required date of adopting this new accounting pronouncement. While the Company has not yet completed the evaluation of the impact of adopting Topic D-108 on its financial position or results of operations, the Company believes that the change in accounting principle prescribed by Topic D-108 will be material. Topic D-108 will become effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal 2006 and will be reflected as a cumulative effect of an accounting change. In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment. This standard will require the cost of employee compensation paid with equity instruments to be measured based on grant-date fair values. That cost will be recognized over the vesting period. SFAS No. 123(R) will become effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal 2006. In October, 2004, the American Jobs Creation Act (the Act ) was signed into law. The Act includes a temporary incentive for U.S. multinationals to repatriate foreign earnings at an effective 5.25 percent tax rate. 67 Table of Contents Such repatriations must occur in either an enterprise last tax year that began before the enactment date, or the first tax year that begins during the one-year period beginning on the date of enactment. In December 2004, the FASB issued a FASB Staff Position, Accounting and Disclosure Guidance for the Foreign Earnings Repatriation Provision within the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 ( FSP FAS 109-2 ). FSP FAS 109-2 allows companies additional time to evaluate the effect of the Act as to whether unrepatriated foreign earnings continue to qualify for the SFAS No. 109 exception regarding non-recognition of deferred tax liabilities and would require explanatory disclosures from those who need the additional time. The Company is currently considering the effects of the repatriation provisions of the Act. Through June 30, 2005, the Company had not provided deferred taxes on substantially all of the undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries since substantially all such earnings were expected to be permanently invested in foreign operations but has started an evaluation of the effects of the repatriation provision. Whether the Company will ultimately take advantage of this provision depends on a number of factors, including reviewing future Congressional or Treasury Department guidance, before a determination can be made. The range of possible amounts that the Company is considering for repatriation under this provision is up to approximately $500 million. The related potential range of income tax is up to approximately $30 million. In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 153, Exchanges of Nonmonetary Assets an amendment of APB Opinion No. 29. This standard amends APB Opinion No. 29, Accounting for Nonmonetary Transactions , by eliminating the exception to fair value measurement for exchanges of similar productive assets and replaces it with a general exception for exchange transactions that do not have commercial substance that is, transactions that are not expected to result in significant changes in the cash flows of the reporting entity. SFAS No. 153 will become effective for the Company for nonmonetary asset exchanges occurring after the first quarter of fiscal 2006. The Company does not expect the adoption of SFAS No. 153 to have a material effect on its financial position, results of operation or cash flows. In May 2005, the FASB issued SFAS No. 154, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections a replacement of APB Opinion No. 20 and FASB Statement No. 3. This standard establishes, unless impracticable, retrospective application as the required method for reporting a change in accounting principle in the absence of explicit transition requirements specific to the newly adopted accounting principle. SFAS No. 154 will become effective for the Company for accounting changes and corrections of errors beginning in fiscal 2007. 68 Table of Contents 
