CIK: 1308161
Company Name: NEWS CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-08-13


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS This document contains statements that constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act ), and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The words expect, estimate, anticipate, predict, believe and similar expressions and variations thereof are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements appear in a number of places in this document and include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of the Company, its directors or its officers with respect to, among other things, trends affecting the Company financial condition or results of operations. The readers of this document are cautioned that any forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties. More information regarding these risks, uncertainties and other factors is set forth under the heading Risk Factors in Item 1A of the Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company does not ordinarily make projections of its future operating results and undertakes no obligation (and expressly disclaims any obligation) to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Readers should carefully review this document and the other documents filed by the Company with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ). This section should be read together with the audited consolidated financial statements of the Company and related notes set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report. INTRODUCTION Management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to help provide an understanding of News Corporation and its subsidiaries (together News Corporation or the Company ) financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. This discussion is organized as follows: Overview of the Company Business This section provides a general description of the Company businesses, as well as developments that occurred either during fiscal 2008 or early fiscal 2009 that the Company believes are important in understanding its results of operations and financial condition or to disclose known trends. Results of Operations This section provides an analysis of the Company's results of operations for the three fiscal years ended June 30, 2008. This analysis is presented on both a consolidated and a segment basis. In addition, a brief description is provided of significant transactions and events that impact the comparability of the results being analyzed. Liquidity and Capital Resources This section provides an analysis of the Company's cash flows for the three fiscal years ended June 30, 2008, as well as a discussion of the Company's outstanding debt and commitments, both firm and contingent, that existed as of June 30, 2008. Included in the discussion of outstanding debt is a discussion of the amount of financial capacity available to fund the Company's future commitments and obligations, as well as a discussion of other financing arrangements. Critical Accounting Policies This section discusses accounting policies considered important to the Company's financial condition and results of operations, and which require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in application. In addition, Note 2 to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation summarizes the Company's significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policy discussion found in this section. OVERVIEW OF THE COMPANY S BUSINESS The Company is a diversified global media company, which manages and reports its businesses in eight segments: Filmed Entertainment, which principally consists of the production and acquisition of live-action and animated motion pictures for distribution and licensing in all formats in all entertainment media worldwide, and the production of original television programming worldwide. 45 Table of Contents Television , which, as of June 30, 2008, principally consisted of the operation of 35 full power broadcast television stations, including nine duopolies, in the United States (of these stations, 25 are affiliated with the FOX network and ten are affiliated with the MyNetworkTV network), the broadcasting of network programming in the United States and the development, production and broadcasting of television programming in Asia. Cable Network Programming , which principally consists of the production and licensing of programming distributed through cable television systems and direct broadcast satellite operators primarily in the United States. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television ( DBS ), which principally consists of the distribution of premium programming services via satellite and broadband directly to subscribers in Italy. Magazines and Inserts , which principally consists of the publication of free-standing inserts, which are promotional booklets containing consumer offers distributed through insertion in local Sunday newspapers in the United States, and the provision of in-store marketing products and services, primarily to consumer packaged goods manufacturers in the United States and Canada. Newspapers and Information Services , which principally consists of the publication of four national newspapers in the United Kingdom, the publication of approximately 147 newspapers in Australia, the publication of a metropolitan newspaper and a national newspaper (with international editions) in the United States and the provision of information services. Book Publishing , which principally consists of the publication of English language books throughout the world. Other, which includes NDS Group plc ( NDS ), a company engaged in the business of supplying open end-to-end digital technology and services to digital pay-television platform operators and content providers; Fox Interactive Media ( FIM ), which operates the Company Internet activities; and News Outdoor Group ( News Outdoor ), an advertising business which offers display advertising primarily in outdoor locations throughout Russia and Eastern Europe. Filmed Entertainment The Filmed Entertainment segment derives revenue from the production and distribution of feature motion pictures and television series. In general, motion pictures produced or acquired for distribution by the Company are exhibited in U.S. and foreign theaters, followed by home entertainment, video-on-demand and pay-per-view television, premium subscription television, network television and basic cable and syndicated television exploitation. Television series initially produced for the networks and first-run syndication are generally licensed to domestic and international markets concurrently and subsequently released in seasonal DVD box sets. More successful series are later syndicated in domestic markets. The length of the revenue cycle for television series will vary depending on the number of seasons a series remains in active production and, therefore, may cause fluctuations in operating results. License fees received for television exhibition (including international and U.S. premium television and basic cable television) are recorded as revenue in the period that licensed films or programs are available for such exhibition, which may cause substantial fluctuations in operating results. The revenues and operating results of the Filmed Entertainment segment are significantly affected by the timing of the Company theatrical and home entertainment releases, the number of its original and returning television series that are aired by television networks and the number of its television series in off-network syndication. Theatrical and home entertainment release dates are determined by several factors, including timing of vacation and holiday periods and competition in the marketplace. The distribution windows for the release of motion pictures theatrically and in various home entertainment formats have been compressing and may continue to change in the future. A further reduction in timing between theatrical and home entertainment releases could adversely affect the revenues and operating results of this segment. 46 Table of Contents The Company enters into arrangements with third parties to co-produce many of its theatrical productions. These arrangements, which are referred to as co-financing arrangements, take various forms. The parties to these arrangements include studio and non-studio entities, both domestic and foreign. In several of these agreements, other parties control certain distribution rights. The Filmed Entertainment segment records the amounts received for the sale of an economic interest as a reduction of the cost of the film, as the investor assumes full risk for that portion of the film asset acquired in these transactions. The substance of these arrangements is that the third-party investors own an interest in the film and, therefore, receive a participation based on the respective third-party investor interest in the profits or losses incurred on the film. Consistent with the requirements of Statement of Position 00-2, Accounting by Producers or Distributors of Films, the estimate of a third-party investor interest in profits or losses incurred on the film is determined by reference to the ratio of actual revenue earned to date in relation to total estimated ultimate revenues. Operating costs incurred by the Filmed Entertainment segment include: exploitation costs, primarily theatrical prints and advertising and home entertainment marketing and manufacturing costs; amortization of capitalized production, overhead and interest costs; and participations and talent residuals. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. The Company competes with other major studios, such as Disney, Paramount, Sony, Universal, Warner Bros., and independent film producers in the production and distribution of motion pictures and DVDs. As a producer and distributor of television programming, the Company competes with studios, television production groups and independent producers and syndicators, such as Disney, Sony, NBC Universal, Warner Bros. and Paramount Television, to sell programming both domestically and internationally. The Company also competes to obtain creative talent and story properties which are essential to the success of the Company filmed entertainment businesses. Television and Cable Network Programming The Company U.S. television operations primarily consist of the FOX Broadcasting Company ( FOX ), MyNetworkTV, Inc. ( MyNetworkTV ) and, as of June 30, 2008, the 35 television stations owned by the Company. The Company international television operations consist primarily of STAR Group Limited ( STAR ). The U.S. television broadcast environment is highly competitive and the primary methods of competition are the development and acquisition of popular programming. Program success is measured by ratings, which are an indication of market acceptance, with the top rated programs commanding the highest advertising prices. FOX and MyNetworkTV compete for audience, advertising revenues and programming with other broadcast networks, such as CBS, ABC, NBC and The CW, independent television stations, cable program services, as well as other media, including DVDs, video games, print and the Internet. In addition, FOX and MyNetworkTV compete with the other broadcast networks to secure affiliations with independently owned television stations in markets across the country. The television stations owned by the Company compete for programming, audiences and advertising revenues with other television stations and cable networks in their respective coverage areas and, in some cases, with respect to programming, with other station groups, and in the case of advertising revenues, with other local and national media. The competitive position of the television stations owned by the Company is largely influenced by the strength of FOX and MyNetworkTV, and, in particular, the prime-time viewership of the respective network, as well as the quality of the syndicated programs and local news programs in time periods not programmed by FOX and MyNetworkTV. In Asia, STAR's channels are primarily distributed to local cable operators or other pay-television platform operators for distribution to their subscribers. STAR derives its revenue from the sale of advertising time and affiliate fees from these pay-television platform operators. 47 Table of Contents The Company U.S. cable network operations primarily consist of the Fox News Channel ( Fox News ), the FX Network ( FX ) and the Regional Sports Networks ( RSNs ). The Company international cable networks consist of the Fox International Channels ( FIC ) with operations primarily in Latin America and Europe. Generally, the Company cable networks, which target various demographics, derive a majority of their revenues from monthly affiliate fees received from cable television systems and DBS operators based on the number of its subscribers. Affiliate fee revenues are net of the amortization of cable distribution investments (capitalized fees paid to a cable operator or DBS operator to facilitate the launch of a cable network). The Company defers the cable distribution investments and amortizes the amounts on a straight-line basis over the contract period. Cable television and DBS are currently the predominant means of distribution of the Company program services in the United States. Internationally, distribution technology varies region by region. The Company cable networks compete for carriage on cable television systems, DBS systems and other distribution systems with other program services, as well as other uses of bandwidth, such as retransmission of free over-the-air broadcast networks, telephony and data transmission. A primary focus of competition is for distribution of the Company cable network channels that are not already distributed by particular cable television or DBS systems. For such program services, distributors make decisions on the use of bandwidth based on various considerations, including amounts paid by programmers for launches, subscription fees payable by distributors and appeal to the distributors subscribers. The most significant operating expenses of the Television segment and the Cable Network Programming segment are the acquisition and production expenses related to programming and the production and technical expenses related to operating the technical facilities of the broadcaster or cable network. Other expenses include promotional expenses related to improving the market visibility and awareness of the broadcaster or cable network and its programming. Additional expenses include sales commissions paid to the in-house advertising sales force, as well as salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead expenses. The Company has several multi-year sports rights agreements, including contracts with the National Football League ( NFL ) through fiscal 2012, contracts with the National Association of Stock Car Auto Racing ( NASCAR ) for certain races and exclusive rights for certain ancillary content through calendar year 2014, a contract with Major League Baseball ( MLB ) through calendar year 2013 and a contract for the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) through fiscal year 2010. These contracts provide the Company with the broadcast rights to certain national sporting events during their respective terms. The costs of these sports contracts are charged to expense based on the ratio of each period operating profit to estimated total operating profit for the remaining term of the contract. The profitability of these long-term national sports contracts is based on the Company best estimates at June 30, 2008 of directly attributable revenues and costs; such estimates may change in the future and such changes may be significant. Should revenues decline from estimates applied at June 30, 2008, a loss may be recorded. Should revenues improve as compared to estimated revenues, the Company may have an improved operating profit related to the contract, which may be recognized over the estimated remaining contract term. While the Company seeks to ensure compliance with federal indecency laws and related Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) regulations, the definition of indecency is subject to interpretation and there can be no assurance that the Company will not broadcast programming that is ultimately determined by the FCC to violate the prohibition against indecency. Such programming could subject the Company to regulatory review or investigation, fines, adverse publicity or other sanctions, including the loss of station licenses. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television The DBS segment operations consist of SKY Italia, which provides basic and premium programming services via satellite and broadband directly to subscribers in Italy. SKY Italia derives revenues principally from 48 Table of Contents subscriber fees. The Company believes that the quality and variety of video, audio and interactive programming, quality of picture, access to service, customer service and price are the key elements for gaining and maintaining market share. SKY Italia competition includes companies that offer video, audio, interactive programming, telephony, data and other information and entertainment services, including broadband Internet providers, digital terrestrial transmission ( DTT ) services, wireless companies and companies that are developing new media technologies. The Company is currently prohibited from providing a pay DTT service under regulations of the European Commission. SKY Italia most significant operating expenses are those related to the acquisition of entertainment, movie and sports programming and subscribers and the production and technical expenses related to operating the technical facilities. Operating expenses related to sports programming are generally recognized over the course of the related sport season, which may cause fluctuations in the operating results of this segment. Magazines and Inserts The Magazine and Inserts segment derives revenues from the sale of advertising space in free-standing inserts, in-store marketing products and services, promotional advertising, subscriptions and production fees. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues. Operating expenses for the Magazine and Inserts segment include paper, promotional, printing, retail commissions, distribution and production costs. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. Newspapers and Information Services The Newspapers and Information Services segment derives revenues primarily from the sale of advertising space, the sale of published newspapers, and subscriptions. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues. Circulation revenues can be greatly affected by changes in competitors cover prices and by promotional activities. Operating expenses for the Newspapers and Information Services segment include costs related to newsprint, ink, printing costs and editorial content. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. The Newspapers and Information Services segment advertising volume, circulation and the price of newsprint are the key uncertainties whose fluctuations can have a material effect on the Company operating results and cash flow. The Company has to anticipate the level of advertising volume, circulation and newsprint prices in managing its businesses to maximize operating profit during expanding and contracting economic cycles. Newsprint is a basic commodity and its price is sensitive to the balance of supply and demand. The Company costs and expenses are affected by the cyclical increases and decreases in the price of newsprint. The newspapers published by the Company compete for readership and advertising with local and national newspapers and also compete with television, radio, Internet and other media alternatives in their respective locales. Competition for newspaper circulation is based on the news and editorial content of the newspaper, service, cover price and, from time to time, various promotions. The success of the newspapers published by the Company in competing with other newspapers and media for advertising depends upon advertisers judgments as to the most effective use of their advertising budgets. Competition for advertising among newspapers is based upon circulation levels, readership levels, reader demographics, advertising rates and advertiser results. Such judgments are based on factors such as cost, availability of alternative media, circulation and quality of readership demographics. In recent years, the newspaper industry has experienced difficulty increasing circulation volume and revenues. This is due to, among other factors, increased competition from new media formats and sources, and shifting preferences among some consumers to receive all or a portion of their news from sources other than a newspaper. 49 Table of Contents The Newspapers and Information Services segment also derives revenue from the provision of subscriber-based information services and the licensing of products and content to third-parties. Losses in the number of subscribers for these information services may affect revenues. The information services provided by the Company also compete with other media sources (free and subscription- based) and new media formats. Licensing revenues depend on new and renewed customer contracts, and may be affected if the Company is unable to generate new licensing business or if existing customers renew for lesser amounts, terminate early or forego renewal. The Company believes that competition from new media formats and sources and shifting consumer preferences will continue to pose challenges within the Newspapers and Information Services industries. Book Publishing The Book Publishing segment derives revenues from the sale of general and children books in the United States and internationally. The revenues and operating results of the Book Publishing segment are significantly affected by the timing of the Company releases and the number of its books in the marketplace. The book publishing marketplace is subject to increased periods of demand in the summer months and during the end-of-year holiday season. Each book is a separate and distinct product, and its financial success depends upon many factors, including public acceptance. Major new title releases represent a significant portion of the Company sales throughout the fiscal year. Consumer books are generally sold on a fully returnable basis, resulting in the return of unsold books. In the domestic and international markets, the Company is subject to global trends and local economic conditions. Operating expenses for the Book Publishing segment include costs related to paper, printing, authors royalties, editorial, art and design expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses include promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. Other NDS NDS supplies open end-to-end digital technology and services to digital pay-television platform operators and content providers. NDS technologies include conditional access and microprocessor security, broadcast and broadband stream management, set-top box and residential gateway middleware, electronic program guides, digital video recording technologies and interactive infrastructure and applications. NDS provides technologies and services supporting standard definition and high definition televisions and a variety of industry, Internet and Internet protocol standards, as well as technology for mobile devices. NDS software systems, consultancy and systems integration services are focused on providing platform operators and content providers with technology to help them profit from the secure distribution of digital information and entertainment to consumer devices which incorporate various technologies supplied by NDS. Significant NDS expenses include smart card costs, royalties for the use of certain intellectual properties, salaries, employee benefits, travel, rent and other routine overhead. FIM The Company sells, through its FIM division, advertising, sponsorships and subscription services on the Company various Internet properties. Significant FIM expenses include development costs, advertising and 50 Table of Contents promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits and other routine overhead. The Company Internet properties include the social networking site MySpace.com, IGN.com, FOXsports.com, Scout.com, RottenTomatoes.com, Askmen.com and Photobucket.com. The Company also has a distribution agreement with Microsoft MSN for FOXsports.com and a search technology and services agreement with Google. News Outdoor The Company sells, through its News Outdoor businesses, outdoor advertising space on various media, primarily in Russia and Eastern Europe. Significant expenses associated with the News Outdoor business include site lease costs, direct production, maintenance and installation expenses, salaries, employee benefits and other routine overhead. In June 2007, the Company announced its intention to explore strategic options for News Outdoor in connection with News Outdoor continued development plans. The strategic options include, but are not limited to, exploring the opportunity to expand News Outdoor existing shareholder group through new strategic and private equity partners. No agreement has yet been entered into with respect to these strategic options. Other Business Developments In December 2007, the Company completed the acquisition of Dow Jones pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of July 31, 2007, by and among the Company, Ruby Newco LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company ( Ruby Newco ), Dow Jones & Company, Inc. ( Dow Jones ) and Diamond Merger Sub Corporation, as amended (the Merger Agreement ). Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, each outstanding share of Dow Jones common stock was converted into the right to receive, at the election of the holder, either (x) $60.00 in cash or (y) 2.8681 Class B common units of Ruby Newco. Each Class B common unit of Ruby Newco is convertible into a share of News Corporation Class A Common Stock. The consideration for the acquisition was approximately $5,700 million which consisted of: $5,150 million in cash, assumed net debt of approximately $330 million and approximately $200 million in equity instruments. The results of Dow Jones have been included in the Company consolidated statements of operations from December 13, 2007, the date of acquisition. In November 2007, Dow Jones announced that it would explore strategic alternatives for the Ottaway Community Newspapers (the Ottaway Newspapers ), which the Company acquired as part of the Dow Jones transaction. In June 2008, the Company determined that it would not sell the Ottaway Newspapers. In February 2008, the Company closed the transactions contemplated by the share exchange agreement (the Share Exchange Agreement ) with Liberty Media Corporation ( Liberty ). Pursuant to the terms of the Share Exchange Agreement, Liberty exchanged its entire interest in the Company common stock (approximately 325 million shares of Class A Common Stock and 188 million shares of Class B Common Stock for 100% of the stock of a wholly owned subsidiary whose holdings consisted of the Company approximate 41% interest (approximately 470 million shares) in The DIRECTV Group, Inc. ( DIRECTV ) constituting the Company entire interest in DIRECTV, three of the Company Regional Sports Networks (FSN Northwest, FSN Pittsburgh and FSN Rocky Mountain) (the Three RSNs ) and approximately $625 million in cash (the Exchange ). The Exchange resulted in the divestiture of the Company entire interest in DIRECTV and the Three RSNs to Liberty. A tax-free gain of $1.7 billion on the Exchange was recognized in Other, net in the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. Upon the closing of the Exchange, the Company entered into a non-competition agreement with DIRECTV and non-competition agreements with each of the Three RSNs, in each case, restricting its right to compete for a period of four years with DIRECTV and the Three RSNs in the respective regions in which such entities were operating on the closing date of the Share Exchange Agreement. In May 2008, the Company disposed of its entire interest (approximately 41%) in Gemstar-TV Guide International Inc. ( Gemstar ) common stock in exchange for a cash payment of approximately $637 million 51 Table of Contents and approximately 19 million shares of Macrovision Solutions Corporation ( Macrovision ) common stock. The Company sold all of its shares of Macrovision common stock in June 2008. The Company recorded a net gain of approximately $112 million on the disposals which is included in Other, net in the consolidated statements of operations. During fiscal 2008, the Company, through a series of transactions, acquired a 25% ownership interest in Premiere AG for cash consideration of approximately $666 million. In June 2008, the Company announced that it and two newly incorporated companies formed by funds advised by Permira Advisers LLP ( the Permira Newcos ) proposed a transaction to an independent committee of the NDS board of directors, which would result in NDS ceasing to be a public company, and the Permira Newcos and the Company owning 51% and 49% of NDS outstanding equity, respectively. On August 5, 2008, NDS announced that the independent committee reached an agreement in principle with the Company and the Permira Newcos on a price at which they would acquire all the issued and outstanding NDS Series A ordinary shares, including those represented by American Depositary Shares traded on The NASDAQ Stock Exchange, for per share consideration of $63 in cash. As part of this transaction, approximately 68% of the NDS Series B ordinary shares held by News Corporation would be cancelled in exchange for $63 per share in a mix of approximately $1.5 billion in cash and a $242 million note. The transaction is subject to negotiation and execution of final legal documentation, and is also conditioned upon approval by the holders of NDS Series A ordinary shares, court approval, the receipt of certain regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions. There can be no assurance that the parties will enter into final legal documentation or that any transaction will be consummated. In July 2008, the Company completed the sale of eight of the Company owned and operated FOX affiliate television stations to an indirect, wholly owned subsidiary of Oak Hill Capital Partners III, L.P. for approximately $1.1 billion in cash. The stations included: WJW in Cleveland, OH; KDVR in Denver, CO; KTVI in St. Louis, MO; WDAF in Kansas City, MO; WITI in Milwaukee, WI; KSTU in Salt Lake City, UT; WBRC in Birmingham, AL; and WGHP in Greensboro, NC. 52 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Results of Operations Fiscal 2008 versus Fiscal 2007 The following table sets forth the Company operating results for fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. For the years ended June 30, 2008 2007 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues $ 32,996 $ 28,655 $ 4,341 15 % Expenses: Operating 20,531 18,645 1,886 10 % Selling, general and administrative 5,984 4,655 1,329 29 % Depreciation and amortization 1,207 879 328 37 % Other operating (income) charges (107 ) 24 (131 ) * * Total operating income 5,381 4,452 929 21 % Equity earnings of affiliates 327 1,019 (692 ) (68 )% Interest expense, net (926 ) (843 ) (83 ) 10 % Interest income 246 319 (73 ) (23 )% Other, net 2,293 359 1,934 * * Income before income tax expense and minority interest in subsidiaries 7,321 5,306 2,015 38 % Income tax expense (1,803 ) (1,814 ) 11 (1 )% Minority interest in subsidiaries, net of tax (131 ) (66 ) (65 ) 98 % Net income $ 5,387 $ 3,426 $ 1,961 57 % Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations (1) $ 1.81 $ 1.08 $ 0.73 68 % ** not meaningful (1) Represents earnings per share based on the total weighted average shares outstanding (Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock combined) for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2008 and 2007. During fiscal 2007, Class A Common Stock carried rights to a greater dividend than Class B Common Stock. Subsequent to the final fiscal 2007 dividend, shares of Class A Common Stock ceased to carry any rights to a greater dividend than shares of Class B Common Stock. See Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. Overview The Company revenues increased 15% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The impact of foreign currency translations represented 4% of the revenue increase for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. The remaining increase was primarily due to revenue increases at the Newspapers and Information Services, Cable Network Programming, DBS and Other segments. The increase at the Newspapers and Information Services segment was primarily due to the inclusion of revenue from Dow Jones, which was acquired in December 2007. The Cable Network Programming segment increase was primarily due to the consolidation of the National Geographic channels and higher net affiliate revenues. The increase at the DBS segment was primarily due to an increase in subscribers during fiscal 2008. The Other segment increase was primarily due to increased revenue from FIM. Operating expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 increased 10% as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The increase was primarily due to incremental costs from acquisitions, the launch of new businesses, higher sports programming costs at the Television segment due to the broadcast of the Super Bowl which was not broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2007 and foreign exchange movements at the DBS and Newspapers and Information Services segments. The increase in operating expenses was partially offset by the absence of expenses related to the International Cricket Council ( ICC ) Cricket World Cup that were included in fiscal 2007 and lower amortization and production costs due to the Writer Guild of America strike in fiscal 2008. 53 Table of Contents Selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 increased approximately 29% as compared to fiscal 2007. This increase was primarily due to incremental expenses related to acquisitions, the launch of new businesses, increased employee costs and foreign exchange movements at the Newspapers and Information Services and DBS segments. Depreciation and amortization increased 37% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The increase in depreciation and amortization was primarily due to the depreciation of additional property and equipment acquired through acquisitions, higher amortization of finite lived intangible assets due to acquisitions, additional property, plant and equipment placed into service and the impact of foreign exchange movements at the Newspapers and Information Services and DBS segments. Also contributing to the increased depreciation and amortization in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 was higher accelerated depreciation at the Newspapers and Information Services segment as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. Operating income increased 21% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to increased Operating income at the DBS, Cable Network Programming, Television, Newspapers and Information Services and Other segments. The impact of foreign currency translations represented 4% of the Operating income increase for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. In addition, Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 benefited from a net gain of $126 million on the disposal of a parcel of land in the United Kingdom which was included in Other operating (income) charges in the consolidated statements of operations. Equity earnings of affiliates Equity earnings of affiliates decreased $692 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The decrease was primarily a result of lower contributions from British Sky Broadcasting Group plc ( BSkyB ) due to a write-down of its ITV plc investment in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. The Company portion of the ITV plc write-down was $485 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. Also contributing to the decrease in earnings from equity affiliates was lower contributions from DIRECTV due to the exchange of the Company entire interest in DIRECTV to Liberty on February 27, 2008 as part of the Share Exchange Agreement. (See Note 3 Acquisitions, Disposals and Other Transactions to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation) For the years ended June 30, 2008 2007 Change % Change ($ millions) The Company share of equity earnings of affiliates principally consists of: DBS equity affiliates $ 138 $ 844 $ (706 ) (84 )% Cable channel equity affiliates 98 98 Other equity affiliates 91 77 14 18 % Total equity earnings of affiliates $ 327 $ 1,019 $ (692 ) (68 )% Interest expense, net Interest expense, net increased $83 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, primarily due to the issuance of $1 billion 6.15% Senior Notes due 2037 in March 2007 and $1.25 billion 6.65% Senior Notes due 2037 in November 2007. This increase was partially offset by the retirement of the Company $350 million 6.625% Senior Notes due January 2008. Interest income Interest income decreased $73 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, primarily as a result of lower average cash balances principally due to cash used in the acquisition of Dow Jones. 54 Table of Contents Other, net For the years ended June 30, 2008 2007 (in millions) Gain on Share Exchange Agreement (a) $ 1,676 $ Gain on sale of Fox Sports Net Bay Area (b) 208 Gain on sale of China Network Systems (b) 133 Gain on sale of Gemstar (b) 112 Gain on sale of Sky Brasil (b) 261 Gain on sale of Phoenix Satellite Television Holdings Limited (b) 136 Termination of participation rights agreement (a) 97 Impairment of cost based investments (b) (125 ) (2 ) Change in fair value of exchangeable securities (c) 307 (126 ) Other (18 ) (7 ) Total Other, net $ 2,293 $ 359 (a) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (b) See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (c) The Company has certain outstanding exchangeable debt securities which contain embedded derivatives. Pursuant to Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) SFAS No. 133 Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities ( SFAS No. 133 ), these embedded derivatives require separate accounting and, as such, changes in their fair value are recognized in Other, net. A significant variance in the price of the underlying stock could have a material impact on the operating results of the Company. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. Income tax expense The effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 was 25%, which was lower than the statutory rate and the effective tax rate of 34% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The lower rate in the current fiscal year was due to the closing of the tax-free Exchange and the reversal of previously deferred tax liabilities for DIRECTV and the Three RSNs. The Exchange was treated as a tax-free split-off in accordance with Section 355 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and, as a result, no income tax provision was recorded against the gain recorded on the transaction. Minority interest in subsidiaries, net of tax Minority interest expense increased $65 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The increase was primarily due to the minority interest associated with National Geographic Channel (US), which was consolidated beginning in October 2007, and the international National Geographic entities, which were consolidated beginning in January 2007. Net income Net income increased 57% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. The increase in Net income was primarily due to an increase in Other, net resulting from the gain recorded on the closing of the Exchange, as well as the operating income increases noted above. These increases were partially offset by decreased earnings from equity affiliates and increased interest expense noted above. 55 Table of Contents Segment Analysis: The following table sets forth the Company revenues and operating income by segment for fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. For the years ended June 30, 2008 2007 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues: Filmed Entertainment $ 6,699 $ 6,734 $ (35 ) (1 )% Television 5,807 5,705 102 2 % Cable Network Programming 4,993 3,902 1,091 28 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 3,749 3,076 673 22 % Magazines and Inserts 1,124 1,119 5 * * Newspapers and Information Services 6,248 4,486 1,762 39 % Book Publishing 1,388 1,347 41 3 % Other 2,988 2,286 702 31 % Total revenues $ 32,996 $ 28,655 $ 4,341 15 % Operating income (loss): Filmed Entertainment $ 1,246 $ 1,225 $ 21 2 % Television 1,126 962 164 17 % Cable Network Programming 1,269 1,090 179 16 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 419 221 198 90 % Magazines and Inserts 352 335 17 5 % Newspapers and Information Services 767 653 114 17 % Book Publishing 160 159 1 1 % Other 42 (193 ) 235 * * Total operating income $ 5,381 $ 4,452 $ 929 21 % ** not meaningful Filmed Entertainment (20% and 23% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment decreased $35 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2007. The revenue decrease was primarily due to a decrease in worldwide home entertainment revenues as the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 included the successful worldwide home entertainment performance of Ice Age: The Meltdown with no comparable release in fiscal 2008. This decrease was partially offset by higher worldwide theatrical revenues. The fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 included the successful worldwide theatrical and home entertainment performances of The Simpsons Movie , Alvin and the Chipmunks , Live Free or Die Hard, Juno, and Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer . Also included in fiscal 2008 were the theatrical releases of What Happens in Vegas, The Happening, Horton Hears a Who! and their related initial releasing costs, as well as the costs relating to the theatrical release of Meet Dave which was released subsequent to June 30, 2008. Additional titles contributing to fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 were the worldwide home entertainment and pay television performances of Night at the Museum , Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan and Eragon . The fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 included the initial releasing costs of Live Free or Die Hard , as well as the successful theatrical and home entertainment performances of Night at the Museum, Devil Wears Prada, Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan and Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer . Also contributing to fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 was the worldwide home entertainment and pay television performance of Ice Age : The Meltdown, X-Men: The Last Stand and Walk the Line. 56 Table of Contents For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, the Filmed Entertainment segment Operating income increased $21 million, or 2%, as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase was primarily due to lower releasing and production costs partially offset by the revenue decrease noted above. Television (18% and 20% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, Television segment revenues increased $102 million, or 2%, as compared to fiscal 2007. The Television segment reported an increase in Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 of $164 million, or 17%, as compared to fiscal 2007. Revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 at the Company U.S. television operations increased 1% as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase was primarily due to increased advertising revenues from the broadcast of the Super Bowl, which was not broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2007 and higher advertising revenues due to higher pricing for the broadcast of NFL games and higher pricing during FOX prime-time. These revenue increases were partially offset by reduced coverage of the MLB post-season, lower ratings as a result of the absence of several programs due to the Writer Guild of America strike in fiscal 2008, as well as a decrease in automotive, political, movies and telecommunication advertising revenues at the Company television stations. Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 at the Company U.S. television operations increased 19% as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase in Operating income was a result of the revenue increases noted above, as well as improved operating results at MyNetworkTV due to lower programming costs. Also contributing to the increase in Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 was the absence of the costs associated with reduced coverage of the MLB post-season and lower programming costs associated with the Writer Guild of America strike. The increases noted above were partially offset by increased sports programming costs due to the broadcast of the Super Bowl. Revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 at the Company international television operations increased as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase was primarily due to higher advertising revenues in India and higher subscription revenues. Operating income at the Company international television operations decreased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to increased programming costs, which were partially offset by the revenue increases noted above. Cable Network Programming (15% and 13% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, revenues at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $1.1 billion, or 28%, as compared to fiscal 2007. This increase was driven by higher net affiliate and advertising revenues at Fox News, FX, and the Company international cable channels as well as affiliate revenue growth at the RSNs. Also contributing to the revenue growth was incremental revenues of $356 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 due to the consolidation of the National Geographic channels. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, Fox News revenues increased 21% as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to an increase in net affiliate and advertising revenues. Net affiliate revenues increased 44% primarily due to higher average rates per subscriber and lower cable distribution amortization as compared to fiscal 2007. Advertising revenues increased 7% as compared to fiscal 2007 due to higher volume and higher pricing. As of June 30, 2008, Fox News reached approximately 93 million Nielsen households. FX revenues increased 10% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, driven by net affiliate and advertising revenue increases. Net affiliate revenues increased 10% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as a result of an increase in average rate per subscriber and the number of subscribers. Advertising revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 increased 6% as compared to fiscal 2007 due to higher pricing and volume. As of June 30, 2008, FX reached approximately 93 million Nielsen households. 57 Table of Contents The RSNs revenues increased 10% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to increases in net affiliate revenues, partially offset by lower advertising revenue. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, net affiliate revenues increased 13% as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to higher affiliate rates and a higher number of subscribers. Advertising revenue during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 decreased 3% as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to the divestiture of three RSN to Liberty. The Company international cable channels revenues increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to the consolidation of NGC Network Europe LLC ( NGC Europe ) which was not consolidated in fiscal 2007. Also contributing to the increase was improved advertising sales and subscriber growth at the other FIC channels. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, Operating income at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $179 million, or 16%, as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to the increases in revenues noted above. The revenue increases were partially offset by a $912 million increase in operating expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The increases in operating expenses were primarily due to increased programming costs resulting from higher entertainment programming costs from movies, syndicated and original shows and the additional costs associated with the launches of the Big Ten Network and Fox Business Network in fiscal 2008. The launches of the Big Ten Network and Fox Business Network resulted in approximately $160 million in operating losses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. The consolidation of the National Geographic channels resulted in incremental Operating income of approximately $87 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. Also contributing to the increased expenses were higher Selling, general and administrative expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, primarily due to the launch of the new channels. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (11% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2008 and 2007) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, SKY Italia revenues increased $673 million, or 22%, as compared to fiscal 2007. This revenue growth was primarily driven by a net increase of approximately 366,000 in subscribers during fiscal 2008, which increased SKY Italia total subscriber base to almost 4.6 million at June 30, 2008. The total churn for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 was approximately 429,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.4 million, as compared to churn of approximately 423,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.0 million in fiscal 2007. Subscriber churn for the period represents the number of SKY Italia subscribers whose service was disconnected during the period. Also contributing to the increase in revenues was the weakening of the U.S. dollar which represented 12% of the increase in revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. Average revenue per subscriber ( ARPU ) for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 was approximately 44, which was consistent with the ARPU for fiscal 2007. SKY Italia calculates ARPU by dividing total subscriber-related revenues for the period by the average subscribers for the period and dividing that amount by the number of months in the period. Subscriber-related revenues are comprised of total subscription revenue, pay-per-view revenue and equipment rental revenue for the period. Average subscribers are calculated for the respective periods by adding the beginning and ending subscribers for the period and dividing by two. Subscriber acquisition costs per subscriber ( SAC ) of approximately 260 in fiscal 2008 were consistent with that of fiscal 2007, as an increase in upfront activation fees paid by subscribers was substantially offset by an increase in sales commissions during fiscal 2008. SAC is calculated by dividing total subscriber acquisition costs for a period by the number of gross SKY Italia subscribers added during the period. Subscriber acquisition costs include the cost of the commissions paid to retailers and other distributors, the cost of equipment sold directly by SKY Italia to subscribers and the costs related to installation and acquisition advertising, net of any upfront activation fee. SKY Italia excludes the value of equipment capitalized under SKY Italia equipment lease program, as well as payments and the value of returned equipment related to disconnected lease program subscribers from subscriber acquisition costs. 58 Table of Contents For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, SKY Italia operating results improved by $198 million as compared to fiscal 2007. The increases were primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to higher fees paid for programming costs as a result of an increase in the number of subscribers, the addition of new channels, as well as an increased number of movie titles. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, the weakening of the U.S. dollar represented 13% of the total improvement in operating results. Magazines and Inserts (4% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2008 and 2007) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, revenues at the Magazines and Inserts segment increased $5 million as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase in revenues primarily resulted from an increase in rates and volume of in-store marketing products, partially offset by reduced rates and volume of free-standing insert products. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, Operating income increased $17 million, or 5%, as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase was primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, as well as lower store commissions for in-store marketing products and lower production costs for free-standing insert products. Newspapers and Information Services (19% and 16% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, revenues at the Newspapers and Information Services segment increased $1.8 billion, or 39%, as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to the inclusion of Dow Jones beginning December 13, 2007 and revenue growth in Australia and the United Kingdom. During fiscal 2008, the weakening of the U.S. dollar resulted in increases of approximately 7% in revenues as compared to fiscal 2007. Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 increased $114 million, or 17%, as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to the revenue growth noted above, partially offset by increased costs related to the printing presses upgrade in the United Kingdom, which was completed in fiscal 2008. Dow Jones contributed $1.1 billion of revenue and $45 million of Operating income, including $47 million of Dow Jones related purchase price adjustments, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. During fiscal 2008, the weakening of the U.S. dollar resulted in increases of approximately 12% in Operating income as compared to fiscal 2007. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, the Australian newspapers revenues increased 27% as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to higher advertising revenues, incremental revenues from the acquisition of the Federal Publishing Company group of companies in April 2007 and favorable foreign exchange movements. Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 increased 28% as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above which were partially offset by an increase in employee related costs. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, the UK newspapers revenues increased 5% as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to favorable foreign exchange movements, as well as higher Internet revenues. Internet revenues increased primarily due to incremental revenues from acquisitions made in fiscal 2007 and higher Internet advertising revenues. Operating income decreased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to incremental accelerated depreciation of $45 million recorded for the printing presses and printing facilities that were replaced earlier than originally anticipated. Book Publishing (4% and 5% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, revenues at Book Publishing segment increased $41 million, or 3%, from fiscal 2007, primarily due to distribution revenues earned on the final release of the Harry Potter series book published by Scholastic and the addition of a new distribution client during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008. This increase was partially offset by lower revenue on Lemony Snicket Series of Unfortunate Events titles. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, HarperCollins had 165 titles on The New York Times Bestseller List with 14 titles reaching the number one position. 59 Table of Contents Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 was relatively consistent with Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as the revenue increases noted above were offset by increased distribution, royalty and printing costs. Other (9% and 8% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2008 and 2007, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008, revenues at the Other operating segment increased $702 million, or 31%, as compared to fiscal 2007, primarily due to incremental revenues received from the search technology and services agreement with Google and increased advertising revenues from FIM Internet sites. The revenue increase was also driven by incremental revenues from the Jamba joint venture which was formed in January 2007, as well as higher revenues from NDS. Operating results for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 increased $235 million as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase was primarily due to a gain of $126 million from the sale of a parcel of land the Company owned in the United Kingdom in June 2008 and due to the revenue increases noted above. The revenue increases at FIM were partially offset by higher costs due to increased development and technical activity, the domestic and international expansion of the business and costs associated with the launch of new business ventures. Also contributing to the increase in operating results was the absence of losses for the ICC Cricket World Cup included in fiscal 2007; however, this was offset by start up losses in conjunction with the Company Eastern European broadcasting initiatives. Results of Operations Fiscal 2007 versus Fiscal 2006 The following table sets forth the Company operating results for fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. For the years ended June 30, 2007 2006 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues $ 28,655 $ 25,327 $ 3,328 13 % Expenses: Operating 18,645 16,593 2,052 12 % Selling, general and administrative 4,655 3,982 673 17 % Depreciation and amortization 879 775 104 13 % Other operating charges 24 109 (85 ) (78 )% Total operating income 4,452 3,868 584 15 % Equity earnings of affiliates 1,019 888 131 15 % Interest expense, net (843 ) (791 ) (52 ) 7 % Interest income 319 246 73 30 % Other, net 359 194 165 85 % Income from continuing operations before income tax expense and minority interest in subsidiaries 5,306 4,405 901 20 % Income tax expense (1,814 ) (1,526 ) (288 ) 19 % Minority interest in subsidiaries, net of tax (66 ) (67 ) 1 (1 )% Income from continuing operations 3,426 2,812 614 22 % Gain on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax 515 (515 ) * * Income before cumulative effect of accounting change 3,426 3,327 99 3 % Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax (1,013 ) 1,013 * * Net income $ 3,426 $ 2,314 $ 1,112 48 % Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations (1) $ 1.08 $ 0.87 $ 0.21 24 % ** not meaningful 60 Table of Contents (1) Represents earnings per share based on the total weighted average shares outstanding (Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock combined) for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2007 and 2006. Class A Common Stock carried rights to a greater dividend than Class B Common Stock through fiscal 2007. As such, net income available to the Company stockholders is allocated between the Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. Subsequent to the final fiscal 2007 dividend payment, shares of Class A Common Stock ceased to carry any rights to a greater dividend than shares of Class B Common Stock. See Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. Overview The Company revenues in fiscal 2007 increased 13% as compared to fiscal 2006. The increase was primarily due to revenue increases at the Cable Network Programming, Filmed Entertainment, DBS, Newspapers and Information Services, Television and Other segments. Operating expenses for the fiscal year end June 30, 2007 increased 12% from fiscal 2006, primarily due to higher sports programming rights at the DBS, Cable Network Programming, Television and Other segments. The increase in operating expenses was also due to higher amortization of production and participation costs and higher home entertainment manufacturing and marketing expenses at the Filmed Entertainment segment. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 17% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to increased personnel costs, higher costs relating to Internet activities and incremental costs resulting from acquisitions. Depreciation and amortization for fiscal 2007 increased 13% as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily resulting from acquisitions and additional plant and equipment placed into service. Operating income increased 15% for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to increased Operating income at the Cable Networks Programming, DBS, Newspapers and Information Services and Filmed Entertainment segments. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, the weakening of the U.S. dollar resulted in an increase of approximately 2% in both revenues and Operating income as compared to fiscal 2006. Equity earnings of affiliates Net earnings from equity affiliates increased $131 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. Fiscal 2007 reflected increased contributions from DIRECTV, resulting from subscriber growth and higher pricing, as well as lower expenses resulting from DIRECTV set-top receiver lease program. These improvements were offset by the absence of equity earnings from Innova S. de R.L. de C.V. ( Innova ) sold in February 2006 and Sky Brasil Servicos Ltda ( Sky Brasil ) sold in August 2006 and increased costs at BSkyB associated with the launch of broadband. For the years ended June 30, 2007 2006 Change % Change ($ millions) The Company share of equity earnings of affiliates principally consists of: DBS equity affiliates $ 844 $ 723 $ 121 17 % Cable channel equity affiliates 98 68 30 44 % Other equity affiliates 77 97 (20 ) (21 )% Total equity earnings of affiliates $ 1,019 $ 888 $ 131 15 % Interest expense, net Interest expense, net for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 increased $52 million as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to the issuance of $1,150 million in 6.4% Senior Notes due 2035 in December 2005 and $1,000 million in 6.15% Senior Notes due 2037 in March 2007. 61 Table of Contents Interest income Interest income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 increased $73 million as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily resulting from higher cash balances during the period. Other, net For the years ended June 30, 2007 2006 (in millions) Gain on sale of Sky Brasil (a) $ 261 $ Gain on sale of Phoenix Satellite Television Holdings Limited (b) 136 Termination of participation rights agreement (b) 97 Gain on sale of Innova (a) 206 Gain on sale of China Netcom Group Corporation (a) 52 Impairment of cost based investments (a) (2 ) (14 ) Change in fair value of exchangeable securities (c) (126 ) (76 ) Other (7 ) 26 Total Other, net $ 359 $ 194 (a) See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (b) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (c) The Company has certain outstanding exchangeable debt securities which contain embedded derivatives. Pursuant to SFAS No. 133, these embedded derivatives are not designated as hedges and, as such, changes in their fair value are recognized in Other, net. A significant variance in the price of the underlying stock could have a material impact on the operating results of the Company. See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. Income tax expense The effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 was 34% as compared to the effective tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006 of 35% and a statutory rate of 35%. The lower effective rate for fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 was due to the realization of deferred tax assets on which valuation allowances had previously been recorded and the resolution of domestic and foreign income tax matters. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, the occurrence of certain capital gain transactions and ordinary taxable income resulted in the utilization of existing capital loss carryforwards and net operating losses on which valuation allowances had been previously recorded. Gain on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax During fiscal 2006, the Company sold its TSL Education Ltd. division ( TSL ), which primarily included The Times Educational Supplement publication in the United Kingdom, for cash consideration of approximately $395 million. In connection with this transaction, the Company recorded a gain of $381 million, net of tax of $0. Also in fiscal 2006, the Company sold Sky Radio Limited ( Sky Radio ), a commercial radio station group in the Netherlands and Germany, for cash consideration of approximately $215 million. In connection with this transaction, the Company recorded a gain of approximately $134 million, net of tax of $0. Both of these transactions are included in gain on disposition of discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006. There was no provision for income taxes related to these transactions as any tax due was offset by a release of a valuation allowance that was applied to an existing deferred tax asset established for capital losses, which, because of the sale of TSL and Sky Radio, was utilized. Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax Effective July 1, 2005, the Company adopted Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) Topic No. D-108, Use of the Residual Method to Value Acquired Assets Other Than Goodwill ( EITF D-108 ). EITF D-108 requires companies who have applied the residual value 62 Table of Contents method in the valuation of acquired identifiable intangibles for purchase accounting and impairment testing to use a direct value method. As a result of the adoption, the Company recorded a charge of $1.6 billion ($1 billion net of tax, or ($0.33) per diluted share of Class A Common Stock and ($0.28) per diluted share of Class B Common Stock), to reduce the intangible balances attributable to its television stations FCC licenses. This charge has been reflected as a cumulative effect of accounting change, net of tax in the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006. Net income Net income increased $1,112 million for fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to the absence of the Cumulative effect of accounting change recognized in fiscal 2006 and increases in Operating income, Equity earnings from affiliates and Other, net. The increase in net income was partially offset by the effect of the gains on sale of TSL and Sky Radio that were recorded during fiscal 2006, with no corresponding gains in fiscal 2007. Segment Analysis: The following table sets forth the Company revenues and operating income by segment for fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. For the years ended June 30, 2007 2006 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues: Filmed Entertainment $ 6,734 $ 6,199 $ 535 9 % Television 5,705 5,334 371 7 % Cable Network Programming 3,902 3,358 544 16 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 3,076 2,542 534 21 % Magazines and Inserts 1,119 1,090 29 3 % Newspapers and Information Services 4,486 4,095 391 10 % Book Publishing 1,347 1,312 35 3 % Other 2,286 1,397 889 64 % Total revenues $ 28,655 $ 25,327 $ 3,328 13 % Operating income (loss): Filmed Entertainment $ 1,225 $ 1,092 $ 133 12 % Television 962 1,032 (70 ) (7 )% Cable Network Programming 1,090 864 226 26 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 221 39 182 * * Magazines and Inserts 335 307 28 9 % Newspapers and Information Services 653 517 136 26 % Book Publishing 159 167 (8 ) (5 )% Other (193 ) (150 ) (43 ) 29 % Total operating income $ 4,452 $ 3,868 $ 584 15 % ** not meaningful Filmed Entertainment (23% and 25% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment increased $535 million, or 9%, as compared to fiscal 2006. This increase was primarily due to an increase in worldwide home entertainment, pay television and free television revenues, partially offset by a decrease in worldwide theatrical revenues. The increase in home entertainment revenues for fiscal 2007 was primarily due to the worldwide 63 Table of Contents release of previously strong theatrical titles, primarily driven by Ice Age: The Meltdown, Night at the Museum, X-Men: The Last Stand, Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan , The Devil Wears Prada and Eragon . Fiscal 2006 worldwide home entertainment releases included Fantastic Four, Walk the Line, Robots, Kingdom of Heaven and Hide & Seek . The increases in worldwide pay television and free television revenues were primarily due to a stronger film lineup and more feature films available during fiscal 2007 and stronger revenues from the returning primetime series Prison Break, Family Guy and My Name Is Earl . Fiscal 2007 worldwide theatrical revenues were driven by the worldwide release of Night at the Museum, Eragon, Borat: Cultural Learnings of America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan, The Devil Wears Prada and Fantastic Four: Rise of the Silver Surfer . Fiscal 2006 theatrical releases included Ice Age: The Meltdown, X-Men: The Last Stand, Fantastic Four, Walk the Line, Big Momma House 2 and Cheaper by the Dozen 2 . Operating income at the Filmed Entertainment segment for fiscal 2007 increased $133 million, or 12%, as compared to fiscal 2006. The improvement was primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, which were partially offset by a $402 million increase in operating expenses resulting from higher releasing costs and higher amortization of production and participation costs directly associated with the increase in revenues noted above. Television (20% and 21% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, Television segment revenues increased $371 million, or 7%, as compared to fiscal 2006. The Television segment reported a decrease in Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 of $70 million, or 7%, from fiscal 2006. Revenues at the U.S. television operations increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. The increase was primarily due to the broadcasts of the BCS and NASCAR Daytona 500 with no comparable events in fiscal 2006 and higher FOX prime-time advertising revenue due to higher pricing and additional commercial inventory sold. Also contributing to the increased advertising revenues was higher political advertising at the Company television stations due to the November 2006 elections. The increase in revenue was partially offset by revenue decreases at the Company-owned MyNetworkTV affiliated stations. Operating income at the Company U.S. television operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 decreased from fiscal 2006. The decrease in Operating income was a result of expenses associated with the first full year of MyNetworkTV which was launched in September 2006, higher sports programming costs related to the BCS, Daytona 500 and the new NFL contracts, partially offset by the increase in revenues noted above. Revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 at the Company international television operations increased over fiscal 2006. The increase was primarily due to higher advertising revenues in India and higher subscription revenues. Operating income for the Company international television operations decreased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to higher programming costs. Cable Network Programming (13% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2007 and 2006) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, revenues at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $544 million, or 16%, as compared to fiscal 2006. The increase was driven by higher net affiliate and advertising revenues at the RSNs, Fox News and FIC, as well as increased net affiliate revenues at FX. The RSNs revenues increased 12% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to net affiliate and advertising revenue increases. Net affiliate revenues increased 13% as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to higher average rates per subscriber and a higher number of subscribers, including those from the acquisition of SportSouth in May 2006. Advertising revenue increased 8% as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to additional revenues from the increased number of MLB and National Basketball Association ( NBA ) games broadcasted. 64 Table of Contents Fox News revenues increased 19% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to net affiliate and advertising revenue increases. Net affiliate revenues increased 55% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, as a result of increases in average rates per subscriber and lower cable distribution amortization as compared to fiscal 2006. Advertising revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 increased 2% as compared to fiscal 2006 due to higher pricing and higher volume. In addition, revenue from licensing fees contributed to the increase in fiscal 2007. As of June 30, 2007, Fox News reached approximately 92 million Nielsen households. FX revenues increased 4% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to an increase in net affiliate revenues. Net affiliate revenues increased 7% as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to an increase in the average rate per subscriber and in the number of subscribers. As of June 30, 2007, FX reached approximately 92 million Nielsen households. Revenues at the Company international cable channels increased 65% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. The increases were primarily due to incremental revenues of $65 million from the consolidation of NGC Network International LLC ( NGC International ) and NGC Network Latin America LLC ( NGC Latin America ) beginning January 1, 2007, as well as improved advertising sales and subscriber growth at the other FIC channels. The Cable Network Programming segment Operating income increased $226 million, or 26%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, as compared to fiscal 2006. This improvement in Operating income was primarily driven by the revenue increases noted above, partially offset by a $318 million increase in operating expenses primarily due to higher sports rights amortization mainly due to additional games and higher entertainment programming for new shows. Also contributing to the Operating income increase was $16 million of incremental Operating income from the consolidation of NGC International and NGC Latin America. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (11% and 10% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, SKY Italia revenues increased $534 million, or 21%, as compared to fiscal 2006. This revenue growth was primarily driven by an increase in subscribers over fiscal 2006. During fiscal 2007, SKY Italia added approximately 368,000 net subscribers, which resulted in SKY Italia subscriber base totaling almost 4.2 million at June 30, 2007. The total churn for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 was approximately 423,000 on an average subscriber base of approximately 4.0 million, as compared to churn of approximately 314,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of approximately 3.6 million in fiscal 2006. Subscriber churn for the period represents the number of SKY Italia subscribers whose service was disconnected during the period. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, the weakening of the U.S. dollar in relation to the Euro represented 7% of the increase in revenues. SKY Italia ARPU for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 was approximately 44 and was consistent with that of fiscal 2006. SAC of approximately 260 in fiscal 2007 was consistent with that of fiscal 2006, primarily due to an increase in commissions being offset by lower average installation costs. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, Operating income at SKY Italia improved by $182 million as compared to fiscal 2006. The improvement in fiscal 2007 was primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, partially offset by higher programming costs due to the increased subscriber base, as well as higher sports rights amortization. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, the weakening of the U.S. dollar in relation to the Euro represented 7% of the total improvement in operating results. 65 Table of Contents Magazines and Inserts (4% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2007 and 2006) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, revenues at the Magazines and Inserts segment increased $29 million, or 3%, as compared to fiscal 2006. The increase in revenues primarily resulted from an increase in volume of in-store marketing and free-standing insert products, partially offset by lower rates for these products. Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 increased $28 million, or 9%, as compared to fiscal 2006. The increase was primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, as well as lower printing costs. Newspapers and Information Services (16% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2007 and 2006) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, revenues at the Newspapers and Information Services segment increased $391 million, or 10%, as compared to fiscal 2006. Operating income increased $136 million, or 26%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. The weakening of the U.S. dollar resulted in approximately 7% of the increases in both revenues and Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, U.K. newspapers revenues increased 9% as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to favorable foreign exchange movements and higher Internet revenues which were partially offset by lower circulation and advertising revenues. Operating income increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to a higher redundancy provision in fiscal 2006. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006, the Company recorded a redundancy provision of approximately $109 million as compared with a $24 million provision recorded during fiscal 2007. The increase in Operating income was also a result of lower production costs due to decreased circulation and lower promotional costs, partially offset by higher operating costs associated with the launch of a free London newspaper, increased investment in Internet businesses and higher newsprint costs. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, Australian newspapers revenues increased 10% as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to favorable foreign exchange movements, an increase in advertising revenues and incremental revenue from the acquisition of the Federal Publishing Company group of companies in April 2007. Operating income increased 3% as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to the impact of favorable exchange rate movements, partially offset by higher employee and newsprint costs. Book Publishing ( 5% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2007 and 2006) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, revenues at the Book Publishing segment increased by $35 million, or 3%, from fiscal 2006, primarily due to strong sales on key titles, including The Dangerous Book For Boys by Conn and Hal Iggulden, The Reagan Diaries by Ronald Reagan, The Children of Hurin by J.R.R. Tolkien and The Measure of a Man by Sidney Poitier, partially offset by lower revenues from the successful children title The Chronicles of Narnia by C.S. Lewis in the corresponding period of fiscal 2006. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, HarperCollins had 128 titles on The New York Times Bestseller lists with 16 titles reaching the number one position. Operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007 decreased $8 million, or 5%, as compared to fiscal 2006. The decrease was primarily due to lower sales of the highly profitable The Chronicles of Narnia which were included in fiscal 2006. Other ( 8% and 6% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2007 and 2006, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, revenues at the Other operating segment increased $889 million, or 64%, as compared to fiscal 2006. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in the number of active users and higher advertising revenues from FIM Internet sites. The revenue increase was also driven by incremental 66 Table of Contents revenues from acquisitions by FIM in October 2005 and from the Jamba joint venture which was formed in January 2007. Also contributing to the revenue increase was Global Cricket Corporation sale of the broadcast and sponsorship rights of the ICC Cricket World Cup with no comparable event in fiscal 2006. Operating results for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007, decreased $43 million as compared to fiscal 2006, primarily due to a loss on the ICC Cricket World Cup which can be attributable to a shortfall in advertising and sponsorship revenue. This underperformance was due to the early elimination of two of the more popular teams from the competition, which resulted in matches among less well-known teams, significantly reducing the Company advertising and sponsorship revenues. Also contributing to the decrease was higher employee costs and higher costs related to Internet initiatives. The decrease in operating results was partially offset by Operating income improvements of $83 million at FIM, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Current Financial Condition The Company principal source of liquidity is internally generated funds; however, the Company has access to the worldwide capital markets, a $2.25 billion revolving credit facility and various film co-production alternatives to supplement its cash flows. At June 30, 2008, no amounts were outstanding under the New Credit Agreement. Also, as of June 30, 2008, the Company had consolidated cash and cash equivalents of approximately $4.7 billion. The Company believes that cash flows from operations will be adequate for the Company to conduct its operations. The Company internally generated funds are highly dependent upon the state of the advertising market and public acceptance of film and television products. Any significant decline in the advertising market or the performance of the Company films could adversely impact its cash flows from operations which could require the Company to seek other sources of funds including proceeds from the sale of certain assets or other alternative sources. The principal uses of cash that affect the Company liquidity position include the following: investments in the production and distribution of new feature films and television programs; the acquisition of and payments for programming rights for entertainment and sports programming; paper purchases; operational expenditures, including employee costs; capital expenditures; interest expense; income tax payments; investments in associated entities; dividends; acquisitions; and stock repurchases. The Company has evaluated, and expects to continue to evaluate, possible acquisitions and dispositions of certain businesses. Such transactions may be material and may involve cash, the Company securities or the assumption of additional indebtedness. Sources and Uses of Cash Fiscal 2008 vs. Fiscal 2007 Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2008 and 2007 is as follows (in millions): Years Ended June 30, 2008 2007 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 3,925 $ 4,110 The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities reflects higher tax payments, higher film production spending and additional payments made under the United Kingdom redundancy program. These decreases were partially offset by higher cash provided by operating activities primarily from the Television, Cable Network Programming and Newspapers and Information Services segments during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase in the Television segment was due to higher receipts from the broadcast of the Super Bowl, which was not broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2007, and lower payments for programming. The increase at the Cable Network Programming segment reflects higher affiliate receipts, and the increase at the Newspapers and Information Services segment reflects higher advertising receipts at the Company Australian newspapers. 67 Table of Contents Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2008 and 2007 is as follows (in millions): Years Ended June 30, 2008 2007 Net cash used in investing activities $ (6,354 ) $ (2,076 ) Net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2008 was higher than fiscal 2007, primarily due to the Company acquisitions of Dow Jones in December 2007 and of Photobucket in July 2007. The increase in cash used for acquisitions was partially offset by cash proceeds from the sale of the Company investment in Gemstar in April 2008. Net cash used in financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2008 and 2007 is as follows (in millions): Years Ended June 30, 2008 2007 Net cash used in financing activities $ (636 ) $ (273 ) The increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to a decrease in cash receipts from borrowings, net of repayments, of $434 million, and a decrease in cash received from the issuance of shares. During fiscal 2008, the Company received net proceeds of $1,237 million from the issuance of $1,250 million 6.65% Senior Notes due 2037, in November 2007 and retired its $350 million 6.625% Senior Notes due 2008 and $225 million 3.875% notes due 2008, as well as $131 million in commercial paper assumed as part of the Dow Jones acquisition. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was partially offset by a reduction in cash used for share repurchases of $355 million in fiscal 2007. The total dividends declared related to fiscal 2008 results were $0.12 per share of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. In August 2008, the Company declared the final dividend on fiscal 2008 results of $0.06 per share for Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. This together with the interim dividend of $0.06 per share of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock constitute the total dividend relating to fiscal 2008. Based on the number of shares outstanding as of June 30, 2008, the total aggregate cash dividends expected to be paid to stockholders in fiscal 2009 is approximately $313 million. Sources and Uses of Cash Fiscal 2007 vs. Fiscal 2006 Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2007 and 2006 is as follows (in millions): Years Ended June 30, 2007 2006 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 4,110 $ 3,257 The increase in net cash provided by operating activities reflects higher operating results and cash collections resulting primarily from an increased sale of home entertainment product at the Filmed Entertainment segment during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2007. These increases were offset by higher tax payments and higher sports rights. The higher sports rights payments reflect the renewal of several sports teams local rights agreements, the addition of the BCS sports rights and higher international sports rights. Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2007 and 2006 is as follows (in millions): Years Ended June 30, 2007 2006 Net cash used in investing activities $ (2,076 ) $ (2,060 ) 68 Table of Contents Cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2007 was slightly higher than fiscal 2006 due to higher capital expenditures and increased investments. Partially offsetting this increase was a reduction in the total net cash used for acquisitions and dispositions. The increase in capital expenditures was primarily due to the Company continued investment in new printing plants in the United Kingdom and an increase in expenditures related to Internet initiatives. The decrease in cash used for acquisitions was primarily due to the acquisitions of Intermix Media, Inc. ( Intermix ) and IGN Entertainment, Inc. ( IGN ) during fiscal 2006. Net cash used in financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2007 and 2006 is as follows (in millions): Years Ended June 30, 2007 2006 Net cash used in financing activities $ (273 ) $ (1,932 ) The decrease in net cash used in financing activities was primarily due to a reduction in share repurchases of approximately $733 million. During fiscal 2007, the Company repurchased 57.5 million shares for approximately $1.3 billion, as compared to repurchases of 125.3 million shares for approximately $2.0 billion in fiscal 2006. The decrease in net cash used in financing activities was also due to an increase in net borrowings of $704 million during fiscal 2007. The total dividends declared related to fiscal 2007 results were $0.12 per share of Class A Common Stock and $0.10 per share of Class B Common Stock. In August 2007, the Company declared the final dividend on fiscal 2007 results of $0.06 per share for Class A Common Stock and $0.05 per share for Class B Common Stock. This, together with the interim dividend of $0.06 per share of Class A Common Stock and a dividend of $0.05 per share of Class B Common Stock, constitutes the total dividend relating to fiscal 2007. Debt Instruments and Guarantees Debt Instruments (1) Years ended June 30, 2008 2007 2006 (in millions) Borrowings Notes due November 2037 $ 1,237 $ $ Notes due March 2037 1,000 Notes due December 2035 1,133 Bank loans 7 187 26 All other 48 9 Total borrowings $ 1,292 $ 1,196 $ 1,159 Repayments of borrowings Notes due January 2008 $ (350 ) $ $ Notes due February 2008 (2) (225 ) Bank loans (154 ) (10 ) Liquid Yield Option Notes (831 ) All other (153 ) (44 ) (24 ) Total repayment of borrowings $ (728 ) $ (198 ) $ (865 ) (1) See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to borrowings. (2) Debt acquired in the acquisition of Dow Jones. See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. 69 Table of Contents LYONs In February 2001, the Company issued Liquid Yield Option Notes ( LYONs ) which pay no interest and had an aggregate principal amount at maturity of $1,515 million representing a yield of 3.5% per annum on the issue price. The holders may exchange the notes at any time into Class A Common Stock or, at the option of the Company, the cash equivalent thereof at a fixed exchange rate of 24.2966 shares of Class A Common Stock per $1,000 note. The LYONs are redeemable at the option of the holders on February 28, 2011 and February 28, 2016 at a price of $706.82 and $840.73, respectively. The Company, at its election, may satisfy the redemption amounts in cash, Class A Common Stock or any combination thereof. The Company can redeem the notes in cash at any time at specified redemption amounts. On February 28, 2006, 92% of the LYONs were redeemed for cash at the specified redemption amount of $594.25 per LYON. Accordingly, the Company paid an aggregate of approximately $831 million to the holders of the LYONs that had exercised this redemption option. The pro-rata portion of unamortized deferred financing costs relating to the redeemed LYONs approximating $13 million was recognized and included in Other, net in the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2006. Ratings of the Public Debt The table below summarizes the Company credit ratings as of June 30, 2008. Rating Agency Senior Debt Outlook Moody Baa 1 Stable S&P BBB+ Stable Revolving Credit Agreement On May 23, 2007, News America Incorporated ( NAI ), a subsidiary of the Company, terminated its existing $1.75 billion Revolving Credit Agreement (the Prior Credit Agreement ) and entered into a new Credit Agreement (the New Credit Agreement ), among NAI as Borrower, the Company as Parent Guarantor, the lenders named therein (the Lenders ), Citibank, N.A. as Administrative Agent and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as Syndication Agent. The New Credit Agreement consists of a $2.25 billion five-year unsecured revolving credit facility with a sublimit of $600 million available for the issuance of letters of credit. Borrowings are in U.S. dollars only, while letters of credit are issuable in U.S. dollars or Euros. The significant terms of the New Credit Agreement include, among others, the requirement that the Company maintain specific leverage ratios and limitations on secured indebtedness. The Company pays a facility fee of 0.08% regardless of facility usage. The Company pays interest of a margin over LIBOR for borrowings and a letter of credit fee of 0.27%. The Company is subject to additional fees of 0.05% if borrowings under the facility exceed 50% of the committed facility. The interest and fees are based on the Company current debt rating. Under the New Credit Agreement, NAI may request an increase in the amount of the credit facility up to a maximum amount of $2.5 billion. The New Credit Agreement is available for the general corporate purposes of NAI, the Company and its subsidiaries. The maturity date is in May 2012, however, NAI may request that the Lenders commitments be renewed for up to two additional one year periods. At June 30, 2008, no amounts were outstanding under the New Credit Agreement. 70 Table of Contents Commitments and Guarantees The Company has commitments under certain firm contractual arrangements ( firm commitments ) to make future payments. These firm commitments secure the future rights to various assets and services to be used in the normal course of operations. The following table summarizes the Company material firm commitments as of June 30, 2008. As of June 30, 2008 Payments Due by Period Total 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years (in millions) Contracts for capital expenditure Land and buildings $ 13 $ 13 $ $ $ Plant and machinery 229 222 5 2 Operating leases (a) Land and buildings 3,550 352 650 544 2,004 Plant and machinery 982 200 245 192 345 Other commitments Borrowings 11,819 281 261 528 10,749 Exchangeable securities 1,692 1,561 131 News America Marketing (b) 368 101 144 94 29 Sports programming rights (c) 16,866 3,072 4,555 3,327 5,912 Entertainment programming rights 3,799 1,843 1,476 272 208 Other commitments and contractual obligations (d) 2,665 659 823 585 598 Total commitments, borrowings and contractual obligations $ 41,983 $ 6,743 $ 8,159 $ 7,105 $ 19,976 The Company also has certain contractual arrangements in relation to certain investees that would require the Company to make payments or provide funding if certain circumstances occur ( contingent guarantees ). The Company does not expect that these contingent guarantees will result in any material amounts being paid by the Company in the foreseeable future. The timing of the amounts presented in the table below reflect when the maximum contingent guarantees will expire and does not indicate that the Company expects to incur an obligation to make payments during that time frame. As of June 30, 2008 Total Amounts Committed Amount of Guarantees Expiration Per Period Contingent guarantees: 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years (in millions) Programming rights (e) $ 502 $ 31 $ 162 $ 80 $ 229 Other 62 42 12 8 $ 564 $ 73 $ 174 $ 88 $ 229 (a) The Company leases transponders, office facilities, warehouse facilities, equipment and microwave transmitters used to carry broadcast signals. These leases, which are classified as operating leases, expire at certain dates through fiscal 2090. In addition, the Company leases various printing plants, which leases expire at various dates through fiscal 2095. (b) News America Marketing Group ( NAMG ), a leading provider of in-store marketing products and services primarily to consumer packaged goods manufacturers, enters into agreements with retailers to occupy space for the display of point of sale advertising. (c) The Company contract with MLB gives the Company rights to broadcast certain regular season and post season games, as well as exclusive rights to broadcast MLB World Series and All-Star Game through the 2013 MLB season. 71 Table of Contents Under the Company contract with NFL, remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast certain football games are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2012. The Company contracts with NASCAR give the Company rights to broadcast certain races and ancillary content through calendar year 2014. Under the Company contract with the BCS, remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast the BCS are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2010. Under the Company contract with the Big Ten Conference, remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast certain Big Ten Conference sporting events are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2032. In addition, the Company has certain other local sports broadcasting rights. (d) Includes obligations relating to third party printing contracts, television rating services, a distribution agreement and paper purchase obligations. (e) A joint-venture in which the Company owns a 50% equity interest, entered into an agreement for global programming rights. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company and the other joint-venture partner have jointly guaranteed the programming rights obligation. The table excludes the Company pension, other postretirement benefits ( OPEB ) obligations and the gross unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions. The Company made primarily voluntary contributions of $57 million and $67 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2007, respectively. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns and interest rates and statutory requirements. Assuming that actual plan asset returns are consistent with the Company expected plan returns in fiscal 2009 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant, the Company would not be required to make any material contributions to its U.S. pension plans for the immediate future. The Company expects to make a combination of voluntary contributions and statutory contributions of approximately $110 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2009. Payments due to participants under the Company pension plans are primarily paid out of the underlying trusts. Payments due under the Company OPEB plans are not required to be funded in advance, but are paid as medical costs are incurred by covered retiree populations, and are principally dependent upon the future cost of retiree medical benefits under the Company pension plans. The Company expects its OPEB payments to approximate $17 million in fiscal 2009. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for further discussion of the Company pension and OPEB plans. The Company adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes ( FIN 48 ) as of the beginning of fiscal year 2008. As noted above, the table excludes any reserves for income taxes under FIN 48 as the Company is unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount or timing of settlement of our reserves for income taxes. Contingencies The Company wholly-owned subsidiary, News Outdoor owns and operates outdoor advertising companies and also owns approximately 73% of Media Support Services Limited ( MSS ), an outdoor advertising company in Russia. The minority stockholders of MSS had the right to sell a portion of their interests to News Outdoor during the first quarter of fiscal 2007 and exercised those rights. In certain limited circumstances, the minority stockholders of MSS have the right to sell, and News Outdoor has the right to purchase, the remaining minority interests at fair market value. The Company believes that the exercise of these sale rights, if any, will not have a material effect on its consolidated financial condition, future results of operations or liquidity. In June 2007, the Company announced its intention to explore strategic options for News Outdoor in connection with News Outdoor continued development plans. These strategic options include, but are not limited to, exploring the opportunity to expand News Outdoor existing shareholder group through new strategic and private equity partners. No agreement has yet been entered into with respect to any transaction. 72 Table of Contents Other than as disclosed in the notes to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation, the Company is party to several purchase and sale arrangements which become exercisable over the next ten years by the Company or the counter-party to the agreement. In the next twelve months, none of these arrangements that become exercisable are material. Purchase arrangements that are exercisable by the counter-party to the agreement, and that are outside the sole control of the Company are accounted for in accordance with EITF No. D-98 Classification and Measurement of Redeemable Securities . Accordingly, the fair values of such purchase arrangements are classified in Minority interest liabilities. The Company experiences routine litigation in the normal course of its business. The Company believes that none of its pending litigation will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition, future results of operations or liquidity. The Company operations are subject to tax in various domestic and international jurisdictions and as a matter of course, the Company is regularly audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. The Company believes it has appropriately accrued for the expected outcome of all pending tax matters and does not currently anticipate that the ultimate resolution of pending tax matters will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition, future results of operations or liquidity. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it is important to the Company's financial condition and results and if it requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application. The development and selection of these critical accounting policies have been determined by management of the Company and the related disclosures have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Board. For a summary of all of the Company significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. Use of Estimates The preparation of the Company consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts that are reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying disclosures. Although these estimates are based on management best knowledge of current events and actions that the Company may undertake in the future, actual results may differ from the estimates. Revenue Recognition Filmed Entertainment Revenues from distribution of feature films are recognized in accordance with Statement of Position ( SOP ) No. 00-2, Accounting by Producers or Distributors of Films ( SOP 00-2 ). Revenues from the theatrical distribution of motion pictures are recognized as they are exhibited and revenues from home video and DVD sales, net of a reserve for estimated returns, together with related costs, are recognized on the date that video and DVD units are made widely available for sale by retailers and all Company-imposed restrictions on the sale of video and DVD units have expired. Revenues from television distribution are recognized when the motion picture or television program is made available to the licensee for broadcast. Management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue for each film on the historical performance of similar films, incorporating factors such as the past box office record of the lead actors and actresses, the genre of the film, pre-release market research (including test market screenings) and the expected number of theaters in which the film will be released. Management updates such estimates based on information available on the actual results of each film through its life cycle. 73 Table of Contents License agreements for the broadcast of theatrical and television product in the broadcast network, syndicated television and cable television markets are routinely entered into in advance of their available date for broadcast. Cash received and amounts billed in connection with such contractual rights for which revenue is not yet recognizable is classified as deferred revenue. Because deferred revenue generally relates to contracts for the licensing of theatrical and television product which have already been produced, the recognition of revenue for such completed product is principally only dependent upon the commencement of the availability period for broadcast under the terms of the related licensing agreement. Television, Cable Network Programming and Direct Broadcast Satellite Advertising revenue is recognized as the commercials are aired, net of agency commissions. Subscriber fees received from subscribers, cable systems and DBS operators are recognized as revenue in the period that services are provided, net of amortization of cable distribution investments. The Company defers the cable distribution investments and amortizes the amounts on a straight-line basis over the contract period. Filmed Entertainment and Television Programming Costs Accounting for the production and distribution of motion pictures and television programming is in accordance with SOP 00-2, which requires management judgment as it relates to total revenues to be received and costs to be incurred throughout the life of each program or its license period. These judgments are used to determine the amortization of capitalized filmed entertainment and television programming costs, the expensing of participation and residual costs associated with revenues earned and any fair value adjustments. In accordance with SOP 00-2, the Company amortizes filmed entertainment and television programming costs using the individual-film-forecast method. Under the individual-film-forecast method, such programming costs are amortized for each film or television program in the ratio that current period actual revenue for such title bears to management estimated remaining unrecognized ultimate revenue as of the beginning of the current fiscal year to be recognized over approximately a six year period or operating profits to be realized from all media and markets for such title. Management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue for each film on factors such as historical performance of similar films, the star power of the lead actors and actresses and once released actual results of each film. For each television program, management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue on the performance of the television programming in the initial markets, the existence of future firm commitments to sell additional episodes of the program and the past performance of similar television programs. Management regularly reviews, and revises when necessary, its total revenue estimates on a title-by-title basis, which may result in a change in the rate of amortization and/or a write down of the asset to fair value. The costs of national sports contracts at FOX and for international sports rights agreements are charged to expense based on the ratio of each period operating profit to estimated total remaining operating profit of the contract. Estimates of total operating profit can change and accordingly, are reviewed periodically and amortization is adjusted as necessary. Such changes in the future could be material. The costs of local and regional sports contracts for a specified number of events, are amortized on an event-by-event basis while costs for local and regional sports contracts for a specified season, are amortized over the season on a straight-line basis. Original cable programming is amortized on an accelerated basis. Management regularly reviews, and revises when necessary, its total revenue estimates on a contract basis, which may result in a change in the rate of amortization and/or a write down of the asset to fair value. Property, Plant and Equipment Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost and are depreciated on a straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of such assets. Changes in circumstances such as technological advances, changes to the 74 Table of Contents Company business model or capital strategy could result in the actual useful lives differing from the Company estimates. In those cases where the Company determines that the useful life of buildings and equipment should be shortened, the Company would depreciate the asset over its revised remaining useful life thereby increasing depreciation expense. Intangible Assets The Company has a significant amount of intangible assets, including goodwill, FCC licenses, and other copyright products and trademarks. Intangible assets acquired in business combinations are recorded at their estimated fair market value at the date of acquisition. Goodwill is recorded as the difference between the cost of acquiring an entity and the estimated fair values assigned to its tangible and identifiable intangible net assets and is assigned to one or more reporting units for purposes of testing for impairment. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of intangible assets acquired, their reporting unit, as well as their useful lives can significantly impact net income. The Company accounts for its business acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting. The total cost of acquisitions is allocated to the underlying net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the tangible net assets acquired is recorded as intangibles. Amounts recorded as goodwill are assigned to one or more reporting units. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other items. Identifying reporting units and assigning goodwill thereto requires judgment involving the aggregation of business units with similar economic characteristics and the identification of existing business units that benefit from the acquired goodwill. Carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are reviewed at least annually for possible impairment in accordance with SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. The Company impairment review is based on, among other methods, a discounted cash flow approach that requires significant management judgments. Impairment occurs when the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the discounted present value of the cash flows for that reporting unit. An impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the net present value of estimated future cash flows, which represents the estimated fair value of the asset. The Company uses its judgment in assessing whether assets may have become impaired between annual valuations. Indicators such as unexpected adverse economic factors, unanticipated technological change or competitive activities, loss of key personnel and acts by governments and courts, may signal that an asset has become impaired. For all of its television station acquisitions through June 30, 2005, the Company utilized the residual method to estimate the fair value of the stations FCC licenses. Effective July 1, 2005, the Company adopted EITF D-108. EITF D-108 requires companies who have applied the residual value method in the valuation of acquired identifiable intangibles for purchase accounting and impairment testing to now use a direct valuation method. The direct valuation method used for FCC licenses requires, among other inputs, the use of published industry data that are based on subjective judgments about future advertising revenues in the markets where the Company owns television stations. This method also involves the use of management judgment in estimating an appropriate discount rate reflecting the risk of a market participant in the U.S. broadcast industry. The resulting fair values for FCC licenses are sensitive to these long-term assumptions and any variations to such assumptions could result in an impairment to existing carrying values in future periods and such impairment could be material. Income Taxes The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions in which it operates. The Company computes its annual tax rate based on the statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available 75 Table of Contents to it in the various jurisdictions in which it earns income. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company tax expense and in evaluating its tax positions including evaluating uncertainties under FIN 48. The Company records valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In making this assessment, management analyzes future taxable income, reversing temporary differences and ongoing tax planning strategies. Should a change in circumstances lead to a change in judgment about the realizability of deferred tax assets in future years, the Company would adjust related valuation allowances in the period that the change in circumstances occurs, along with a corresponding increase or charge to income. Employee Costs In June 2007, the Company adopted SFAS No. 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R) ( SFAS No. 158 ). SFAS No. 158 requires an employer to recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of a defined benefit postretirement plan (other than a multiemployer plan) as an asset or liability in its statement of financial position and to recognize changes in that funded status in the fiscal year in which the changes occur through comprehensive income. (See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation) The following table summarizes the incremental effects of the initial adoption of SFAS No. 158 on the Company consolidated balance sheet as of June 30, 2007: Before application of SFAS No. 158 SFAS No. 158 adjustment After application of SFAS No. 158 (in millions) Intangible assets $ 11,710 $ (7 ) $ 11,703 Other non-current assets 1,096 (274 ) 822 Total assets 62,624 (281 ) 62,343 Other liabilities 3,301 18 3,319 Deferred income taxes 5,999 (100 ) 5,899 Total stockholders equity 33,121 (199 ) 32,922 Total liabilities and stockholders equity 62,624 (281 ) 62,343 The Company maintains defined benefit pension plans covering a significant number of its employees and retirees. The primary plans have been closed to employees hired after January 1, 2008. For financial reporting purposes, net periodic pension expense (income) is calculated based upon a number of actuarial assumptions, including a discount rate for plan obligations and an expected rate of return on plan assets. The Company considers current market conditions, including changes in investment returns and interest rates, in making these assumptions. In developing the expected long-term rate of return, the Company considered the pension portfolio's past average rate of returns, and future return expectations of the various asset classes. The expected long-term rate of return is based on an asset allocation assumption of 58% equities, 39% fixed-income securities and 3% in all other investments. The discount rate reflects the market rate for high-quality fixed-income investments on the Company annual measurement date of June 30 and is subject to change each fiscal year. The discount rate assumptions used to account for pension and other postretirement benefit plans reflect the rates at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled. The rate was determined by matching our expected benefit payments for the primary plans to a hypothetical yield curve developed using a portfolio of several hundred high quality non-callable corporate bonds. 76 Table of Contents The key assumptions used in developing the Company fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006 net periodic pension expense (income) for its plans consists of the following: 2008 2007 2006 ($ in millions) Discount rate used to determine net periodic benefit cost 6.0 % 5.9 % 5.1 % Assets: Expected rate of return 7.0 % 7.0 % 7.5 % Expected return $ 166 $ 135 $ 122 Actual return $ (140 ) $ 232 $ 186 (Loss)/Gain $ (306 ) $ 97 $ 64 One year actual return (4.4 )% 12.3 % 11.1 % Five year actual return 8.2 % 9.0 % 4.7 % The weighted average discount rate is volatile from year to year because it is determined based upon the prevailing rates in the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia as of the measurement date. The Company will utilize a weighted average discount rate of 6.7% in calculating the fiscal 2009 net periodic pension expense for its plans. The Company will continue to use a weighted average long-term rate of return of 7% for fiscal 2009 based principally on a combination of asset mix and historical experience of actual plan returns. The accumulated net losses on the Company pension plans at June 30, 2008 were $433 million which increased from $301 million at June 30, 2007. This increase of $132 million was due primarily to the recent performance of the global equity markets partially offset by a higher discount rate. Higher discount rates decrease the present values of benefit obligations and reduce the Company accumulated net loss and also decrease subsequent-year pension expense; lower discount rates increase present values of benefits obligations and increase the Company deferred losses and also increase subsequent-year pension expense. The net accumulated losses at June 30, 2007 were primarily a result of economic conditions and the strengthening of the mortality assumptions. Economic conditions impacting the Company defined benefit pension plans were the lower interest rate environment for high-quality fixed income debt instruments through fiscal 2006 and the downturn in the global equity markets in the earlier part of this decade. These deferred losses are being systematically recognized in future net periodic pension expense in accordance with SFAS No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions ( SFAS No. 87 ). Unrecognized losses in excess of 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or the plans projected benefit obligation are recognized over the average future service of the plan participants. The Company made contributions of $57 million, $67 million and $149 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. These were primarily voluntary contributions made to improve the funded status of the plans which were impacted by the economic conditions noted above. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns, statutory requirements and interest rate movements. Assuming that actual plan returns are consistent with the Company expected plan returns in fiscal 2009 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant, the Company would not be required to make any material statutory contributions to its primary U.S. pension plans for the immediate future. The Company will continue to make voluntary contributions as necessary to improve funded status. 77 Table of Contents Changes in net periodic pension expense may occur in the future due to changes in the Company expected rate of return on plan assets and discount rate resulting from economic events. The following table highlights the sensitivity of the Company pension obligations and expense to changes in these assumptions, assuming all other assumptions remain constant: Changes in Assumption Impact on Annual Pension Expense Impact on PBO 0.25 percentage point decrease in discount rate Increase $11 million Increase $97 million 0.25 percentage point increase in discount rate Decrease $11 million Decrease $97 million 0.25 percentage point decrease in expected rate of return on assets Increase $6 million 0.25 percentage point increase in expected rate of return on assets Decrease $6 million Net periodic pension expense for the Company pension plans is expected to be approximately $115 million in fiscal 2009. The increase is primarily due to the economic conditions noted above. Recent Accounting Pronouncements See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for discussion of recent accounting pronouncements. 78 Table of Contents 
