CIK: 1308161
Company Name: NEWS CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-08-15


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS This document contains statements that constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act ), and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The words expect, estimate, anticipate, predict, believe and similar expressions and variations thereof are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements appear in a number of places in this document and include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of the Company, its directors or its officers with respect to, among other things, trends affecting the Company financial condition or results of operations. The readers of this document are cautioned that any forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties. More information regarding these risks, uncertainties and other factors is set forth under the heading Risk Factors in Item 1A of the Annual Report on Form 10-K (the Annual Report ). The Company does not ordinarily make projections of its future operating results and undertakes no obligation (and expressly disclaims any obligation) to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Readers should carefully review this document and the other documents filed by the Company with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC ). This section should be read together with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation and related notes set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report. INTRODUCTION Management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to help provide an understanding of News Corporation and its subsidiaries (together News Corporation or the Company ) financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. This discussion is organized as follows: Overview of the Company Business This section provides a general description of the Company businesses, as well as developments that occurred either during fiscal 2011 or early fiscal 2012 that the Company believes are important in understanding its results of operations and financial condition or to disclose known trends. Results of Operations This section provides an analysis of the Company results of operations for the three fiscal years ended June 30, 2011. This analysis is presented on both a consolidated and a segment basis. In addition, a brief description is provided of significant transactions and events that impact the comparability of the results being analyzed. Liquidity and Capital Resources This section provides an analysis of the Company cash flows for the three fiscal years ended June 30, 2011, as well as a discussion of the Company outstanding debt and commitments, both firm and contingent, that existed as of June 30, 2011. Included in the discussion of outstanding debt is a discussion of the amount of financial capacity available to fund the Company future commitments and obligations, as well as a discussion of other financing arrangements. Critical Accounting Policies This section discusses accounting policies considered important to the Company financial condition and results of operations, and which require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in application. In addition, Note 2 to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation summarizes the Company significant accounting policies, including the critical accounting policy discussion found in this section. OVERVIEW OF THE COMPANY S BUSINESS The Company regularly reviews its segment reporting and classification. In the first quarter of fiscal 2011, the Company aggregated the previously reported Book Publishing segment, Integrated Marketing Services segment and the Newspapers and Information Services segment to report a new Publishing segment because of changes in how the Company manages and evaluates these businesses as a result of evolving industry trends. The Company has revised its segment information for prior fiscal years to conform to the fiscal 2011 presentation. 44 Table of Contents The Company is a diversified global media company, which manages and reports its businesses in the following six segments: Cable Network Programming , which principally consists of the production and licensing of programming distributed through cable television systems and direct broadcast satellite operators primarily in the United States, Latin America, Europe and Asia. Filmed Entertainment , which principally consists of the production and acquisition of live-action and animated motion pictures for distribution and licensing in all formats in all entertainment media worldwide, and the production and licensing of television programming worldwide. Television , which principally consists of the broadcasting of network programming in the United States and the operation of 27 full power broadcast television stations, including nine duopolies, in the United States (of these stations, 17 are affiliated with the FOX Broadcasting Company ( FOX ) and ten are affiliated with Master Distribution Service, Inc. ( MyNetworkTV )). Direct Broadcast Satellite Television , which consists of the distribution of basic and premium programming services via satellite and broadband directly to subscribers in Italy. Publishing , which principally consists of the Company newspapers and information services, book publishing and integrated marketing services businesses. The newspapers and information services business principally consists of the publication of national newspapers in the United Kingdom, the publication of approximately 146 newspapers in Australia, the publication of a metropolitan newspaper and a national newspaper (with international editions) in the United States and the provision of information services. The book publishing business consists of the publication of English language books throughout the world and the integrated marketing services business consists of the publication of free-standing inserts and the provision of in-store marketing products and services in the United States and Canada. Other , which principally consists of the Company digital media properties, Wireless Generation, the Company education technology business, and News Outdoor, an advertising business which offers display advertising in outdoor locations primarily throughout Russia and Eastern Europe. Television and Cable Network Programming The Company television operations primarily consist of FOX, MyNetworkTV and the 27 television stations owned by the Company. The television operations derive revenues primarily from the sale of advertising and to a lesser extent retransmission compensation. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues. The U.S. television broadcast environment is highly competitive and the primary methods of competition are the development and acquisition of popular programming. Program success is measured by ratings, which are an indication of market acceptance, with the top rated programs commanding the highest advertising prices. FOX is a broadcast network and MyNetworkTV is a programming distribution service, airing original and off-network programming. FOX and MyNetworkTV compete with broadcast networks, such as ABC, CBS, NBC and The CW, independent television stations, cable and DBS program services, as well as other media, including DVDs, Blu-rays, video games, print and the Internet for audiences, programming and, in the case of FOX, advertising revenues. In addition, FOX and MyNetworkTV compete with the other broadcast networks and other programming distribution services to secure affiliations with independently owned television stations in markets across the country. Retransmission consent rules provide a mechanism for the television stations owned by the Company to seek and obtain payment from multi-channel video programming distributors who carry broadcasters signals. Retransmission compensation consists of per subscriber-based compensatory fees paid to the Company from cable and satellite distribution systems as well as a portion of the retransmission revenue the affiliates generate for their retransmission of FOX and MyNetworkTV. 45 Table of Contents The television stations owned by the Company compete for programming, audiences and advertising revenues with other television stations and cable networks in their respective coverage areas and, in some cases, with respect to programming, with other station groups, and in the case of advertising revenues, with other local and national media. The competitive position of the television stations owned by the Company is largely influenced by the quality and strength of FOX and MyNetworkTV programming, and, in particular, the prime-time viewership of the respective network. The Company U.S. cable network operations primarily consist of the Fox News Channel ( FOX News ), the FX Network ( FX ), Regional Sports Networks ( RSNs ), the National Geographic Channels, SPEED and the Big Ten Network. The Company international cable networks consist of the Fox International Channels ( FIC ) and STAR. FIC produces and distributes entertainment, factual, sports, and movie channels through television channels in Europe, Africa, Asia and Latin America using several brands, including Fox, Fox Crime, Fox Life and National Geographic Channel. STAR owned and affiliated channels are distributed in the following countries and regions: India; Greater China; Indonesia; the rest of South East Asia; Pakistan; the Middle East and Africa; the United Kingdom and Europe; and North America. Generally, the Company cable networks, which target various demographics, derive a majority of their revenues from monthly affiliate fees received from cable television systems and direct broadcast satellite operators based on the number of their subscribers. Affiliate fee revenues are net of the amortization of cable distribution investments (capitalized fees paid to a cable operator or direct broadcast satellite operator to facilitate the launch of a cable network). The Company defers the cable distribution investments and amortizes the amounts on a straight-line basis over the contract period. Cable television and direct broadcast satellite are currently the predominant means of distribution of the Company program services in the United States. Internationally, distribution technology varies region by region. The Company cable networks compete for carriage on cable television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems and other distribution systems with other program services. A primary focus of competition is for distribution of the Company cable network channels that are not already distributed by particular cable television or direct broadcast satellite systems. For such program services, distributors make decisions on the use of bandwidth based on various considerations, including amounts paid by programmers for launches, subscription fees payable by distributors and appeal to the distributors subscribers. The most significant operating expenses of the Television segment and the Cable Network Programming segment are the acquisition and production expenses related to programming and the expenses related to operating the technical facilities of the broadcaster or cable network. Other expenses include promotional expenses related to improving the market visibility and awareness of the broadcaster or cable network and its programming. Additional expenses include sales commissions paid to the in-house advertising sales force, as well as salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead expenses. The Company has several multi-year sports rights agreements, including contracts with the National Football League ( NFL ) through fiscal 2014, contracts with the National Association of Stock Car Auto Racing ( NASCAR ) for certain races and exclusive rights for certain ancillary content through calendar year 2014 and a contract with Major League Baseball ( MLB ) through calendar year 2013. These contracts provide the Company with the broadcast rights to certain U.S. national sporting events during their respective terms. The costs of these sports contracts are charged to expense based on the ratio of each period operating profit to estimated total operating profit for the remaining term of the contract. The profitability of these long-term U.S. national sports contracts is based on the Company best estimates at June 30, 2011 of attributable revenues and costs; such estimates may change in the future and such changes may be significant. Should revenues decline from estimates applied at June 30, 2011, additional amortization of rights may be recorded. Should revenues improve as compared to estimated revenues, the Company may have an improved operating profit related to the contract, which may be recognized over the remaining contract term. 46 Table of Contents While the Company seeks to ensure compliance with federal indecency laws and related Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) regulations, the definition of indecency is subject to interpretation and there can be no assurance that the Company will not broadcast programming that is ultimately determined by the FCC to violate the prohibition against indecency. Such programming could subject the Company to regulatory review or investigation, fines, adverse publicity or other sanctions, including the loss of station licenses. Filmed Entertainment The Filmed Entertainment segment derives revenue from the production and distribution of feature motion pictures and television series. In general, motion pictures produced or acquired for distribution by the Company are exhibited in U.S. and foreign theaters, followed by home entertainment, including sale and rental of DVDs and Blu-rays, video-on-demand and pay-per-view television, on-line and mobile distribution, premium subscription television, network television and basic cable and syndicated television exploitation. Television series initially produced for the networks and first-run syndication are generally licensed to domestic and international markets concurrently and subsequently released in seasonal DVD and Blu-ray box sets. More successful series are later syndicated in domestic markets. The length of the revenue cycle for television series will vary depending on the number of seasons a series remains in active production and, therefore, may cause fluctuations in operating results. License fees received for television exhibition (including international and U.S. premium television and basic cable television) are recorded as revenue in the period that licensed films or programs are available for such exhibition, which may cause substantial fluctuations in operating results. The revenues and operating results of the Filmed Entertainment segment are significantly affected by the timing of the Company theatrical and home entertainment releases, the number of its original and returning television series that are aired by television networks and the number of its television series in off-network syndication. Theatrical and home entertainment release dates are determined by several factors, including timing of vacation and holiday periods and competition in the marketplace. The distribution windows for the release of motion pictures theatrically and in various home entertainment products and services (including subscription rentals, rental kiosks and Internet streaming services), have been compressing and may continue to change in the future. A further reduction in timing between theatrical and home entertainment releases could adversely affect the revenues and operating results of this segment. The Company enters into arrangements with third parties to co-produce many of its theatrical productions. These arrangements, which are referred to as co-financing arrangements, take various forms. The parties to these arrangements include studio and non-studio entities, both domestic and international. In several of these agreements, other parties control certain distribution rights. The Filmed Entertainment segment records the amounts received for the sale of an economic interest as a reduction of the cost of the film, as the investor assumes full risk for that portion of the film asset acquired in these transactions. The substance of these arrangements is that the third-party investors own an interest in the film and, therefore, receive a participation based on the respective third-party investor interest in the profits or losses incurred on the film. Consistent with the requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification ( ASC ) 926 Entertainment Films, ( ASC 926 ), the estimate of a third-party investor interest in profits or losses incurred on the film is determined by reference to the ratio of actual revenue earned to date in relation to total estimated ultimate revenues. Operating costs incurred by the Filmed Entertainment segment include: exploitation costs, primarily theatrical prints and advertising and home entertainment marketing and manufacturing costs; amortization of capitalized production, overhead and interest costs; and participations and talent residuals. Selling, general and administrative expenses include salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. The Company competes with other film studios, such as Disney, Paramount, Sony, Universal, Warner Bros. and independent film producers in the production and distribution of motion pictures, DVDs and Blu-rays. As a producer and distributor of television programming, the Company competes with studios, television production groups and independent producers and syndicators, such as Disney, Sony, NBC Universal, Warner Bros. and 47 Table of Contents Paramount Television, to sell programming both domestically and internationally. The Company also competes to obtain creative talent and story properties, which are essential to the success of the Company filmed entertainment businesses. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television The Direct Broadcast Satellite Television ( DBS ) segment operations consist of SKY Italia, which provides basic and premium programming services via satellite and broadband directly to subscribers in Italy. SKY Italia derives revenues principally from subscriber fees. The Company believes that the quality and variety of programming, audio and interactive programming including personal video recorders, quality of picture including high definition channels, access to service, customer service and price are the key elements for gaining and maintaining market share. SKY Italia competition includes companies that offer video, audio, interactive programming, telephony, data and other information and entertainment services, including broadband Internet providers, digital terrestrial transmission ( DTT ) services, wireless companies and companies that are developing new media technologies. Since 2003, SKY Italia had been prohibited from owning a DTT frequency or providing a pay television DTT offer under a commitment made to the European Commission (the EC ) through December 31, 2011. In July 2010, the EC modified this restriction to allow SKY Italia to bid for one DTT frequency. However, if SKY Italia were to successfully bid for such a DTT frequency, the EC would limit SKY Italia use of such frequency to exclusively free-to-air channels for 5 years subsequent to its acquisition. SKY Italia most significant operating expenses are those related to the acquisition of entertainment, movie and sports programming and subscribers and the production and expenses related to operating the technical facilities. Operating expenses related to sports programming are generally recognized over the course of the related sport season, which may cause fluctuations in the operating results of this segment. Publishing The Company Publishing segment consists of the Company newspapers and information services, book publishing and integrated marketing services businesses. Revenue is derived from the sale of advertising space, newspapers, books and subscriptions, as well as licensing. Adverse changes in general market conditions for advertising may affect revenues. Circulation and subscription revenues can be greatly affected by changes in the prices of the Company and/or competitors products, as well as by promotional activities. Operating expenses include costs related to paper, production, distribution, editorial, commissions and royalties. Selling, general and administrative expenses include promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits, rent and other routine overhead. The Company expects that advancements in technology will introduce new challenges and opportunities for digital distribution by the publishing businesses. The Publishing segment advertising volume, circulation and the price of paper are the key variables whose fluctuations can have a material effect on the Company operating results and cash flow. The Company has to anticipate the level of advertising volume, circulation and paper prices in managing its businesses to maximize operating profit during expanding and contracting economic cycles. Paper is a basic commodity and its price is sensitive to the balance of supply and demand. The Company costs and expenses are affected by the cyclical increases and decreases in the price of paper. The Publishing segment products compete for readership and advertising with local and national competitors and also compete with other media alternatives in their respective markets. Competition for circulation and subscriptions are based on the content of the products provided, service, pricing and, from time to time, various promotions. The success of these products depends upon advertisers judgments as to the most effective use of their advertising budgets. Competition for advertising is based upon the reach of the products, advertising rates and advertiser results. Such judgments are based on factors such as cost, availability of alternative media, distribution and quality of readership demographics. The Company believes that competition from new media formats and sources and shifting consumer preferences will continue to pose challenges for the Publishing segment businesses. 48 Table of Contents Other The Other segment consists primarily of: Digital Media Group The Company sells advertising, sponsorships and subscription services on the Company various digital media properties. Significant expenses associated with the Company digital media properties include development costs, advertising and promotional expenses, salaries, employee benefits and other routine overhead. The Company sold Myspace in June 2011. Wireless Generation Wireless Generation, the Company education technology business, provides data systems and professional services that enable teachers to use data to assess student progress and deliver individualized instruction. Significant expenses associated with the Company education technology business include salaries, employee benefits and other routine overhead. News Outdoor News Outdoor sells outdoor advertising space on various media, primarily in Russia. Significant expenses associated with the News Outdoor business include site lease costs, direct production, maintenance and installation expenses, salaries, employee benefits and other routine overhead. The Company sold its outdoor advertising businesses in Russia and Romania in July 2011. Other Business Developments In June 2010, the Company announced that it had proposed to the board of directors of British Sky Broadcasting Group plc ( BSkyB ), in which the Company currently has an approximate 39% interest, to make a cash offer of 700 pence per share for the BSkyB shares that the Company does not already own. Following the allegations regarding News of the World , on July 13, 2011, the Company announced that it no longer intended to make an offer for the BSkyB shares that the Company does not already own. As a result of the July 2011 announcement, the Company paid BSkyB a breakup fee of approximately $63 million in accordance with a cooperation agreement between the parties. During fiscal 2011, the Company acquired an additional interest in Asianet Communications Limited ( Asianet ), an Asian general entertainment television joint venture, for approximately $92 million in cash. As a result of this transaction, the Company increased its interest in Asianet to 75% from the 51% it owned at June 30, 2010. In August 2010, the Company increased its investment in Tata Sky Ltd. ( Tata Sky ) for approximately $88 million in cash. As a result of this transaction, the Company increased its interest in Tata Sky to approximately 30% from the 20% it owned at June 30, 2010. In fiscal 2011, the Company agreed to backstop 400 million (approximately $525 million), of financing measures that were being initiated by Sky Deutschland of which approximately 342 million (approximately $450 million) has been completed. As part of these financing measures, the Company acquired 108 million additional shares of Sky Deutschland, increasing its ownership from approximately 45% to 49.9%. The aggregate cost of the shares acquired by the Company was approximately 115 million (approximately $150 million) and the shares were newly registered shares issued pursuant to the total capital increase. In addition, in accordance with the backstop, the Company agreed with Sky Deutschland to subscribe to a bond issuance that is convertible for up to 53.9 million underlying Sky Deutschland shares. The convertible bond was issued to the Company in January 2011 for approximately 165 million (approximately $225 million). The 49 Table of Contents Company currently has the right to convert the bond into equity, subject to certain black-out periods. If not converted, the Company will have the option to redeem the bond for cash upon its maturity in four years. The remaining amount under the backstop of approximately 58 million (approximately $75 million), must be funded prior to December 2011 and will be provided as a loan to the extent Sky Deutschland does not generate other proceeds through capital increases or convertible bond issuances. The Company has also agreed to loan Sky Deutschland approximately $70 million to support the launch of a sports news channel. The Company expects to fund these amounts in fiscal 2012. In November 2010, the Company formed a joint venture with China Media Capital ( CMC ), a media investment fund in China, to explore new growth opportunities. The Company transferred the equity and related assets of its STAR China business along with the Fortune Star Chinese movie library with a combined market value of approximately $140 million and CMC paid cash of approximately $74 million to the Company. Following this transaction, CMC holds a 53% controlling stake in the joint venture and the Company holds a 47% stake. In December 2010, the Company disposed of the Fox Mobile Group ( Fox Mobile ). In fiscal 2011, the Company acquired Wireless Generation, an education technology company, for cash. Total consideration was approximately $390 million, which included the equity purchase price and the repayment of Wireless Generation outstanding debt. In April 2011, the Company acquired Shine Limited ( Shine ), an international television production company, for cash. The total consideration for this acquisition included (i) approximately $480 million for the acquisition of the equity, of which approximately $60 million has been set aside in escrow to satisfy any indemnification obligations, (ii) the repayment of Shine outstanding debt of approximately $135 million and (iii) net liabilities assumed. Elisabeth Murdoch, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Shine, and daughter of Mr. K. R. Murdoch and sister of Messrs. Lachlan and James Murdoch, received approximately $214 million in cash at closing in consideration for her majority ownership interest in Shine, and is entitled to her proportionate share of amounts that are released from escrow. In June 2011, the Company transferred the equity and related assets of Myspace to a digital media company in exchange for a minority equity interest in the acquirer. As a result of this transaction, the Company interest in the acquirer is now accounted for under the cost method of accounting. In July 2011, the Company announced that it would close its publication, News of the World , after allegations of phone hacking and payments to police. As a result of these allegations, the Company is subject to several ongoing investigations by U.K. and U.S. regulators and governmental authorities, including investigations into whether similar conduct may have occurred at the Company subsidiaries outside of the U.K. The Company is fully cooperating with these investigations. In addition, the Company has admitted liability in a number of civil cases related to the phone hacking allegations and has settled a number of cases. The Company has taken steps to solve the problems relating to News of the World including the creation and establishment of an independent Management & Standards Committee (the MSC ), which will have oversight of, and take responsibility for, all matters in relation to the News of the World phone hacking case, police payments and all other connected issues at News International Group Limited ( News International ), including as they may relate to other News International publications. The MSC appointed an independent Chairman, Lord Grabiner QC, and will report directly to Joel Klein, Executive Vice President and a director of the Company, who in turn will report to Viet Dinh, an independent director and Chairman of the Company Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee. Both directors will update the Company Board of Directors. The MSC will ensure full cooperation with all relevant investigations and inquiries into News of the World matters and all other related issues across News International and will conduct its own internal investigations where appropriate. The MSC will also be responsible for reviewing existing compliance systems and for proposing and overseeing the implementation of new compliance, ethics and governance procedures at News International. The Company has engaged outside counsel to assist it in responding to U.K. and U.S. governmental inquiries. 50 Table of Contents In July 2011, the Company sold its majority interest in its outdoor advertising businesses in Russia and Romania for approximately $360 million. The Company expects to record a gain related to the sale of this business during the first quarter of fiscal 2012. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Results of Operations Fiscal 2011 versus Fiscal 2010 The following table sets forth the Company operating results for fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues $ 33,405 $ 32,778 $ 627 2 % Operating expenses (21,058 ) (21,015 ) (43 ) Selling, general and administrative (6,306 ) (6,619 ) 313 (5 )% Depreciation and amortization (1,191 ) (1,185 ) (6 ) 1 % Impairment and restructuring charges (313 ) (253 ) (60 ) 24 % Equity earnings of affiliates 462 448 14 3 % Interest expense, net (966 ) (991 ) 25 (3 )% Interest income 126 91 35 38 % Other, net 18 69 (51 ) (74 )% Income from continuing operations before income tax expense 4,177 3,323 854 26 % Income tax expense (1,029 ) (679 ) (350 ) 52 % Income from continuing operations 3,148 2,644 504 19 % Loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax (254 ) (254 ) * * Net income 2,894 2,644 250 9 % Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests (155 ) (105 ) (50 ) 48 % Net income attributable to News Corporation stockholders $ 2,739 $ 2,539 $ 200 8 % ** not meaningful Overview The Company revenues increased 2% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was primarily due to revenue increases at the Cable Network Programming, Television and Publishing segments. The Cable Network Programming segment revenues increased primarily due to increases in net affiliate and advertising revenues. The increase at the Television segment was primarily due to advertising revenues from the Super Bowl which was broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2011, higher pricing resulting from improvements in the advertising markets and higher comparative political advertising due to the 2010 mid-term elections. The revenue increase at the Publishing segment was primarily due to favorable foreign exchange fluctuations and higher advertising and circulation revenues at The Wall Street Journal. These revenue increases were partially offset by revenue decreases at the Filmed Entertainment and Other segments. Revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment decreased primarily due to lower worldwide theatrical and home entertainment revenues resulting principally from the inclusion in fiscal 2010 of the releases of Avatar and Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs with no comparable releases in fiscal 2011 . The decrease at the Other segment was primarily the result of lower advertising and search revenues at Myspace. Operating expenses increased $43 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to higher programming costs at the Cable Network Programming segment as well as higher programming costs at the Television segment due to the broadcast of the Super Bowl partially offset by lower amortization of production costs and lower participation costs at the Filmed Entertainment segment due to the fiscal 2010 releases of Avatar and Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs with no comparable releases in fiscal 2011. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 5% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 due to lower litigation settlement costs at the Publishing segment. 51 Table of Contents Depreciation and amortization for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 increased $6 million as compared to fiscal 2010 as additional depreciation and amortization from the fiscal 2011 acquisitions was partially offset by certain assets becoming fully depreciated or amortized and the absence of depreciation and amortization related to businesses disposed of in fiscal 2010 and 2011. Impairment and restructuring charges As discussed in Note 9 Goodwill and Intangible Assets to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, during the second quarter of fiscal 2011, the Company performed an interim impairment assessment of the Digital Media Group reporting unit goodwill. As a result of the review performed, the Company recorded a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $168 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. As discussed in Note 4 Restructuring Programs to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company recorded restructuring charges of approximately $145 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. The restructuring charges primarily reflect a $115 million charge related to the Company digital media properties and $25 million related to termination benefits recorded at the newspaper businesses. The charges at the Company digital media properties were a result of an organizational restructuring to align resources more closely with business priorities and consisted of facility related costs of $95 million, termination benefits of $18 million and other associated costs of $2 million. During fiscal 2010, the Company determined that it was more likely than not that it would sell or dispose its News Outdoor and Fox Mobile businesses which are considered reporting units under ASC 350 Intangibles Goodwill and Other ( ASC 350 ). In connection with such potential sales, the Company reviewed these businesses for impairment and recognized a non-cash impairment charge of $200 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010. The impairment charge consisted of a write-down of $52 million in finite-lived intangible assets, a write-down of $137 million in goodwill and a write-down of fixed assets of $11 million. Fox Mobile was sold in fiscal 2011 and News Outdoor was sold in July 2011. During fiscal 2010, the Company recorded approximately $53 million of restructuring charges in the consolidated statements of operations. The restructuring charges reflect an $18 million charge related to the sales and distribution operations of the STAR channels, a $19 million charge related to termination benefits recorded at the newspaper businesses, a $7 million charge related to the restructuring program at Fox Mobile and $9 million of accretion on facility termination obligations. Equity earnings of affiliates Equity earnings of affiliates for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 increased $14 million as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase in equity earnings from the Company Other equity affiliates of $74 million was primarily due to a gain related to the disposal of a business at NDS during fiscal 2011. The decrease in equity earnings from the Company DBS equity affiliates of $36 million was primarily due to lower contributions from BSkyB resulting from the absence of a gain related to the partial sale of its ITV investment and the absence of a favorable litigation settlement in fiscal 2010, partially offset by higher subscription revenues and a gain related to a business disposal in fiscal 2011. The decrease in equity earnings from the Company Cable channel equity affiliates of $24 million was primarily due to higher sports programming costs. For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Change % Change ($ millions) DBS equity affiliates $ 305 $ 341 $ (36 ) (11 )% Cable channel equity affiliates 42 66 (24 ) (36 )% Other equity affiliates 115 41 74 * * Total equity earnings of affiliates $ 462 $ 448 $ 14 3 % ** not meaningful 52 Table of Contents Interest expense, net Interest expense, net for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 decreased $25 million as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to the redemption of the Company 0.75% Senior Exchangeable BUCS and 5% TOPrS in fiscal 2010. This decrease was partially offset by interest expense related to the $2.5 billion in senior notes issued in February 2011. Interest income Interest income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 increased by $35 million as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to higher cash balances. Other, net For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 (in millions) Gain on STAR China transaction (a) $ 55 $ Loss on disposal of Fox Mobile (a) (29 ) Loss on early extinguishment of debt (b) (36 ) Gain on the sale of eastern European television stations (a) 195 Gain (loss) on the financial indexes business transaction (a) 43 (23 ) Loss on Photobucket transaction (a) (32 ) Impairment of cost based investments (c) (3 ) Change in fair value of exchangeable and convertible securities (c)(d) 46 3 Other (61 ) (71 ) Total Other, net $ 18 $ 69 (a) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (b) See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (c) See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (d) The Company had certain exchangeable debt securities which contained embedded derivatives. Pursuant to ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging ( ASC 815 ), these embedded derivatives were not designated as hedges and, as such, changes in their fair value were recognized in Other, net in the consolidated statements of operations. The Company redeemed the exchangeable debt securities in fiscal 2010. (See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation.) Income tax expense The Company tax provision and related tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 were lower than the statutory rate primarily due to permanent differences, the tax benefit related to the disposition of assets and the resolution of tax matters. The Company tax provision and related tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 were lower than the statutory rate primarily due to the recognition of prior year tax credits, permanent differences and the recognition of tax assets on the disposition of certain assets. The recognition of prior year tax credits relates to the Company election to credit certain prior year taxes instead of claiming deductions. Loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax In June 2011, the Company transferred the equity and related assets of Myspace to a digital media company in exchange for an equity interest in the acquirer. The loss on this transaction was approximately $254 million, net of a tax benefit of $61 million, or ($0.10) per diluted share and was included in loss on disposition of discontinued operations, net of tax in the consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011. Net income Net income increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to the higher revenues and lower litigation settlement costs noted above, partially offset by the loss on the Myspace transaction. 53 Table of Contents Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to higher results at the Company majority owned businesses. Segment Analysis: The following table sets forth the Company revenues and segment operating income for fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues: Cable Network Programming $ 8,037 $ 7,038 $ 999 14 % Filmed Entertainment 6,899 7,631 (732 ) (10 )% Television 4,778 4,228 550 13 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 3,761 3,802 (41 ) (1 )% Publishing 8,826 8,548 278 3 % Other 1,104 1,531 (427 ) (28 )% Total revenues $ 33,405 $ 32,778 $ 627 2 % Segment operating income (loss): Cable Network Programming $ 2,760 $ 2,268 $ 492 22 % Filmed Entertainment 927 1,349 (422 ) (31 )% Television 681 220 461 * * Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 232 230 2 1 % Publishing 864 467 397 85 % Other (614 ) (575 ) (39 ) 7 % Total segment operating income $ 4,850 $ 3,959 $ 891 23 % ** not meaningful Management believes that total segment operating income is an appropriate measure for evaluating the operating performance of the Company business segments because it is the primary measure used by the Company chief operating decision maker to evaluate the performance and allocate resources within the Company businesses. Total segment operating income provides management, investors and equity analysts a measure to analyze operating performance of each of the Company business segments and its enterprise value against historical data and competitors data, although historical results may not be indicative of future results (as operating performance is highly contingent on many factors, including customer tastes and preferences). The following table reconciles total segment operating income to income from continuing operations before income tax expense. For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 (in millions) Total segment operating income $ 4,850 $ 3,959 Impairment and restructuring charges (313 ) (253 ) Equity earnings of affiliates 462 448 Interest expense, net (966 ) (991 ) Interest income 126 91 Other, net 18 69 Income from continuing operations before income tax expense $ 4,177 $ 3,323 54 Table of Contents Cable Network Programming (24% and 21% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, revenues at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $999 million, or 14%, as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to higher net affiliate and advertising revenues. Domestic net affiliate and advertising revenues increased 10% and 17%, respectively, primarily due to increases at the RSNs, FOX News and FX. International net affiliate and advertising revenues increased 20% and 22%, respectively. The domestic net affiliate revenue increase for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 was primarily due to higher average rates per subscriber and a higher number of subscribers. The increase in domestic advertising revenues was primarily due to higher pricing, ratings growth and additional commercial spots sold. The increase in international net affiliate revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 was primarily due to higher net affiliate revenues at FIC resulting primarily from increases in the number of subscribers at existing channels. The increase in international advertising revenues was primarily due to increases at STAR and FIC. The higher advertising revenues at STAR were primarily due to the strengthening of the advertising market in India and higher ratings. The strengthening of the worldwide advertising markets led to improvements at existing FIC channels in Asia and Latin America. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, operating income at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $492 million, or 22%, as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above. The revenue increases were partially offset by a $507 million increase in expenses, primarily due to higher sports rights amortization and higher entertainment programming costs. Filmed Entertainment (21% and 23% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment decreased $732 million, or 10%, as compared to fiscal 2010. The revenue decrease was primarily driven by the successful worldwide theatrical and home entertainment releases of Avatar , Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs and Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Squeakquel during fiscal 2010 as compared to the worldwide theatrical and home entertainment releases of The Chronicles of Narnia: Voyage of the Dawn Treader, and Black Swan and the worldwide theatrical release of Rio in fiscal 2011. The revenue decreases noted above were partially offset by higher contributions from Twentieth Century Fox Television and the inclusion of revenues from Shine which was acquired in fiscal 2011. The revenue increase at Twentieth Century Fox Television was primarily due to higher home entertainment, international television and digital distribution revenues from Glee, Modern Family, Sons of Anarchy, initial syndication revenues from How I Met Your Mother and American Dad and revenues from the Glee concert tour. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, the Filmed Entertainment segment operating income decreased $422 million, or 31%, as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to the revenue decreases noted above, partially offset by lower amortization of production and participation costs. Television (14% and 13% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, Television segment revenues increased $550 million, or 13%, as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was primarily due to increased advertising revenues at the television stations owned by the Company and at FOX as well as higher retransmission consent revenues. The advertising revenue increase reflects the broadcast of the Super Bowl, which was not broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2010, higher revenues from NFL regular season games, higher pricing resulting from improvements in the advertising 55 Table of Contents markets, particularly in the automotive and financial sectors and higher comparative political advertising due to the 2010 mid-term elections. These revenue increases were partially offset by the absence of revenue from the broadcast of the Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) games which were broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2010 and lower MLB advertising revenues due to lower post-season ratings and the broadcast of one less post-season game. The Television segment reported an increase in operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 of $461 million as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, lower prime-time entertainment programming costs and the absence of BCS programming costs, partially offset by higher NFL programming costs due to the broadcast of the Super Bowl. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (11% and 12% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, SKY Italia revenues decreased $41 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2010, due to unfavorable foreign exchange movements. SKY Italia had an increase of approximately 230,000 subscribers during fiscal 2011, bringing the total subscriber base to 4.97 million at June 30, 2011. Revenue, on a local currency basis, was consistent with fiscal 2010 as higher subscription revenues were offset by lower advertising revenues, primarily due to the absence of the FIFA World Cup. The total churn for fiscal 2011 was approximately 508,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.9 million, as compared to churn of approximately 630,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.8 million in fiscal 2010. Subscriber churn for the period represents the number of SKY Italia subscribers whose service was disconnected during the period. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro resulted in a decrease in revenues of approximately 2% as compared to fiscal 2010. Average revenue per subscriber ( ARPU ) of approximately 43 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 was consistent with fiscal 2010. SKY Italia calculates ARPU by dividing total subscriber-related revenues for the period by the average subscribers for the period and dividing that amount by the number of months in the period. Subscriber-related revenues are comprised of total subscription revenue, pay-per-view revenue and equipment rental revenue for the period. Average subscribers are calculated for the respective periods by adding the beginning and ending subscribers for the period and dividing by two. Subscriber acquisition costs per subscriber ( SAC ) of approximately 335 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 increased from fiscal 2010, primarily due to higher average installation costs related to an increased penetration of high definition personal video recorder set-top boxes. SAC is calculated by dividing total subscriber acquisition costs for a period by the number of gross SKY Italia subscribers added during the period. Subscriber acquisition costs include the cost of the commissions paid to retailers and other distributors, the cost of equipment sold directly by SKY Italia to subscribers and the costs related to installation and acquisition advertising, net of any upfront activation fee. SKY Italia excludes the value of equipment capitalized under SKY Italia equipment lease program, as well as payments and the value of returned equipment related to disconnected lease program subscribers from subscriber acquisition costs. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, SKY Italia operating income increased $2 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2010, as lower programming expenses related to FIFA World Cup and Olympic Games which occurred in fiscal 2010, were offset by the lower revenues noted above and higher installation costs. Publishing (27% and 26% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, revenues at the Publishing segment increased $278 million, or 3%, as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase in revenues was primarily due to increased revenues at the Australian newspapers due to favorable foreign exchange fluctuations and higher advertising and circulation revenues at The 56 Table of Contents Wall Street Journal . These revenue increases were partially offset by the absence of revenues from the financial indexes business which was disposed of in fiscal 2010, lower book sales due to fewer new releases and lower licensing fees resulting from a settlement received at HarperCollins in fiscal 2010. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar and British pound sterling resulted in a revenue increase of approximately $309 million, or 4%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, operating income at the Publishing segment increased $397 million, or 85%, as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase in operating income was primarily due to lower litigation settlement costs at the Company integrated marketing services business and favorable foreign exchange fluctuations at the Australian and United Kingdom newspapers. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar and British pound sterling resulted in an operating income increase of approximately $50 million, or 11%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. Other (3% and 5% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2011 and 2010, respectively) Revenues at the Other segment decreased $427 million, or 28%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011, as compared to fiscal 2010. The decrease was primarily due to decreased revenues from the Company digital media properties of $342 million, principally due to lower advertising and search revenues at Myspace.The decrease was also due to the absence of revenue related to the eastern European television stations disposed of in fiscal 2010 of $86 million and lower revenues from Fox Mobile of $146 million due to its fiscal 2011 disposition. The revenue decreases were partially offset by increased revenues at News Outdoor and the inclusion of revenues from Wireless Generation which was acquired in fiscal 2011. Operating results for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 decreased $39 million, or 7%, as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to lower operating results from the Company digital media properties, principally resulting from the revenue declines noted above. These decreases were partially offset by lower operating losses from Fox Mobile and Fox Audience Network resulting from their fiscal 2011 dispositions and improved operating results at News Outdoor. Results of Operations Fiscal 2010 versus Fiscal 2009 The following table sets forth the Company operating results for fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. For the years ended June 30, 2010 2009 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues $ 32,778 $ 30,423 $ 2,355 8 % Operating expenses (21,015 ) (19,563 ) (1,452 ) 7 % Selling, general and administrative (6,619 ) (6,164 ) (455 ) 7 % Depreciation and amortization (1,185 ) (1,138 ) (47 ) 4 % Impairment and restructuring charges (253 ) (9,208 ) 8,955 * * Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates 448 (309 ) 757 * * Interest expense, net (991 ) (927 ) (64 ) 7 % Interest income 91 91 Other, net 69 1,256 (1,187 ) (95 )% Income (loss) before income tax expense 3,323 (5,539 ) 8,862 * * Income tax (expense) benefit (679 ) 2,229 (2,908 ) * * Net income (loss) 2,644 (3,310 ) 5,954 * * Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests (105 ) (68 ) (37 ) 54 % Net income (loss) attributable to News Corporation stockholders $ 2,539 $ (3,378 ) $ 5,917 * * ** not meaningful 57 Table of Contents Overview The Company revenues increased 8% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase was primarily due to revenue increases at the Filmed Entertainment, Cable Network Programming and Publishing segments. Filmed Entertainment segment revenues increased primarily due to increased worldwide theatrical and home entertainment revenues . The increase at the Cable Network Programming segment was primarily due to increases in net affiliate and advertising revenues. The increase at the Publishing segment was primarily due to favorable foreign exchange fluctuations. These revenue increases were partially offset by decreased revenues at the Other segment, primarily due to decreased revenues at the Company digital media properties and the sale of a portion of the Company ownership stake in NDS Group plc ( NDS ) in February 2009. As a result of the sale, the Company portion of NDS operating results subsequent to February 2009 is included within Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates. Operating expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 increased 7% as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase was primarily due to increased amortization of production costs and higher participation costs at the Filmed Entertainment segment and higher programming costs at the Television, Cable Network Programming and DBS segments, as well as unfavorable foreign exchange fluctuations. These increases were partially offset by the absence of costs related to NDS in the Other segment, reflecting the sale of a portion of the Company NDS ownership stake as noted above, as well as the effect of company-wide cost containment initiatives. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 increased 7% as compared to fiscal 2009. This increase was primarily due to a $500 million charge related to the legal settlement with Valassis Communications, Inc. ( Valassis ) at the Publishing segment, partially offset by the absence of costs related to NDS as noted above and the effects of company-wide cost containment initiatives. Depreciation and amortization increased 4% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase was primarily due to higher depreciation at the DBS segment resulting from increased depreciation of set-top boxes and unfavorable foreign exchange fluctuations, which was partially offset by the absence of depreciation and amortization related to NDS. Impairment and restructuring charges As discussed in Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation, the Company determined that it was more likely than not that its News Outdoor and Fox Mobile businesses which are considered reporting units under ASC 350, would be sold or disposed. In connection with such potential sales, the Company reviewed these businesses for impairment and recognized a non-cash impairment charge of $200 million in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010. The impairment charge consisted of a write-down of $52 million in finite-lived intangible assets, a write-down of $137 million in goodwill and a write-down of fixed assets of $11 million. As discussed in Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation, the Company recorded approximately $53 million of restructuring charges in the consolidated statements of operations in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010. The restructuring charges reflect an $18 million charge related to the sales and distribution operations of the STAR channels, a $19 million charge related to termination benefits recorded at the newspaper businesses, a $7 million charge related to the restructuring program at Fox Mobile and $9 million of accretion on facility termination obligations. During fiscal 2009, the Company performed an interim impairment review in advance of its annual impairment assessment because the Company believed events had occurred and circumstances had changed that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the Company goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets below their carrying amounts. These events included: (a) the decline of the price of the Company Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock below the carrying value of the Company stockholders equity; (b) the reduced growth in advertising revenues; (c) the decline in the operating profit margins in some of the Company advertising-based businesses; and (d) the decline in the valuations of other television stations, newspapers and advertising-based companies as determined by the current trading values of those companies. In addition, the Company performed an annual impairment assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. 58 Table of Contents As a result of the impairment reviews performed, the Company recorded non-cash impairment charges of approximately $8.9 billion ($7.2 billion, net of tax) during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009. The charges consisted of a write-down of the Company indefinite-lived intangible assets (primarily FCC licenses in the Television segment) of $4.6 billion, a write-down of $4.1 billion of goodwill and a write-down of the Publishing segment fixed assets of $185 million. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009, the Company recorded restructuring charges of approximately $312 million. These restructuring charges reflect a number of the Company businesses that implemented a series of operational restructuring actions to address the Company cost structure, including the restructuring of the Company digital media properties to align resources more closely with business priorities. This restructuring program included significant job reductions, both domestically and internationally, to enable the businesses to operate on a more cost effective basis. In conjunction with this restructuring program, the Company also eliminated excess facility requirements. In fiscal 2009, several other businesses of the Company implemented similar plans, including the U.K. and Australian newspapers, HarperCollins, MyNetworkTV and Fox Television Stations. Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates Equity earnings of affiliates increased $757 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher contributions from BSkyB as a result of a favorable litigation settlement, as well as a gain recognized by BSkyB on the sale of a portion of its investment in ITV and the absence of write-downs related to ITV recorded by BSkyB during fiscal 2009. Also contributing to the increase was the absence of a $422 million write-down of the Company investment in Sky Deutschland recorded in fiscal 2009. For the years ended June 30, 2010 2009 Change % Change ($ millions) DBS equity affiliates $ 341 $ (374 ) $ 715 * * Cable channel equity affiliates 66 59 7 12 % Other equity affiliates 41 6 35 * * Total equity (losses) earnings of affiliates $ 448 $ (309 ) $ 757 * * ** not meaningful Interest expense, net Interest expense, net for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 increased $64 million as compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009, primarily due to the issuance of borrowings in February 2009 and August 2009. This increase was partially offset by the retirement of $200 million and $150 million of the Company borrowings in October 2008 and March 2010, respectively. Other, net For the years ended June 30, 2010 2009 (in millions) Gain (loss) on the sale of eastern European television stations (a) $ 195 $ (100 ) Loss on the financial indexes business transaction (a) (23 ) Loss on Photobucket transaction (a) (32 ) Gain on sale of NDS shares (a) 1,249 Gain on the sale of the Stations (a) 232 Impairment of cost based investments (b) (3 ) (113 ) Change in fair value of exchangeable securities (c) 3 77 Other (71 ) (89 ) Total Other, net $ 69 $ 1,256 59 Table of Contents (a) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (b) See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. (c) The Company had certain exchangeable debt securities which contained embedded derivatives. Pursuant to ASC 815, these embedded derivatives were not designated as hedges and, as such, changes in their fair value were recognized in Other, net in the consolidated statements of operations. The Company redeemed the exchangeable debt securities in fiscal 2010. (See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation.) Income tax (expense) benefit The Company tax provision and related tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 were lower than the statutory rate primarily due to the recognition of prior year tax credits, permanent differences and the recognition of tax assets on the disposition of certain assets. The recognition of prior year tax credits relates to the Company election to credit certain prior year taxes instead of claiming deductions. The Company tax provision and related tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009 were different from the statutory rate primarily due to the recognition of a non-cash benefit related to the reduction of accruals for uncertain positions resulting from the resolution of certain tax matters and a permanent difference on the gain on the sale of a portion of a subsidiary. The tax provision and tax rate for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2009 reflect these items, which were offset in part by the non-deductible goodwill included within the impairment charges taken in fiscal 2009. Net income (loss) Net income increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase was primarily due to a reduction in impairment charges recorded in fiscal 2010, as well as the higher revenues and equity earnings of affiliates as noted above. This increase was partially offset by the litigation settlement charge recorded in fiscal 2010, the absence of the gain on the sale of a portion of the Company ownership stake in NDS in February 2009, the gain on the sale of eight of the Company television stations in July 2008 and the non-cash tax benefit in fiscal 2009 noted above. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher results at the Company majority owned businesses. This increase was partially offset by the absence of income from NDS due to the sale of a portion of the Company ownership stake in February 2009, resulting in the Company remaining interest in NDS being accounted for under the equity method of accounting. 60 Table of Contents Segment Analysis: The following table sets forth the Company revenues and segment operating income for fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. For the years ended June 30, 2010 2009 Change % Change ($ millions) Revenues: Cable Network Programming $ 7,038 $ 6,131 $ 907 15 % Filmed Entertainment 7,631 5,936 1,695 29 % Television 4,228 4,051 177 4 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 3,802 3,760 42 1 % Publishing 8,548 8,167 381 5 % Other 1,531 2,378 (847 ) (36 )% Total revenues $ 32,778 $ 30,423 $ 2,355 8 % Segment operating income (loss): Cable Network Programming $ 2,268 $ 1,653 $ 615 37 % Filmed Entertainment 1,349 848 501 59 % Television 220 191 29 15 % Direct Broadcast Satellite Television 230 393 (163 ) (41 )% Publishing 467 836 (369 ) (44 )% Other (575 ) (363 ) (212 ) 58 % Total segment operating income $ 3,959 $ 3,558 $ 401 11 % Management believes that total segment operating income is an appropriate measure for evaluating the operating performance of the Company business segments because it is the primary measure used by the Company chief operating decision maker to evaluate the performance and allocate resources within the Company businesses. Total segment operating income provides management, investors and equity analysts a measure to analyze operating performance of each of the Company business segments and its enterprise value against historical data and competitors data, although historical results may not be indicative of future results (as operating performance is highly contingent on many factors, including customer tastes and preferences). The following table reconciles total segment operating income to income (loss) before income tax expense. For the years ended June 30, 2010 2009 (in millions) Total segment operating income $ 3,959 $ 3,558 Impairment and restructuring charges (253 ) (9,208 ) Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates 448 (309 ) Interest expense, net (991 ) (927 ) Interest income 91 91 Other, net 69 1,256 Income (loss) before income tax expense $ 3,323 $ (5,539 ) Cable Network Programming (21% and 20% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2010 and 2009, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, revenues at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $907 million, or 15%, as compared to fiscal 2009. Revenue increased 14% and 18% at the domestic and international cable channels, respectively, primarily due to higher net affiliate and advertising revenues. 61 Table of Contents Domestic net affiliate and advertising revenues increased 19% and 3%, respectively, primarily due to increases at FOX News, the RSNs and FX. International net affiliate and advertising revenues increased 15% and 25%, respectively, primarily due to increases at FIC and STAR. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, FOX News revenues increased 23% as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to increases in net affiliate and advertising revenues. Net affiliate revenues increased 40% as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher average rates per subscriber and a higher number of subscribers. Advertising revenues increased 9% as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher pricing. The RSNs revenues increased 12% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 driven by higher net affiliate and advertising revenues. Net affiliate revenues increased 14% as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher average rates per subscriber and a higher number of subscribers. Advertising revenues increased 3% as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher National Basketball Association, MLB and collegiate football revenues resulting from higher pricing and additional commercial spots sold. The Company international cable operations revenues increased 18% as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher advertising revenues at STAR, as well as higher net affiliate and advertising revenues at FIC. The higher advertising revenues at STAR were primarily due to the strengthening of the advertising market in India and improved performance at the regional channels, while the strengthening of the worldwide advertising markets led to improvements at FIC. The higher net affiliate revenues at FIC resulted from increases in subscribers at existing channels in Europe and Latin America. FX revenues increased 11% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher net affiliate and advertising revenues. Net affiliate revenues increased 16% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, primarily due to higher average rates per subscriber. Advertising revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 increased 3% as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to additional commercial spots sold. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, operating income at the Cable Network Programming segment increased $615 million, or 37%, as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above. Also contributing to this increase was the absence of a $30 million settlement relating to the termination of a distribution agreement at the Company international cable operations in fiscal 2009. These increases were partially offset by a $292 million increase in expenses, primarily due to higher movie acquisition costs, sports rights amortization and original programming costs. Filmed Entertainment (23% and 20% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2010 and 2009, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, revenues at the Filmed Entertainment segment increased $1,695 million, or 29%, as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to increased worldwide theatrical and home entertainment revenues. The revenue increase was primarily driven by the successful worldwide theatrical and home entertainment releases of Avatar , Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Squeakquel and Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs, as well as the worldwide theatrical release of Date Night . Also contributing to the increase in revenues were the home entertainment releases of X-Men Origins: Wolverine and Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian . For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, the Filmed Entertainment segment operating income increased $501 million, or 59%, as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to the revenue increases noted above, partially offset by increased amortization of production costs, higher participation and releasing costs and higher home entertainment manufacturing and marketing costs. 62 Table of Contents Television (13% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2010 and 2009) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, Television segment revenues increased $177 million, or 4%, as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase was primarily due to higher advertising revenues at the television stations owned by the Company as a result of higher pricing due to continued improvements in the advertising market, partially offset by lower political advertising revenues due to the absence of advertising revenues related to the 2008 presidential election. In addition, higher NFL and MLB revenues due to increased post-season ratings were more than offset by the absence of revenue from the Bowl Championship Series National Championship, which was broadcast on FOX in fiscal 2009, and lower ratings for NASCAR. The Television segment reported an increase in operating income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 of $29 million, or 15%, as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase in operating income was primarily the result of the revenue increases noted above and the effects of cost containment initiatives, as well as improved operating results at MyNetworkTV, partially offset by higher prime-time entertainment programming and sports costs at FOX. Direct Broadcast Satellite Television (12% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2010 and 2009) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, SKY Italia revenues increased $42 million, or 1%, as compared to fiscal 2009, as increases from higher advertising revenues primarily due to the FIFA World Cup and favorable foreign exchange fluctuations, were partially offset by lower pay-per-view and other revenues. The number of SKY Italia subscribers decreased by approximately 56,000 during fiscal 2010, bringing the total subscriber base to 4.7 million at June 30, 2010. The total churn for fiscal 2010 was approximately 630,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.8 million, as compared to churn of approximately 635,000 subscribers on an average subscriber base of 4.7 million in fiscal 2009. Subscriber churn for the period represents the number of SKY Italia subscribers whose service was disconnected during the period. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro resulted in an increase in revenue of approximately 1% as compared to fiscal 2009. ARPU of approximately 43 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 decreased from approximately 44 in fiscal 2009. The decrease in ARPU for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, was primarily due to lower average tier mix and reduced pay-per-view revenue. SAC of approximately 310 in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 increased from fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher marketing costs on a per subscriber basis. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, SKY Italia operating income decreased $163 million, or 41%, as compared to fiscal 2009, resulting from higher sports rights amortization, primarily due to the 2010 FIFA World Cup and Winter Olympics, and increased set-top box depreciation. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Euro resulted in a decrease in operating income of approximately 4% as compared to fiscal 2009. Publishing (26% and 27% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2010 and 2009, respectively) For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, revenues at the Publishing segment increased $381 million, or 5%, as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase in revenue was primarily due to favorable foreign exchange fluctuations at the Australian newspapers, increased book sales and higher integrated marketing services revenues. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, revenues at the Company newspapers and information services businesses increased $229 million, or 4%, as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to favorable foreign exchange fluctuations at the Australian newspapers and higher circulation revenues at The Wall Street Journal 63 Table of Contents due to higher pricing. The increase in revenues was partially offset by lower circulation revenues at the Company U.K newspapers and a decrease in revenue from the disposition of the financial indexes businesses at Dow Jones. The weakening of the U.S. dollar against local currencies, primarily the Australian Dollar, resulted in revenue and operating income increases of approximately 6% and 13%, respectively, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, revenues at the Company book publishing business increased $128 million, or 11%, as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to higher sales at the General Books and Children divisions and favorable foreign exchange fluctuations. Also contributing to the increase during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 were revenues from licensing fees received from a settlement. The increase at the General Books division was primarily due to the success of Going Rogue by Sarah Palin and higher electronic book sales. Strong sales of Where the Wild Things Are by Maurice Sendak, The Vampire Diaries by L.J. Smith and LA Candy by Lauren Conrad led to the increase at the Children division. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, HarperCollins had 164 titles on The New York Times Bestseller List with 19 titles reaching the number one position. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, revenues at the Company integrated marketing service businesses increased $24 million, or 2%, as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase in revenues was primarily due to increases in volume and rates of in-store marketing products sold, partially offset by lower revenues for free-standing insert products. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, operating income at the Publishing segment decreased $369 million, or 44%, as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease in operating income was primarily due to the $500 million charge relating to the settlement of the Valassis litigation and higher royalty and manufacturing costs resulting from higher book sales. The operating income decrease was partially offset by the revenue increases noted above, as well as the impact of cost containment initiatives and lower newspaper production costs. Other (5% and 8% of the Company consolidated revenues in fiscal 2010 and 2009, respectively) Revenues at the Other segment decreased $847 million, or 36%, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to decreased revenues from NDS and the Company digital media properties. The decrease at NDS of $413 million was due to the absence of revenues for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, reflecting the sale of a portion of the Company ownership stake in NDS in February 2009. As a result of the sale, the Company portion of NDS operating results subsequent to February 2009 is included within Equity earnings (losses) of affiliates. The revenue decrease at the Company digital media properties of $276 million was principally due to lower search and advertising revenues. Operating results for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 decreased $212 million, or 58%, as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease was primarily due to lower operating results from NDS and the Company digital media properties. The decrease at NDS was due to the absence of $121 million of operating income during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010, resulting from the sale of a portion of the Company ownership stake in NDS as noted above. The decrease at the Company digital media properties of $135 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 was primarily due to the revenue declines noted above, partially offset by cost containment initiatives. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Current Financial Condition The Company principal source of liquidity is internally generated funds. The Company also has a $2.25 billion revolving credit facility, which expires in May 2012, and has access to various film co-production alternatives to supplement its cash flows. In addition, the Company has access to the worldwide capital markets, 64 Table of Contents subject to market conditions. As of June 30, 2011, the availability under the revolving credit facility was reduced by stand-by letters of credit issued which totaled approximately $77 million. As of June 30, 2011, the Company was in compliance with all of the covenants under the revolving credit facility, and it does not anticipate any violation of such covenants. The Company internally generated funds are highly dependent upon the state of the advertising markets and public acceptance of its film and television products. The principal uses of cash that affect the Company liquidity position include the following: investments in the production and distribution of new feature films and television programs; the acquisition of and payments under programming rights for entertainment and sports programming; paper purchases; operational expenditures including employee costs; capital expenditures; interest expenses; income tax payments; investments in associated entities; dividends; acquisitions; debt repayments; and stock repurchases. The Company has evaluated, and expects to continue to evaluate, possible acquisitions and dispositions of certain businesses. Such transactions may be material and may involve cash, the Company securities or the assumption of additional indebtedness. Sources and Uses of Cash Fiscal 2011 vs. Fiscal 2010 Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011 and 2010 is as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 4,471 $ 3,854 The increase in net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 was primarily due to higher affiliate receipts at the Cable Network Programming segment, higher collections at the DBS segment, higher advertising receipts at the Television segment, lower litigation settlement payments at the Publishing segment and lower pension contributions. These increases were partially offset by lower worldwide theatrical receipts, due to the absence of Avatar, and higher production spending at the Filmed Entertainment segment, lower receipts at the digital media properties due to lower advertising and search revenues and higher tax payments. Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011 and 2010 is as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Net cash used in investing activities $ (2,247 ) $ (313 ) The increase in net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 was primarily due to the absence of proceeds from the sale of the financial indexes businesses and the majority of the Company eastern European television stations which were sold in fiscal 2010, cash utilized for the Company acquisitions of Shine and Wireless Generation in fiscal 2011 and higher capital expenditures. The increase in capital expenditures was primarily due to higher equipment purchases at the DBS segment and higher facility and equipment purchases at the Publishing segment. Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2011 and 2010 is as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2011 2010 Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities $ 1,360 $ (1,445 ) 65 Table of Contents The change in net cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2011 as compared to the net cash used in financing activities for fiscal 2010 was primarily due to higher borrowings and lower repayments of borrowings. During fiscal 2011, News America Incorporated, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, ( NAI ), issued $2.5 billion in senior notes as compared to fiscal 2010 which included the issuance of $1.0 billion in senior notes. During fiscal 2011, NAI redeemed a portion of its 9.25% Senior Debentures due in February 2013 for $262 million and $82 million of its LYONs. The Company also repaid approximately $134 million assumed as part of the Shine acquisition in fiscal 2011. In fiscal 2010, NAI redeemed its 0.75% Senior Exchangeable BUCS for $1.6 billion, its 5% TOPrS for $134 million and its 4.75% Senior Notes due March 2010 for $150 million. The total dividends declared related to fiscal 2011 results were $0.17 per share of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. In August 2011, the Company declared the final dividend on fiscal 2011 results of $0.095 per share for Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. This together with the interim dividend of $0.075 per share of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock constitute the total dividend relating to fiscal 2011. Based on the number of shares outstanding as of June 30, 2011, the total aggregate cash dividends expected to be paid to stockholders in fiscal 2012 is approximately $450 million. Sources and Uses of Cash Fiscal 2010 vs. Fiscal 2009 Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2010 and 2009 is as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2010 2009 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 3,854 $ 2,248 The increase in net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily reflects higher profits and worldwide theatrical receipts at the Filmed Entertainment segment, higher affiliate receipts at the Cable Network Programming segment, higher receipts at the book publishing business and lower tax payments. The increase was partially offset by the $500 million payment relating to the settlement of the Valassis litigation, higher payments for programming rights, higher pension contributions and higher interest payments. Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2010 and 2009 is as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2010 2009 Net cash used in investing activities $ (313 ) $ (627 ) Net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 decreased as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to a reduction in cash used for acquisitions and lower property, plant and equipment purchases. This was partially offset by lower cash proceeds from disposals. Fiscal 2009 included proceeds from the sale of eight of the Company television stations and a portion of the Company interest in NDS. Fiscal 2010 included cash proceeds of $840 million related to the disposition of the financial indexes businesses and $372 million related to the sale of a majority of the Company eastern European television stations. Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2010 and 2009 is as follows (in millions): For the years ended June 30, 2010 2009 Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities $ (1,445 ) $ 315 66 Table of Contents The change in net cash used in financing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2010 as compared to net cash provided in fiscal 2009 was primarily due to the redemption of the Company 0.75% Senior Exchangeable BUCS and 5% TOPrS, as well as the repayment of $150 million Senior Notes due March 2010. The increase in cash used in financing activities was partially offset by the issuance of $600 million 6.90% Senior Notes due 2039 and $400 million 5.65% Senior Notes due 2020 in August 2009. The total dividends declared related to fiscal 2010 results were $0.15 per share of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. In August 2010, the Company declared the final dividend on fiscal 2010 results of $0.075 per share for Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock. This together with the interim dividend of $0.075 per share of Class A Common Stock and Class B Common Stock constitute the total dividend relating to fiscal 2010. Debt Instruments Borrowings (1) Years ended June 30, 2011 2010 2009 (in millions) Borrowings Notes due February 2041 $ 1,469 $ $ Notes due February 2021 984 Notes due August 2039 593 Notes due August 2020 396 Notes due March 2019 690 Notes due March 2039 283 Bank loans 30 All other 18 38 37 Total borrowings $ 2,471 $ 1,027 $ 1,040 Repayments of borrowings Senior Debentures due February 2013 $ (262 ) $ $ Debt assumed in Shine acquisition (2) (134 ) LYONs (82 ) BUCS (3) (1,655 ) TOPrS (3) (134 ) Notes due March 2010 (150 ) Notes due October 2008 (200 ) Bank loans (46 ) (82 ) (64 ) All other (33 ) (59 ) (79 ) Total repayment of borrowings $ (557 ) $ (2,080 ) $ (343 ) (1) See Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to borrowings. (2) See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to the Shine acquisition. (3) See Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for information with respect to the redemptions of the BUCS and TOPrS. 67 Table of Contents Ratings of the Public Debt The table below summarizes the Company credit ratings as of June 30, 2011. Rating Agency Senior Debt Outlook Moody Baa1 Stable S&P BBB+ Stable In July 2011, S&P Ratings Services placed the Company BBB+ corporate credit rating on CreditWatch with negative implications. Moody Investors Service reaffirmed the Company corporate credit rating of Baa1 in July 2011. Revolving Credit Agreement In May 2007, NAI, entered into a credit agreement (the Credit Agreement ), among NAI as Borrower, the Company as Parent Guarantor, the lenders named therein (the Lenders ), Citibank, N.A. as Administrative Agent and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as Syndication Agent. The Credit Agreement provides a $2.25 billion unsecured revolving credit facility with a sub-limit of $600 million available for the issuance of letters of credit and has a maturity date of May 2012. Borrowings are in U.S. dollars only, while letters of credit are issuable in U.S. dollars or Euros. The significant terms of the agreement include the requirement that the Company maintain specific leverage ratios and limitations on secured indebtedness. NAI pays a facility fee of 0.08% regardless of facility usage. NAI pays interest for borrowings at LIBOR plus 0.27% and pays commission fees on letters of credit at 0.27%. NAI pays an additional fee of 0.05% if borrowings under the facility exceed 50% of the committed facility. The interest and fees are based on the Company current debt rating. As of June 30, 2011, approximately $77 million in standby letters of credit, for the benefit of third parties, were outstanding. Commitments and Guarantees The Company has commitments under certain firm contractual arrangements ( firm commitments ) to make future payments. These firm commitments secure the future rights to various assets and services to be used in the normal course of operations. The following table summarizes the Company material firm commitments as of June 30, 2011. As of June 30, 2011 Payments Due by Period Total 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years (in millions) Contracts for capital expenditure $ 490 $ 408 $ 47 $ 32 $ 3 Operating leases (a) Land and buildings 2,746 371 644 546 1,185 Plant and machinery 1,781 251 455 342 733 Other commitments Borrowings 15,495 32 434 950 14,079 Sports programming rights (b) 20,493 3,412 5,283 2,441 9,357 Entertainment programming rights 3,756 1,847 1,330 436 143 Other commitments and contractual obligations (c) 4,371 1,002 1,374 604 1,391 Total commitments, borrowings and contractual obligations $ 49,132 $ 7,323 $ 9,567 $ 5,351 $ 26,891 The Company also has certain contractual arrangements in relation to certain investees that would require the Company to make payments or provide funding if certain circumstances occur ( contingent guarantees ). The Company does not expect that these contingent guarantees will result in any material amounts being paid by the 68 Table of Contents Company in the foreseeable future. The timing of the amounts presented in the table below reflect when the maximum contingent guarantees will expire and does not indicate that the Company expects to incur an obligation to make payments during that time frame. As of June 30, 2011 Contingent guarantees: Total Amounts Committed Amount of Guarantees Expiration Per Period 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years After 5 years (in millions) Sports programming rights (d) $ 308 $ 15 $ 131 $ 162 $ Indemnity (e) 801 27 54 54 666 Letters of credit and other 249 249 $ 1,358 $ 291 $ 185 $ 216 $ 666 (a) The Company leases transponders, office facilities, warehouse facilities, printing plants, equipment and microwave transmitters used to carry broadcast signals. These leases, which are classified as operating leases, expire at certain dates through fiscal 2090. (b) The Company contract with MLB gives the Company rights to broadcast certain regular season and post season games, as well as exclusive rights to broadcast MLB World Series and All-Star Game through the 2013 MLB season. Under the Company contract with NFL, remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast certain football games are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2014. The Company contracts with NASCAR give the Company rights to broadcast certain races and ancillary content through calendar year 2014. Under the Company contracts with certain collegiate conferences, remaining future minimum payments for program rights to broadcast certain sporting events are payable over the remaining terms of the contracts. Under the Company contract with Italy National League Football, remaining future minimum payments for programming rights to broadcast National League Football matches are payable over the remaining term of the contract through fiscal 2017. In addition, the Company has certain other local sports broadcasting rights. (c) Primarily includes obligations relating to third party printing contracts, television rating services and paper purchase obligations. (d) A joint-venture in which the Company owns a 50% equity interest entered into an agreement for global programming rights. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company and the other joint-venture partner have jointly guaranteed the programming rights obligation. (e) In connection with the transaction related to the Dow Jones financial index businesses, the Company agreed to indemnify CME with respect to any payments of principal, premium and interest CME makes under its guarantee of the venture financing. (See Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for further discussion of this transaction.) The table excludes the Company pension, other postretirement benefits ( OPEB ) obligations and the gross unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions as the Company is unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount and timing. The Company made contributions of $158 million and $338 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2010, respectively. The majority of these contributions were voluntarily made to improve the funding status of the plans. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns and interest rates and statutory requirements. Assuming that actual plan asset returns are consistent with the Company expected plan returns in fiscal 2011 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant, the Company would not be required to make any material contributions to its U.S. pension plans for the immediate future. The 69 Table of Contents Company expects to make a combination of voluntary contributions and statutory contributions of approximately $50 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2012. Payments due to participants under the Company pension plans are primarily paid out of underlying trusts. Payments due under the Company OPEB plans are not required to be funded in advance, but are paid as medical costs are incurred by covered retiree populations, and are principally dependent upon the future cost of retiree medical benefits under the Company pension plans. The Company expects its net OPEB payments to approximate $18 million in fiscal 2012. (See Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for further discussion of the Company pension and OPEB plans.) Contingencies Other than as disclosed in the notes to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation, the Company is party to several purchase and sale arrangements which become exercisable over the next ten years by the Company or the counter-party to the agreement. In the next twelve months, none of these arrangements that become exercisable are material. Purchase arrangements that are exercisable by the counter-party to the agreement, and that are outside the sole control of the Company, are accounted for in accordance with ASC 480-10-S99-3A Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity. Accordingly, the fair values of such purchase arrangements are classified in redeemable noncontrolling interests. As disclosed in the notes to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation, U.K. and U.S. regulators and governmental authorities are conducting investigations after allegations of phone hacking and inappropriate payments to police at our former publication, News of the World , and other related matters, including investigations into whether similar conduct may have occurred at the Company subsidiaries outside of the U.K. The Company is cooperating fully with these investigations. It is possible that these proceedings could damage our reputation and might impair our ability to conduct our business. The Company is not able to predict the ultimate outcome or cost associated with these investigations. Violations of law may result in civil, administrative or criminal fines or penalties. The Company has admitted liability in a number of civil cases related to the phone hacking allegations and has settled a number of cases. At June 30, 2011, the Company has provided for its best estimate of the liability for the claims that have been filed. The Company has announced a process under which parties can pursue claims against the Company, and management believes that it is probable that additional claims will be filed. It is not possible to estimate the liability for such additional claims given the early stage of this matter and the information that is currently available to the Company. If more claims are filed and additional information becomes available, the Company will update the provision for such matters. Any fees, expenses, fines, penalties, judgments or settlements which might be incurred by the Company in connection with the various proceedings could affect the Company results of operations and financial condition. The Company operations are subject to tax in various domestic and international jurisdictions and as a matter of course, the Company is regularly audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities. The Company believes it has appropriately accrued for the expected outcome of all pending tax matters and does not currently anticipate that the ultimate resolution of pending tax matters will have a material adverse effect on its consolidated financial condition, future results of operations or liquidity. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it is important to the Company financial condition and results and if it requires significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in its application. The development and selection of these critical accounting policies have been determined by management of the Company and the related disclosures have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Company Board of Directors. For the Company summary of significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation. 70 Table of Contents Use of Estimates The preparation of the Company consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts that are reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying disclosures. Although these estimates are based on management best knowledge of current events and actions that the Company may undertake in the future, actual results may differ from the estimates. Revenue Recognition Television, Cable Network Programming and Direct Broadcast Satellite Advertising revenue is recognized as the commercials are aired, net of agency commissions. Subscriber fees received from subscribers, cable systems and DBS operators are recognized as revenue in the period that services are provided, net of amortization of cable distribution investments, in the case of Cable Network Programming revenues. The Company defers the cable distribution investments and amortizes the amounts on a straight-line basis over the contract period. Filmed Entertainment Revenues from distribution of feature films are recognized in accordance with ASC 926. Revenues from the theatrical distribution of motion pictures are recognized as they are exhibited and revenues from DVD and Blu-ray sales, net of a reserve for estimated returns, are recognized on the date that DVD and Blu-ray units are made widely available for sale by retailers and all Company-imposed restrictions on the sale of DVD and Blu-ray units have expired. Revenues from television distribution are recognized when the motion picture or television program is made available to the licensee for broadcast. Management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue for each film on the historical performance of similar films, incorporating factors such as the past box office record of the lead actors and actresses, the genre of the film, pre-release market research (including test market screenings) and the expected number of theaters in which the film will be released. Management updates such estimates based on information available on the actual results of each film through its life cycle. License agreements for the broadcast of theatrical and television product in the broadcast network, syndicated television and cable television markets are routinely entered into in advance of their available date for broadcast. Cash received and amounts billed in connection with such contractual rights for which revenue is not yet recognizable is classified as deferred revenue. Because deferred revenue generally relates to contracts for the licensing of theatrical and television product which have already been produced, the recognition of revenue for such completed product is principally only dependent upon the commencement of the availability period for broadcast under the terms of the related licensing agreement. Filmed Entertainment and Television Programming Costs Accounting for the production and distribution of motion pictures and television programming is in accordance with ASC 926, which requires management judgment as it relates to total revenues to be received and costs to be incurred throughout the life of each program or its license period. These judgments are used to determine the amortization of capitalized filmed entertainment and television programming costs, the expensing of participation and residual costs associated with revenues earned and any fair value adjustments. In accordance with ASC 926, the Company amortizes filmed entertainment and television programming costs using the individual-film-forecast method. Under the individual-film-forecast method, such programming costs are amortized for each film or television program in the ratio that current period actual revenue for such title bears to management estimated ultimate revenue as of the beginning of the current fiscal year to be recognized over approximately a six year period or operating profits to be realized from all media and markets for such title. Management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue for each film on factors such as historical performance of similar films, the star power of the lead actors and actresses and once released actual results of 71 Table of Contents each film. For each television program, management bases its estimates of ultimate revenue on the performance of the television programming in the initial markets, the existence of future firm commitments to sell additional episodes of the program and the past performance of similar television programs. Management regularly reviews, and revises when necessary, its total revenue estimates on a title-by-title basis, which may result in a change in the rate of amortization and/or a write-down of the asset to fair value. The costs of national sports contracts at FOX and for international sports rights agreements are charged to expense based on the ratio of each period operating profit to estimated total remaining operating profit of the contract. Estimates of total operating profit can change and accordingly, are reviewed periodically and amortization is adjusted as necessary. Such changes in the future could be material. The costs of local and regional sports contracts for a specified number of events are amortized on an event-by-event basis, while costs for local and regional sports contracts for a specified season are amortized over the season on a straight-line basis. Original cable programming is amortized on an accelerated basis. Management regularly reviews, and revises when necessary, its total revenue estimates on a contract basis, which may result in a change in the rate of amortization and/or a write-down of the asset to fair value. Property, Plant and Equipment Property, plant and equipment are recorded at cost and are depreciated on a straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of such assets. Changes in circumstances, such as technological advances, changes to the Company business model or capital strategy, could result in the actual useful lives differing from the Company estimates. In those cases, where the Company determines that the useful life of buildings and equipment should be shortened, the Company would depreciate the asset over its revised remaining useful life thereby increasing depreciation expense. Intangible Assets The Company has a significant amount of intangible assets, including goodwill, FCC licenses, and other copyright products and trademarks. Intangible assets acquired in business combinations are recorded at their estimated fair value at the date of acquisition. Goodwill is recorded as the difference between the cost of acquiring an entity and the estimated fair values assigned to its tangible and identifiable intangible net assets and is assigned to one or more reporting units for purposes of testing for impairment. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of intangible assets acquired, their reporting unit, as well as their useful lives can significantly impact net income. The Company accounts for its business acquisitions under the purchase method of accounting. The total cost of acquisitions is allocated to the underlying net assets, based on their respective estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the tangible net assets acquired is recorded as intangibles. Amounts recorded as goodwill are assigned to one or more reporting units. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows, discount rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other items. Identifying reporting units and assigning goodwill to them requires judgment involving the aggregation of business units with similar economic characteristics and the identification of existing business units that benefit from the acquired goodwill. The Company allocates goodwill to disposed businesses using the relative fair value method. Carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite lives are reviewed at least annually for possible impairment in accordance with ASC 350. The Company impairment review is based on, among other methods, a discounted cash flow approach that requires significant management judgments. The Company uses 72 Table of Contents its judgment in assessing whether assets may have become impaired between annual valuations. Indicators such as unexpected adverse economic factors, unanticipated technological change or competitive activities, loss of key personnel and acts by governments and courts, may signal that an asset has become impaired. The Company uses the direct valuation method to value identifiable intangibles for purchase accounting and impairment testing. The direct valuation method used for FCC licenses requires, among other inputs, the use of published industry data that are based on subjective judgments about future advertising revenues in the markets where the Company owns television stations. This method also involves the use of management judgment in estimating an appropriate discount rate reflecting the risk of a market participant in the U.S. broadcast industry. The resulting fair values for FCC licenses are sensitive to these long-term assumptions and any variations to such assumptions could result in an impairment to existing carrying values in future periods and such impairment could be material. The Company goodwill impairment reviews are determined using a two-step process. The first step of the process is to compare the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill. In performing the first step, the Company determines the fair value of a reporting unit by primarily using a discounted cash flow analysis and market-based valuation approach methodologies. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including judgments about appropriate discount rates, perpetual growth rates, relevant comparable company earnings multiples and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. The cash flows employed in the analyses are based on the Company estimated outlook and various growth rates have been assumed for years beyond the long-term business plan period. Discount rate assumptions are based on an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the respective reporting units. In assessing the reasonableness of its determined fair values, the Company evaluates its results against other value indicators, such as comparable public company trading values. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is not impaired and the second step of the impairment review is not necessary. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the second step of the goodwill impairment review is required to be performed to estimate the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill. The implied fair value of goodwill is determined in the same manner as the amount of goodwill recognized in a business combination. That is, the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of that unit (including any unrecognized intangible assets) as if the reporting unit had been acquired in a business combination and the estimated fair value of the reporting unit was the purchase price paid. The implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is compared with the carrying amount of that goodwill. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of that goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. During fiscal 2011, the Company recorded an impairment charge for its Digital Media Group which is considered a reporting unit under ASC 350. The Company continues to monitor this reporting unit due to the impairment charges recorded in fiscal 2011. Goodwill at risk for future impairment related to this reporting unit totaled $243 million as of June 30, 2011. The Company will continue to monitor its goodwill and intangible assets for possible future impairment. Income Taxes The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions in which it operates. The Company computes its annual tax rate based on the statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to it in the various jurisdictions in which it earns income. Tax laws are complex and subject to different interpretations by the taxpayer and respective governmental taxing authorities. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company tax expense and in evaluating its tax positions including evaluating uncertainties under ASC 740 Income Taxes . The Company records valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In making this assessment, management analyzes future taxable income, reversing temporary differences and ongoing tax planning strategies. Should a change in circumstances lead to a change in 73 Table of Contents judgment about the realizability of deferred tax assets in future years, the Company would adjust related valuation allowances in the period that the change in circumstances occurs, along with a corresponding increase or charge to income. Employee Costs The measurement and recognition of costs of the Company various pension and other postretirement benefit plans require the use of significant management judgments, including discount rates, expected return on plan assets, future compensation and other actuarial assumptions. The Company maintains defined benefit pension plans covering a significant number of its employees and retirees. The primary plans are closed to new participants. For financial reporting purposes, net periodic pension expense (income) is calculated based upon a number of actuarial assumptions, including a discount rate for plan obligations and an expected rate of return on plan assets. The Company considers current market conditions, including changes in investment returns and interest rates, in making these assumptions. In developing the expected long-term rate of return, the Company considered the pension portfolio past average rate of returns, and future return expectations of the various asset classes. The expected long-term rate of return is based on an asset allocation assumption of 50% equities, 39% fixed-income securities and 11% in cash and other investments. The discount rate reflects the market rate for high-quality fixed-income investments on the Company annual measurement date of June 30 and is subject to change each fiscal year. The discount rate assumptions used to account for pension and other postretirement benefit plans reflect the rates at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled. The rate was determined by matching the Company expected benefit payments for the primary plans to a hypothetical yield curve developed using a portfolio of several hundred high-quality non-callable corporate bonds. The key assumptions used in developing the Company fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009 net periodic pension expense (income) for its plans consist of the following: 2011 2010 2009 ($ in millions) Discount rate used to determine net periodic benefit cost 5.7 % 7.0 % 6.7 % Assets: Expected rate of return 7.0 % 7.0 % 7.0 % Expected return $ 171 $ 138 $ 143 Actual return $ 326 $ 237 $ (230 ) Gain/(Loss) $ 155 $ 99 $ (373 ) One year actual return 13.7 % 12.7 % (10.8 )% Five year actual return 4.4 % 3.9 % 3.5 % The weighted average discount rate is volatile from year to year because it is determined based upon the prevailing rates in the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia as of the measurement date. The Company will utilize a weighted average discount rate of 5.7% in calculating the fiscal 2012 net periodic pension expense for its plans. The Company will continue to use a weighted average long-term rate of return of 7% for fiscal 2012 based principally on a combination of asset mix and historical experience of actual plan returns. The accumulated net losses on the Company pension plans at June 30, 2011 were $835 million which decreased from $940 million at June 30, 2010. This decrease of $105 million was due primarily to an actual plan asset return of 13.7% in fiscal 2011, which was higher than the expected rate of return of 7%, and loss amortization in fiscal 2011. The net accumulated losses at June 30, 2011 were primarily the result of changes in discount rates and deferred asset losses. Lower discount rates increase present values of benefit obligations and increase the Company deferred losses and also increase subsequent-year pension expense. Higher discount rates decrease 74 Table of Contents the present values of benefit obligations and reduce the Company accumulated net loss and also decrease subsequent-year pension expense. These deferred losses are being systematically recognized into future net periodic pension expense in accordance with ASC 715 Compensation Retirement Benefits. Unrecognized losses in excess of 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or the plans projected benefit obligation are recognized over the average future service of the plan participants. The Company made contributions of $158 million, $338 million and $214 million to its pension plans in fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The majority of these contributions were voluntarily made to improve the funding status of the plans which were impacted by the economic conditions noted above. Future plan contributions are dependent upon actual plan asset returns, statutory requirements and interest rate movements. Assuming that actual plan returns are consistent with the Company expected plan returns in fiscal 2011 and beyond, and that interest rates remain constant, the Company would not be required to make any material statutory contributions to its primary U.S. pension plans for the immediate future. The Company will continue to make voluntary contributions as necessary to improve funded status. Changes in net periodic pension expense may occur in the future due to changes in the Company expected rate of return on plan assets and discount rate resulting from economic events. The following table highlights the sensitivity of the Company pension obligations and expense to changes in these assumptions, assuming all other assumptions remain constant: Changes in Assumption Impact on Annual Pension Expense Impact on PBO 0.25 percentage point decrease in discount rate Increase $16 million Increase $128 million 0.25 percentage point increase in discount rate Decrease $16 million Decrease $128 million 0.25 percentage point decrease in expected rate of return on assets Increase $7 million 0.25 percentage point increase in expected rate of return on assets Decrease $7 million Fiscal 2012 net periodic pension expense for the Company pension plans is expected to be approximately $146 million as compared to $168 million for fiscal 2011. The decrease is primarily due to an improved asset return which reduces the amount of deferred losses recognized in net periodic pension expense as noted above. Recent Accounting Pronouncements See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements of News Corporation for discussion of recent accounting pronouncements. 75 Table of Contents 
