CIK: 1555280
Company Name: ZOETIS INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2016-02-24


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Introduction Our management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (MD&A) is provided to assist readers in understanding our performance, as reflected in the results of our operations, our financial condition and our cash flows. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data . The discussion in this MD&A contains a description of our historical performance for periods in which we operated as a business unit of Pfizer, as well as forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. Our future results could differ materially from historical performance and from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors such as those discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors , and in the Comparability of historical results and our relationship with Pfizer and Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results sections of this MD&A. Overview of our business We are a global leader in the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of animal health medicines and vaccines, with a focus on both livestock and companion animals. For more than 60 years, as a business unit of Pfizer Inc. (Pfizer) and since 2013, as an independent public company, we have been committed to enhancing the health of animals and bringing solutions to our customers who raise and care for them. We manage our operations through two geographic operating segments. Within each of these operating segments, we offer a diversified product portfolio for both livestock and companion animal customers in order to capitalize on local and regional trends and customer needs. Our two operating segments are the United States (U.S.) and International. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 19. Segment, Geographic and Other Revenue Information . We directly market our products to livestock producers and veterinarians located in approximately 45 countries across North America, Europe, Africa, Asia, Australia and South America, and are a market leader in nearly all of the major regions in which we operate. Through our efforts to establish an early and direct presence in many emerging markets, such as Brazil, China and Mexico, we believe we are the largest animal health medicines and vaccines business as measured by revenue across emerging markets as a whole. In markets where we do not have a direct commercial presence, we generally contract with distributors that provide logistics and sales and marketing support for our products. We believe our investments in the industry largest sales organization, including our extensive network of technical and veterinary operations specialists, our high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply, and our long track record of developing products that meet customer needs, has led to enduring and valued relationships with our customers. Our research and development (R&D) efforts enable us to deliver innovative products to address unmet needs and evolve our product lines so they remain relevant for our customers. Additionally, our management team focus on improving operational and cost efficiencies increases the likelihood of achieving our core growth strategies and enhancing long-term value for our shareholders. A summary of our 2015 performance compared to the comparable 2014 and 2013 periods follows: Years Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Revenue $ 4,765 $ 4,785 $ 4,561 5 Net income attributable to Zoetis 339 583 504 (42 ) 16 Adjusted net income (a) 889 790 709 13 11 (a) Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure. See the Adjusted net income section of this MD&A for more information. Our operating environment Industry The animal health industry, which focuses on both livestock and companion animals, is a growing industry that impacts billions of people worldwide. The primary livestock species for the production of animal protein are cattle (both beef and dairy), swine, poultry, sheep and fish. Livestock health and production are essential to meeting the growing demand for animal protein of a global population. Factors influencing growth in demand for livestock medicines and vaccines include: human population growth and increasing standards of living, particularly in many emerging markets; increasing demand for improved nutrition, particularly animal protein; natural resource constraints, such as scarcity of arable land, fresh water and increased competition for cultivated land, resulting in fewer resources that will be available to meet this increased demand for animal protein; and increased focus on food safety. The primary companion animal species are dogs, cats and horses. Health professionals indicate that companion animals improve the physical and emotional well-being of pet owners. Factors influencing growth in demand for companion animal medicines and vaccines include: economic development and related increases in disposable income, particularly in many emerging markets; 31 | Table of Contents increasing pet ownership; and companion animals living longer, increasing medical treatment of companion animals and advances in companion animal medicines and vaccines. Product development initiatives Our future success depends on both our existing product portfolio and our pipeline of new products, including new products that we may develop through joint ventures and products that we are able to obtain through license or acquisition. We believe we are an industry leader in animal health R&D, with a track record of generating new products and product lifecycle innovation. The majority of our R&D programs focus on product lifecycle innovation, which is defined as R&D programs that leverage existing animal health products by adding new species or claims, achieving approvals in new markets or creating new combinations and reformulations. Perceptions of product quality, safety and reliability We believe that animal health medicines and vaccines customers value high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply. The importance of quality and safety concerns to pet owners, veterinarians and livestock producers also contributes to animal health brand loyalty, which we believe often continues after the loss of patent-based and regulatory exclusivity. We depend on positive perceptions of the safety and quality of our products, and animal health products generally, by our customers, veterinarians and end-users. The issue of the potential transfer of increased antibacterial resistance in bacteria from food-producing animals to human pathogens, and the causality of that transfer, continue to be the subject of global scientific and regulatory discussion. Antibacterials refer to small molecules that can be used to treat or prevent bacterial infections and are a sub-categorization of the products that make up our anti-infectives and medicated feed additives portfolios. In some countries, this issue has led to government restrictions and bans on the use of specific antibacterials in some food-producing animals, regardless of the route of administration (in feed or injectable). These restrictions are more prevalent in countries where animal protein is plentiful and governments are willing to take action even when there is scientific uncertainty. Our total revenue attributable to antibacterials for livestock was approximately $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2015 . We cannot predict whether antibacterial resistance concerns will result in additional restrictions or bans, expanded regulations or public pressure to discontinue or reduce use of antibacterials in food-producing animals. The overall economic environment In addition to industry-specific factors, we, like other businesses, face challenges related to global economic conditions. Growth in both the livestock and companion animal sectors is driven by overall economic development and related growth, particularly in many emerging markets. In recent years, certain of our customers and suppliers have been affected directly by economic downturns, which decreased the demand for our products and, in some cases, hindered our ability to collect amounts due from customers. The cost of medicines and vaccines to our livestock producer customers is small relative to other production costs, including feed, and the use of these products is intended to improve livestock producers economic outcomes. As a result, demand for our products has historically been more stable than demand for other production inputs. Similarly, industry sources have reported that pet owners indicated a preference for reducing spending on other aspects of their lifestyle, including entertainment, clothing and household goods, before reducing spending on pet care. While these factors have mitigated the impact of recent downturns in the global economy, further economic challenges could increase cost sensitivity among our customers, which may result in reduced demand for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. Competition The animal health industry is competitive. Although our business is the largest by revenue in the animal health medicines and vaccines industry, we face competition in the regions in which we operate. Principal methods of competition vary depending on the particular region, species, product category or individual product. Some of these methods include new product development, quality, price, service and promotion to veterinary professionals, pet owners and livestock producers. Our competitors include the animal health businesses of large pharmaceutical companies and specialty animal health businesses. There are also several new start-up companies working in the animal health area. In addition to competition from established market participants, there could be new entrants to the animal health medicines and vaccines industry in the future. In certain markets, we also compete with companies that produce generic products, but the level of competition from generic products varies from market to market. For example, the level of generic competition is higher in Europe and certain emerging markets than in the United States. Weather conditions and the availability of natural resources The animal health industry and demand for many of our animal health products in a particular region are affected by weather conditions, as usage of our products follows varying weather patterns and weather-related pressures from pests, such as ticks. As a result, we may experience regional and seasonal fluctuations in our results of operations. In addition, veterinary hospitals and practitioners depend on visits from and access to the animals under their care. Veterinarians patient volume and ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience prolonged snow, ice or other severe weather conditions, particularly in regions not accustomed to sustained inclement weather. Furthermore, livestock producers depend on the availability of natural resources, including large supplies of fresh water. Their animals health and their ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience a shortage of fresh water due to human population growth or floods, droughts or other weather conditions. In the event of adverse weather conditions or a shortage of fresh water, veterinarians and livestock producers may purchase less of our products. For example, drought conditions could negatively impact, among other things, the supply of corn and the availability of grazing pastures. A decrease in harvested corn results in higher corn prices, which could negatively impact the profitability of livestock producers of cattle, pork and poultry. Higher corn prices and reduced availability of grazing pastures contribute to reductions in herd or flock sizes that in turn result in less spending on animal health products. As such, a prolonged drought could have a material adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition. Factors 32 | Table of Contents influencing the magnitude and timing of effects of a drought on our performance include, but may not be limited to, weather patterns and herd management decisions. Disease outbreaks Sales of our livestock products could be adversely affected by the outbreak of disease carried by animals. Outbreaks of disease may reduce regional or global sales of particular animal-derived food products or result in reduced exports of such products, either due to heightened export restrictions or import prohibitions, which may reduce demand for our products. Also, the outbreak of any highly contagious disease near our main production sites could require us to immediately halt production of our products at such sites or force us to incur substantial expenses in procuring raw materials or products elsewhere. Alternatively, sales of products that treat specific disease outbreaks may increase. For example, from December 2014 through June 2015, highly pathogenic H5 avian influenza virus infections were reported in domestic poultry, captive birds and wild birds in the United States, with a majority of confirmed infections occurring in backyard and commercial poultry flocks. The egg and turkey industry were the most impacted by this occurrence of avian influenza. USDA surveillance indicates that more than 48 million birds were affected (either infected or exposed) in at least 20 states. Although no new H5 avian influenza infections have been detected in the United States since June 2015, an outbreak of highly pathogenic H7 avian influenza was reported in a single turkey flock in Indiana in January 2016, and both forms of the virus continue to pose a threat to the poultry industry. It is important to note that human infection with avian influenza viruses has not occurred from eating properly cooked poultry or poultry products. We are closely monitoring the developments as this situation unfolds and the impact on our 2015 global revenue was not significant. Manufacturing and supply In order to sell our products, we must be able to produce and ship our products in sufficient quantities. Many of our products involve complex manufacturing processes and are sole-sourced from certain manufacturing sites. Minor deviations in our manufacturing or logistical processes, such as temperature excursions or improper package sealing, could result in delays, inventory shortages, unanticipated costs, product recalls, product liability and/or regulatory action. In addition, a number of factors could cause production interruptions that could result in launch delays, inventory shortages, recalls, unanticipated costs or issues with our agreements under which we supply third parties. Our manufacturing network may be unable to meet the demand for our products or we may have excess capacity if demand for our products changes. The unpredictability of a product's regulatory or commercial success or failure, the lead time necessary to construct highly technical and complex manufacturing sites, and shifting customer demand increase the potential for capacity imbalances. Foreign exchange rates Significant portions of our revenue and costs are exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates. Our products are sold in more than 100 countries and, as a result, our revenue is influenced by changes in foreign exchange rates. For the year ended December 31, 2015 , approximately 47% of our revenue was denominated in foreign currencies. We seek to manage our foreign exchange risk, in part, through operational means, including managing same-currency revenue in relation to same-currency costs and same-currency assets in relation to same-currency liabilities. As we operate in multiple foreign currencies, including the euro, Brazilian real, Canadian dollar, Australian dollar and other currencies, changes in those currencies relative to the U.S. dollar will impact our revenue, cost of goods and expenses, and consequently, net income. Exchange rate fluctuations may also have an impact beyond our reported financial results and directly impact operations. These fluctuations may affect the ability to buy and sell our goods and services between markets impacted by significant exchange rate variances. For the year ended December 31, 2015 , approximately 53% of our total revenue was in U.S. dollars. Our year-over-year revenue growth was unfavorably impacted by 8 % from changes in foreign currency values relative to the U.S. dollar. On February 10, 2015, the Venezuelan government announced that they would continue to operate with a three-tier exchange rate system. In addition, they announced that the primary rate of 6.3 bolivars to the U.S. dollar would remain in place for imports that are deemed essential. A new free-floating rate (SIMADI) replaced the existing third-tier rate (SICAD II). As of December 31, 2015, the Venezuelan bolivar to U.S. dollar exchange rates were the CENCOEX official rate of 6.3; the SICAD I rate of 13.5; and the SIMADI rate of 199. Through the fourth quarter of 2015, we used the CENCOEX official rate of 6.3 to report our Venezuela financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In the fourth quarter of 2015, upon evaluation of evolving economic conditions in Venezuela and our expectation of Venezuela's responses to changes in its economy, continued volatility, and the fact that we have not received any approved payments from Venezuela for transactions at the CENCOEX official rate of 6.3 per U.S. dollar in 2015, we determined that our outstanding Venezuelan bolivar-denominated net monetary assets are no longer expected to be settled at the CENCOEX official rate of 6.3, but rather at the SIMADI rate of 199. On November 30, 2015, we recorded a net remeasurement loss of $89 million on bolivar-denominated net monetary assets, primarily related to cash deposits in Venezuela, using the SIMADI rate of 199 bolivars to the U.S. dollar, and this rate will be used prospectively. We believe this best represents the estimate of the U.S. dollar amount that will ultimately be collected. Additionally, the company recorded a lower of cost or market adjustment to inventory of $4 million, and asset impairment charges of $3 million. In February 2014, the Venezuelan government issued a Law on Fair Pricing, establishing a maximum profit margin of 30%. At the time of its issuance, there was uncertainty as to how the law would be interpreted and applied. The Venezuelan government also recently issued new regulations relating to the publication of these fair prices to consumers. While we believe we are currently fully compliant with this new law, it is uncertain how this law may be interpreted and enforced in the future. The actions of the Venezuelan government described above relating to currency and to the interpretation and enforcement of the Law on Fair Pricing and associated regulations, as well as other potential actions by the Venezuelan government in response to economic uncertainties could impact the recoverability of our investment in Venezuela, which could result in additional charges and, under extreme circumstances, could impact our ability to continue to operate in the country in the same manner as we have historically. 33 | Table of Contents Based on all of the factors noted above, in the second quarter of 2015, we decided to decrease our activity in Venezuela in 2015 and will further decrease it in 2016. As a result, our revenue for the year ended November 30, 2015, was approximately $65 million, as compared with $77 million for the year ended November 30, 2014. As of November 30, 2015, as a result of the revaluation and other charges, our net monetary assets were $3 million in Venezuela. On February 17, 2016, the Venezuela government made an announcement that the three-tier exchange rate system existing in the country has changed to a dual system (official rate and SIMADI rate). Additionally, the official rate was devalued from 6.3 to 10 Venezuelan bolivars per U.S. dollar. Operational efficiency program During 2015, we launched a comprehensive operational efficiency program, which was incremental to the previously announced supply network strategy. These initiatives have focused on reducing complexity in our product portfolios through the elimination of approximately 5,000 product stock keeping units (SKUs), changing our selling approach in certain markets, reducing our presence in certain countries and planning to sell or exit ten manufacturing sites over the long term. As of December 31, 2015, we entered into an agreement to divest three U.S manufacturing sites and in January 2016, we announced agreements to sell manufacturing facilities in India and Taiwan. We are also continuing to optimize our resource allocation and efficiency by reducing resources associated with non-customer facing activities and operating more efficiently as a result of less internal complexity and more standardization of processes. As part of this initiative, we expect to reduce certain positions through divestitures, normal attrition and involuntary terminations by approximately 2,000 to 2,500, subject to consultations with works councils and unions in certain countries. As of December 31, 2015, approximately 1,200 positions have been eliminated and additional reductions are expected primarily over the next nine to twelve months. For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5B. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Divestitures, Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 22. Subsequent Events. Recent developments On January 5, 2016, we announced a business transfer agreement with the India-based pharmaceutical company Zydus Cadila (Cadila Healthcare Ltd.) to sell our manufacturing site in Haridwar, India. The agreement also includes the divestment of a portfolio of our products in conjunction with our comprehensive operational efficiency program. These products include medicated feed additives, anti-infectives, parasiticides, and nutritionals for livestock, sold primarily in India. This transaction was subsequently completed on February 17, 2016. We received approximately $28 million in cash, subject to working capital adjustments. This site was included within held for sale classification as of December 31, 2015. For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5B. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Divestitures. On January 11, 2016, the European Commission (EC) issued a press release announcing its conclusion that selective tax advantages granted by Belgium under its "excess profit" tax scheme constitute illegal state aid and ordering the Belgian authorities to recover benefits from taxpayers who are parties to an Excess Profit Ruling (EPR) agreement. The EC decision, once published, can be challenged before the Court of Justice of the European Union by Belgium, other Member States, and other parties who are directly and individually concerned, such as the company. As a result of the decision, the company expects to record a net charge in the first quarter of 2016 of up to $45 million. This does not include any benefits associated with a successful appeal of the decision, nor does it reflect guidance we expect to receive from the Belgian government on the methodology and timing of the recovery of prior tax benefits. The net charge of up to $45 million relates to recovery of benefits for the periods 2013 through 2015 offset by the revaluation of the company deferred tax assets and liabilities using the rates expected to be in place at the time of the reversal. On January 14, 2016, we announced a share purchase agreement with Yung Shin Pharmaceutical Industrial Co., Ltd., a pharmaceutical company with an animal health business and headquarters in Taiwan, to divest our 55 percent ownership share of our Taiwan joint venture including our manufacturing site in Hsinchu, Taiwan. The agreement also includes the divestment of a portfolio of products in conjunction with our comprehensive operational efficiency program. These products include medicated feed additives, anti-infective medicines and nutritional premixes for livestock, sold primarily in Taiwan and in international markets. Under the agreement, Zoetis will receive approximately $13 million in cash. We expect to complete the transaction in the second quarter of 2016, pending the successful completion of customary regulatory review in Taiwan. The assets and liabilities of the joint venture were included within held for sale classification as of December 31, 2015. For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5B. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Divestitures. On February 12, 2016, we completed the sale to Huvepharma NV (Huvepharma) of two of our manufacturing sites in the United States: Laurinburg, North Carolina, and Longmont, Colorado. Huvepharma also assumed the assets and operations and the lease of our manufacturing and distribution site in Van Buren, Arkansas. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5B. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Divestitures for additional information regarding the terms of the sale. These sites were included within held for sale classification as of December 31, 2015. These site exits represent three of the ten sites we plan to exit as part of our operational efficiency program. We received $48 million in 34 | Table of Contents initial cash consideration, including $8 million related to transferred inventory, and expect to receive additional cash consideration for inventory transfers once certain conditions are met. Our growth strategies We seek to enhance the health of animals and to bring solutions to our customers who raise and care for them. We have a global presence in both developed and emerging markets and we intend to grow our business by pursuing the following core strategies: leverage our direct local presence and strong customer relationships Through our direct selling commercial model, we can deepen our understanding of our customers businesses and can encourage the adoption of more sophisticated animal health products; further penetrate emerging markets We seek to maximize our presence where economic development is driving increased demand for animal protein and increased demand for and spending on companion animals; pursue new product research and development and value-added product lifecycle innovation to extend our product portfolio New product R&D and product lifecycle innovation enable us to deliver products to address unmet needs and evolve our product lines so they remain relevant for our customers. We leverage our strong direct presence in many regions and cost-effectively develop new products; remain the partner of choice for access to new products and technologies We support cutting-edge research and secure the right to develop and commercialize new products and technologies; continue to provide high-quality products and improve manufacturing production margins We believe our manufacturing and supply chain provides us with a global platform for continued expansion, including in emerging markets, and that our quality and reliability differentiate us from our competitors; and expand into complementary businesses to become a more complete, trusted partner in providing solutions We believe we have the potential to generate incremental and complementary revenue, in the areas of diagnostics, genetics, devices, dairy data management, e-learning and professional consulting, which could also enhance the loyalty of our customer base and may lead to increased product sales. Components of revenue and costs and expenses Our revenue, costs and expenses are reported for the year ended December 31 for each year presented, except for operations outside the United States, for which the financial information is included in our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended November 30 for each year presented. Revenue Our revenue is primarily derived from our diversified product portfolio of medicines and vaccines used to treat and protect livestock and companion animals. Generally, our products are promoted to veterinarians and livestock producers by our sales organization which includes sales representatives and technical and veterinary operations specialists, and then sold directly by us or through distributors. The depth of our product portfolio enables us to address the varying needs of customers in different species and geographies. In 2015 , our top selling product line, the ceftiofur line, contributed approximately 8% of our revenue. The ceftiofur line and our next two top selling products, Revolution and Draxxin, contributed approximately 21% of our revenue. Our top ten selling product lines contributed approximately 38% of our revenue. For additional information regarding our products, including descriptions of our product lines that each represented approximately 1% or more of our revenue in 2015 , see Item 1. Business Products . Costs and expenses Costs of sales consist primarily of cost of materials, facilities and other infrastructure used to manufacture our medicine and vaccine products and royalty expenses associated with the intellectual property of our products, when relevant. Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses consist of, among other things, the internal and external costs of marketing, promotion, advertising and shipping and handling as well as certain costs related to business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development, public affairs and procurement. Research and development (R&D) expenses consist primarily of project costs specific to new product R&D and product lifecycle innovation, overhead costs associated with R&D operations and investments that support local market clinical trials for approved indications and expenses related to regulatory approvals for our products. We do not disaggregate R&D expenses by research stage or by therapeutic area for purposes of managing our business. Amortization of intangible assets consists primarily of the amortization expense for identifiable finite-life intangible assets that have been acquired through business combinations. These assets consist of, but are not limited to, developed technology, brands and trademarks. Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs consist of all restructuring charges (those associated with acquisition activity and those associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives), as well as costs associated with acquiring and integrating businesses. Restructuring charges are associated with employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the company. Acquisition-related costs are associated with acquiring and integrating acquired businesses, such as Pharmaq Holding AS and Abbott Animal Health (AAH) in 2015, the King Animal Health (KAH) business in 2011 and the Fort Dodge Animal Health (FDAH) business acquired as part of Pfizer's acquisition of Wyeth in 2009, and may include transaction costs and expenditures for consulting and the integration of systems and processes. Other (income)/deductions net consist primarily of various items including net (gains)/losses on asset disposals, royalty-related income, foreign exchange translation (gains)/losses and certain asset impairment charges. 35 | Table of Contents Comparability of historical results and our relationship with Pfizer Prior to the Separation, the combined financial statements were derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Pfizer and included allocations for direct costs and indirect costs attributable to the operations of the animal health business of Pfizer. The pre-Separation financial statements and activities do not purport to reflect what the results of operations, comprehensive income/(loss), financial position, equity or cash flows would have been had we operated as an independent public company during the periods presented. For a detailed description of the basis of presentation and an understanding of the limitations of the predictive value of the historical combined financial statements, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Basis of Presentation. Our historical expenses are not necessarily indicative of the expenses we currently incur as an independent public company. With respect to support functions, for example, for the periods prior to the IPO, our historical combined financial statements include expense allocations for certain support functions that were provided on a centralized basis within Pfizer, such as expenses for business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, and, to a lesser extent, business development, public affairs and procurement, among others. As part of the Separation, pursuant to agreements with Pfizer, Pfizer provides us with some of the services related to these functions on a transitional basis in exchange for agreed-upon fees, and we are incurring other costs to replace the services and resources that will not be provided by Pfizer. We have also incurred certain nonrecurring costs related to becoming an independent public company, including new branding (which includes changes to the manufacturing process for required new packaging), the creation of standalone systems and infrastructure, the accelerated vesting of certain Pfizer equity awards and associated cash payment related thereto, site separation and certain legal registration and patent assignment costs. Some of our products are manufactured at sites that were retained by Pfizer or that are operated by Pfizer under a sale-leaseback arrangement. In 2013, pursuant to the master manufacturing and supply agreement with Pfizer, we began purchasing these products from Pfizer. Under the master manufacturing and supply agreement, our supply price is Pfizer's costs plus a percentage markup. Subject to limited exceptions, during the two years following the completion of the IPO (from February 6, 2013, through February 5, 2015), the markup was 0% and, for the remainder of the term of the agreement, the markup will be 15%. The cost of each Pfizer-supplied product is subject to annual review. The pre-Separation period included in the consolidated statement of income for the year ended December 31, 2013 included allocations of certain manufacturing and supply costs incurred by the manufacturing sites that would not have been charged to us under the master manufacturing and supply agreement with Pfizer had such agreement been in effect in the periods presented, such as operating variances, as well as purchase price and volume variances under a certain threshold. In connection with the IPO, we and Pfizer have entered into certain agreements that provide a framework for our ongoing relationship with Pfizer. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 20B. Transactions and Agreements with Pfizer: Agreements with Pfizer. Following the IPO, the equity awards previously granted to our employees by Pfizer continued to vest, and service with Zoetis counted as service with Pfizer for equity award purposes. On June 24, 2013, Pfizer completed the Exchange Offer whereby Pfizer disposed of all shares of Zoetis common stock owned by Pfizer. Pfizer accelerated the vesting of, and in some cases the settlement of, on a pro-rata basis, outstanding Pfizer restricted stock units (RSUs), Total Shareholder Return Units (TSRUs) and Performance Share Awards (PSAs) previously granted to our employees, subject, in each case, to the requirements of Section 409A of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, the terms of the 2004 Pfizer Stock Plan and the applicable award agreements and any outstanding deferral elections. In addition, unvested Pfizer stock options previously granted to our employees accelerated in full, and our employees generally have the ability to exercise the stock options until the earlier of (i) June 23, 2016 (three years from Pfizer's completion of the Exchange Offer), (ii) termination of their employment from Zoetis or (iii) the expiration date of the stock option. Zoetis employees who held Pfizer stock options and were retirement eligible as of June 24, 2013, will have the full term of the stock option to exercise. The accelerated vesting of the outstanding Pfizer stock options, and the settlement, on a pro-rata basis, of other Pfizer equity awards, resulted in the recognition of additional expense for the year ended December 31, 2013, of $ 9 million , which is included in stock-based compensation. The unvested portion of Pfizer RSUs, TSRUs and PSAs were forfeited as of the completion of the Exchange Offer. In the third quarter of 2013, Zoetis made a cash payment of approximately $ 20 million to certain non-executive Zoetis employees, based on the value of the employees' forfeited Pfizer RSUs, TSRUs and PSAs (as applicable). This amount is included in the consolidated statement of income as additional compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2013. Members of the Zoetis Executive Team did not receive a cash payment for any forfeited Pfizer RSUs, TSRUs and PSAs, but instead, in the third quarter of 2013, were granted Zoetis RSUs which were equivalent in value and vest on the same date as their forfeited Pfizer RSUs, TSRUs and PSAs. Recent significant acquisitions The assets, liabilities, operating results and cash flows of acquired businesses are included in our results commencing from their respective acquisition dates. On November 9, 2015, we completed the acquisition of Pharmaq, a privately held Norwegian company. We acquired 100% of the issued share capital of Pharmaq for an aggregate cash purchase price of $765 million , adjusted to reflect cash, working capital and net indebtedness as of the closing date for net cash consideration transferred to the seller of $668 million . The acquisition expands the Zoetis aquaculture portfolio, which is the fastest growing animal health market. On February 10, 2015, we completed the purchase of certain assets of Abbott Animal Health (AAH), a subsidiary of Abbott Laboratories (Abbott). AAH is a companion animal health business focused on the veterinary surgical suite. The purchase expands our companion animal product portfolio to include veterinarian solutions for anesthesia, pain management, and the diagnosis of diabetes. The $254 million purchase price included net cash of $229 million and an additional contingent payment of $25 million which was due to Abbott within one year of the acquisition date, subject to certain deductions in the event of sales disruptions due to supply issues. The range of undiscounted amounts that Zoetis could pay pursuant to this contingent consideration arrangement was between zero and $25 million , with an acquisition date fair value of $22 million . The company submitted a $25 million payment to Abbott in February 2016. For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Acquisition of Pharmaq and Acquisition of Abbott Animal Health . 36 | Table of Contents Agreements with Pfizer On February 6, 2013, we entered into a transitional services agreement with Pfizer whereby Pfizer agreed to provide us with various corporate support services. This agreement has a service commencement date of January 1, 2013, in the United States and December 1, 2012 for our international locations. In addition, on October 1, 2012, we entered into a master manufacturing and supply agreement with Pfizer on October 1, 2012, whereby we and Pfizer agreed to manufacture and supply products to each other commencing January 1, 2013. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 20B. Transactions and Agreements with Pfizer: Agreements with Pfizer for more information related to these and other agreements, including the related costs. Significant accounting policies and application of critical accounting estimates In presenting our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies . We believe that the following accounting policies are critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements as they require the application of the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments and, therefore, could have the greatest impact on our financial statements: (i) fair value; (ii) revenue; (iii) asset impairment reviews; and (iv) contingencies. Below are some of our more critical accounting estimates. See also Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Estimates and Assumptions for a discussion about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions. Fair value For a discussion about the application of fair value to our long-term debt and financial instruments, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 10 . Financial Instruments . For a discussion about the application of fair value to our business combinations, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5 . Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments . For a discussion about the application of fair value to our asset impairment reviews, see Asset impairment reviews below . Revenue Our gross product revenue is subject to deductions that are generally estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenue is recognized and primarily represents sales returns and revenue incentives. For example: for sales returns, we perform calculations in each market that incorporate the following, as appropriate: local returns policies and practices; returns as a percentage of revenue; an understanding of the reasons for past returns; estimated shelf life by product; an estimate of the amount of time between shipment and return or lag time; and any other factors that could impact the estimate of future returns, product recalls, discontinuation of products or a changing competitive environment; and for revenue incentives, we use our historical experience with similar incentives programs to estimate the impact of such programs on revenue. If any of our ratios, factors, assessments, experiences or judgments are not indicative or accurate predictors of our future experience, our results could be materially affected. Although the amounts recorded for these revenue deductions are dependent on estimates and assumptions, historically our adjustments to actual results have not been material. The sensitivity of our estimates can vary by program, type of customer and geographic location. Amounts recorded for revenue deductions can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely on estimates and assumptions. For further information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies: Estimates and Assumptions . Asset impairment reviews We review all of our long-lived assets for impairment indicators throughout the year and we perform detailed testing whenever impairment indicators are present. In addition, we perform impairment testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived assets at least annually. When necessary, we record charges for impairments of long-lived assets for the amount by which the fair value is less than the carrying value of these assets. Our impairment review processes are described below and in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies: Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets and, for deferred tax assets, in Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies: Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities and Income Tax Contingencies . Examples of events or circumstances that may be indicative of impairment include: a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used. For example, restrictions imposed by the regulatory authorities could affect our ability to manufacture or sell a product, and a projection or forecast that demonstrates losses or reduced profits associated with an asset. This could result, for example, from the introduction of a competitor product that results in a significant loss of market share or the inability to achieve the previously projected revenue growth, or from the lack of acceptance of a product by customers. Our impairment reviews of most of our long-lived assets depend on the determination of fair value, as defined by U.S. GAAP, and these judgments can materially impact our results of operations. A single estimate of fair value can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and 37 | Table of Contents uncertainties and can rely on estimates and assumptions. For information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies: Estimates and Assumptions . Intangible assets other than goodwill We test indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying amount, a quantitative test that compares the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset with its carrying value is performed. If the fair value is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized. As a result of our overall intangible asset impairment review, we recognized a number of impairments of identifiable intangible assets other than goodwill. We recorded the following identifiable intangible asset impairment charges in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs and Other (income)/deductions net , as applicable: In 2015, the intangible asset impairment charges reflect (i) approximately $27 million of developed technology rights due to product rationalization decisions associated with our operational efficiency initiative; and (ii) approximately $2 million of acquired in-process research and development (IPR&D) assets related to the termination of a canine oncology project. In 2014, the intangible asset impairment charges reflect (i) approximately $6 million of IPR&D assets related to a pharmaceutical product for dogs acquired with the FDAH acquisition in 2009, as a result of the termination of the development program due to a re-assessment of economic viability; and (ii) approximately $1 million related to finite-lived developed technology rights and IPR&D due to negative market conditions and the re-assessment of economic viability. In 2013, the intangible asset impairment charges reflect (i) approximately $2 million of finite-lived developed technology rights due to a re-assessment of economic viability; (ii) approximately $2 million of finite-lived developed technology rights and IPR&D as a result of exiting a combined manufacturing and R&D facility; and (iii) approximately $2 million related to acquired IPR&D as a result of the termination of certain development programs due to a re-assessment of their economic viability. When we are required to determine the fair value of intangible assets other than goodwill, we use an income approach, specifically the multi-period excess earnings method, also known as the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the asset, which includes the application of a terminal value for indefinite-lived assets, and then we apply an asset-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value amount. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, the impact of technological risk associated with IPR&D assets, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the risks inherent in the projected cash flows; foreign currency fluctuations; and the tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. While all identifiable intangible assets can be impacted by events and thus lead to impairment, in general, identifiable intangible assets that are at the highest risk of impairment include IPR&D assets (approximately $ 138 million as of December 31, 2015). IPR&D assets are higher-risk assets because R&D is an inherently risky activity. For a description of our accounting policy, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies: Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . Goodwill Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of net assets of businesses purchased and is assigned to reporting units. We test goodwill for impairment on at least an annual basis, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, either by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount or by performing a quantitative assessment. Factors considered in the qualitative assessment include general macroeconomic conditions, conditions specific to the industry and market, cost factors which could have a significant effect on earnings or cash flows, the overall financial performance of the reporting unit, and whether there have been sustained declines in our share price. Additionally, we evaluate the extent to which the fair value exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit at the date of the last quantitative assessment performed. When performing a quantitative assessment to test for goodwill impairment we utilize the income approach, which is forward-looking, and relies primarily on internal forecasts. Within the income approach, the method that we use is the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the reporting unit, which includes the application of a terminal value, and then apply a reporting unit-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of technological risk and competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the various risks inherent in the projected cash flows; and the tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. In 2015 and 2014, we quantitatively assessed, as of September 27, 2015, and September 28, 2014, respectively, the fair value of each of our reporting units using the income approach. The fair value of each reporting unit was found to exceed its respective carrying value, therefore no impairments were recorded. 38 | Table of Contents For all of our reporting units, there are a number of future events and factors that may impact future results and that could potentially have an impact on the outcome of subsequent goodwill impairment testing. For a list of these factors, see Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results. For a description of our accounting policy, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies: Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . Contingencies For a discussion about income tax contingencies, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 9D. Tax Matters: Tax Contingencies . For a discussion about legal contingencies, guarantees and indemnifications, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statement Note 18. Commitments and Contingencies . Analysis of the consolidated statements of income The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated statements of income should be read along with our consolidated financial statements, and the notes thereto. For more information on the carve-out basis of presentation for the periods prior to the IPO, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Basis of Presentation . Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Revenue $ 4,765 $ 4,785 $ 4,561 5 Costs and expenses: Cost of sales (a) 1,738 1,717 1,669 1 3 % of revenue 36 % 36 % 37 % Selling, general and administrative expenses (a) 1,532 1,643 1,613 (7 ) 2 % of revenue 32 % 34 % 35 % Research and development expenses (a) 364 396 399 (8 ) (1 ) % of revenue 8 % 8 % 9 % Amortization of intangible assets 61 60 60 2 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs 320 25 26 * (4 ) Interest expense, net of capitalized interest 124 117 113 6 4 Other (income)/deductions net 81 7 (9 ) * * Income before provision for taxes on income 545 820 690 (34 ) 19 % of revenue 11 % 17 % 15 % Provision for taxes on income 206 233 187 (12 ) 25 Effective tax rate 37.8 % 28.4 % 27.1 % Net income before allocation to noncontrolling interests 339 587 503 (42 ) 17 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 4 (1 ) * * Net income attributable to Zoetis $ 339 $ 583 $ 504 (42 ) 16 % of revenue 7 % 12 % 11 % * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Exclusive of amortization of intangible assets, except as disclosed in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . Revenue Total revenue by operating segment was as follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 U.S. $ 2,328 $ 2,059 $ 1,902 13 8 International 2,386 2,676 2,606 (11 ) 3 Total operating segments 4,714 4,735 4,508 5 Contract manufacturing 51 50 53 2 (6 ) Total Revenue $ 4,765 $ 4,785 $ 4,561 5 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 39 | Table of Contents On a global basis, the mix of revenue between livestock and companion animal products was as follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Livestock $ 2,958 $ 3,103 $ 2,916 (5 ) 6 Companion animal 1,756 1,632 1,592 8 3 Contract manufacturing 51 50 53 2 (6 ) Total Revenue $ 4,765 $ 4,785 $ 4,561 5 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2015 vs. 2014 Total revenue decreased by $ 20 million in 2015 , compared with 2014 . The unfavorable impact of foreign exchange decreased revenue by approximately $393 million , or 8% , driven by the depreciation of certain international currencies, particularly the euro and Brazilian real. Operational revenue grew $373 million, or 8 %, due to growth across both operating segments, comprised of 5% volume increases and 3% price increases. Operational revenue growth was primarily driven by increased revenue in the U.S. as well as Brazil, China, and the United Kingdom. Total livestock sales increased 4% operationally, driven by our cattle and swine portfolios. Growth in sales of cattle products were driven by increased sales in the U.S. and Brazil associated with favorable market conditions. Swine sales increased primarily in China and the U.S., driven by increased sales of vaccines. Total companion animal sales increased 14% operationally, driven by the addition of sales from the acquisition of certain assets of Abbott Animal Health, as well as the performance of Apoquel and other key brands. 2014 vs. 2013 Total revenue increased $ 224 million , or 5% , in 2014 compared with 2013 , with growth across both operating segments, due to higher operational revenue of $ 320 million , or 7 %, comprised of 5% volume and 2% price. Operational revenue growth was driven by increased revenue in the U.S. and good performance in emerging markets, particularly Venezuela, Brazil and China. Total livestock sales increased 9% operationally, driven by strong sales of our cattle, swine and poultry portfolios. Growth in sales of cattle products were driven by increased sales of our premium anti-infective products, while sales of swine products were tempered by the effect of PEDv. Total companion animal sales increased 4% operationally, driven by the introduction of Apoquel in the United States, the United Kingdom, and Germany, as well as strong performance in Latin American countries due to price and volume increases in high inflationary markets and the continued increase in medicalization rates. Partially offsetting the increase in operational revenue was the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $ 96 million , or 2 %, driven by the depreciation of certain international currencies, particularly the Brazilian real and Argentine peso. Costs and Expenses Cost of sales Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Cost of sales (a) $ 1,738 $ 1,717 $ 1,669 1 3 % of revenue 36 % 36 % 37 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of corporate enabling functions were $3 million in 2013. 2015 vs. 2014 Cost of sales increased $ 21 million , or 1% , in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily as a result of: an increase in sales volume of products with less favorable margins; higher global manufacturing and supply costs; charges related to our operational efficiency initiative; and charges reflecting the fair value adjustments to inventory acquired from Abbott Animal Health and Pharmaq, partially offset by: favorable foreign exchange. 2014 vs. 2013 Cost of sales increased $ 48 million , or 3% , in 2014 compared with 2013 , primarily as a result of: an increase in sales volume; incremental global manufacturing and supply spending associated with the build-up of our operations in 2013, which is now impacting our 2014 cost of sales; and an increase in inventory obsolescence, scrap and other charges, partially offset by: favorable foreign exchange. 40 | Table of Contents Selling, general and administrative expenses Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Selling, general and administrative expenses (a) $ 1,532 $ 1,643 $ 1,613 (7 ) 2 % of revenue 32 % 34 % 35 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of corporate enabling functions were $24 million in 2013. 2015 vs. 2014 SG&A expenses decreased by $ 111 million , or 7% , in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily as a result of: favorable foreign exchange; and a reduction in marketing and other spending driven by our operational efficiency initiative, partially offset by: higher costs associated with our enabling functions, including higher business technology costs; and an increase in bad debt expense. 2014 vs. 2013 SG&A expenses increased by $ 30 million , or 2% , in 2014 compared with 2013 , primarily as a result of: increased field selling and distribution expenses in certain regions due to higher sales and increased costs associated with delivering our products to customers; and additional costs due to the build-up of our supply chain and logistics organization and enabling functions and related costs post-separation from Pfizer, partially offset by: a reduction in the amount of additional costs related to becoming an independent public company, including the nonrecurrence of additional costs in 2013 due to the accelerated vesting of stock options and associated expenses related to certain Pfizer equity awards as a result of the Separation; favorable foreign exchange; and lower direct marketing spending. Research and development expenses Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Research and development expenses $ 364 $ 396 $ 399 (8 ) (1 ) % of revenue 8 % 8 % 9 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2015 vs. 2014 R&D expenses decreased by $ 32 million , or 8% , in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily as a result of: favorable foreign exchange; a reduction in spending driven by our operational efficiency initiative; and lower expenses associated with our business development activities. 2014 vs. 2013 R&D expenses decreased $ 3 million , or 1% , in 2014 compared with 2013 , primarily as a result of: the nonrecurrence of additional costs in 2013 due to the accelerated vesting of stock options and associated expenses related to certain Pfizer equity awards as a result of the Separation; savings associated with the closure of two R&D sites; and favorable foreign exchange, partially offset by: higher salary-related expenses. 41 | Table of Contents Amortization of intangible assets Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Amortization of intangible assets $ 61 $ 60 $ 60 2 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2015 vs. 2014 Amortization of intangible assets increased $1 million, or 2% , in 2015 compared with 2014 . 2014 vs. 2013 Amortization of intangible assets was flat in 2014 compared with 2013 . Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs $ 320 $ 25 $ 26 * (4 ) * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. During 2015, we launched a comprehensive operational efficiency program, which was incremental to the previously announced supply network strategy. These initiatives have focused on reducing complexity in our product portfolios, changing our selling approach in certain markets and reducing our presence in certain countries, and planning to sell or exit certain manufacturing sites over the long term. We are also continuing to optimize our resource allocation and efficiency by reducing resources associated with non-customer facing activities and operating more efficiently as a result of less internal complexity and more standardization of processes. As part of this initiative, we expect to reduce certain positions through divestitures, normal attrition and involuntary terminations by approximately 2,000 to 2,500 , subject to consultations with works councils and unions in certain countries. As of December 31, 2015, approximately 1,200 positions had been eliminated and additional reductions are expected primarily over the next nine to twelve months. Our acquisition-related costs primarily relate to restructuring charges for employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the future, as well as integration costs. The majority of these net restructuring charges are related to termination costs, but we also exited a number of distributor and other contracts and performed certain facility rationalization efforts. Our integration costs are generally comprised of consulting costs related to the integration of systems and processes, as well as product transfer costs. For additional information regarding restructuring charges and acquisition-related costs, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives . 2015 vs. 2014 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs increased by $ 295 million in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily as a result of an increase in employee termination costs and asset impairment charges as a result of our operational efficiency initiative and supply network strategy. 2014 vs. 2013 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs decreased by $ 1 million in 2014 compared with 2013 , primarily as a result of: a decrease in asset impairment charges due to the exiting of one of our manufacturing facilities in 2013; and a decrease in integration costs related to the KAH and FDAH acquisitions, partially offset by: an increase in employee termination costs primarily due to a reversal in 2013 related to a previously established termination reserve that was reversed in the second quarter of 2013 related to our operations in Europe. Interest expense, net of capitalized interest Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest $ 124 $ 117 $ 113 6 4 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2015 vs. 2014 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased by $ 7 million , or 6% , in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily due to the issuance of $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes in November 2015. 42 | Table of Contents 2014 vs. 2013 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased by $ 4 million, or 4%, in 2014 compared with 2013 , primarily related to an additional month of interest expense in 2014 associated with our senior notes which were issued on January 28, 2013. This increase was partially offset by the nonrecurrence of allocated debt and related allocated interest expense from Pfizer. Interest expense related to allocated debt was $2 million for 2013. Other (income)/deductions net Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Other (income)/deductions net $ 81 $ 7 $ (9 ) * * * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2015 vs. 2014 The change in Other (income)/deductions net reflects an unfavorable impact of $ 74 million on income attributable to Zoetis in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily as a result of: charges of $89 million related to the revaluation of the net monetary assets in Venezuela; impairment charges of $6 million related to assets held by our joint venture in Taiwan, currently classified as held for sale; and an impairment of IPR&D assets related to the impairment of a canine oncology project, partially offset by: lower charges for legal and other matters as a result of the commercial settlement of $13 million in Mexico in 2014; and lower foreign currency losses primarily as a result of the depreciation of the Argentine peso in the first quarter of 2014. 2014 vs. 2013 The change in Other (income)/deductions net reflects an unfavorable impact of $ 16 million on income attributable to Zoetis in 2014 compared with 2013 , primarily as a result of: a charge associated with a commercial settlement and recall in Mexico of $13 million, partially offset by the related insurance recovery of $1 million; higher foreign currency losses of $8 million, primarily driven by costs related to hedging and exposures to certain emerging market currencies, as well as losses related to the depreciation of the Argentine peso in the first quarter of 2014; an impairment charge related to IPR&D assets acquired with the FDAH acquisition in 2009, as a result of the termination of the development program due to a re-assessment of economic viability; and a pension plan settlement charge related to the divestiture of a manufacturing facility, partially offset by: an insurance recovery of litigation related charges. Provision for taxes on income Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Provision for taxes on income $ 206 $ 233 $ 187 (12 ) 25 Effective tax rate 37.8 % 28.4 % 27.1 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. As of the Separation date, we operate under a standalone legal entity structure and the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income has been calculated accordingly. For the periods prior to the Separation, the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income has been calculated as if Zoetis filed a separate tax return and includes tax costs and benefits, such as uncertain tax positions, repatriation decisions and audit settlements, among others. The impact of the incentive tax rulings in Belgium and Singapore continued to be a component of the 2015 effective tax rate. For additional information on the impact of the European Commission negative decision on the Belgium excess profits ruling on January 11, 2016, see Note 22. Subsequent Events On December 18, 2015, the President of the United States signed into law the Consolidated Appropriation Act of 2016 (the 2016 Act), which extended and made permanent the U.S. Research and Development Tax Credit for tax year 2015 and forward, as well as other provisions. Given the enactment date of the 2016 Act, the impact of the 2015 U.S. Research and Development Tax Credit is included in the 2015 effective tax rate. For more information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 9A. Tax Matters: Taxes on Income . 43 | Table of Contents 2015 vs. 2014 The difference in the effective tax rate in 2015 compared with 2014 is primarily due to the following components: the change in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings from (i) operations and (ii) restructuring charges related to the operational efficiency initiative and supply network strategy, as well as repatriation costs. The jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary as a result of repatriation decisions and as a result of operating fluctuations in the normal course of business, the impact of non-deductible items and the extent and location of other income and expense items, such as restructuring charges/(benefits), asset impairments and gains and losses on asset divestitures; changes in valuation allowances and resolution of other tax items; the tax expense related to changes in uncertain tax positions, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 9D. Tax Matters: Tax Contingencies ; a $9 million discrete tax benefit recorded in the first quarter of 2015 related to a revaluation of deferred taxes as a result of a change in tax rates; a $6 million discrete tax benefit recorded in the second quarter of 2015 related to prior period tax adjustments; and the tax expense related to the non-deductible revaluation of the net monetary assets in Venezuela to the SIMADI exchange rate recorded in the fourth quarter of 2015. 2014 vs. 2013 The difference in the effective tax rate in 2014 compared with 2013 is primarily due to the following components: the change in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs. The jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary as a result of repatriation decisions and as a result of operating fluctuations in the normal course of business, the impact of non-deductible items and the extent and location of other income and expense items, such as restructuring charges/(benefits), asset impairments and gains and losses on asset divestitures; changes in valuation allowances and resolution of other tax items; the tax cost related to changes in uncertain tax positions, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 9D. Tax Matters: Tax Contingencies ; and an $8 million discrete tax expense during the first quarter of 2014 related to an intercompany inventory adjustment. 44 | Table of Contents Operating Segment Results In the second quarter of 2015, we changed our segment reporting structure to reflect the way management makes operating decisions. We consolidated our prior Europe/Africa/Middle East (EuAfME), Canada/Latin America (CLAR) and Asia/Pacific (APAC) operating segments into one operating segment. As a result, the company's new segment reporting structure consists of two reportable segments: the United States and International. We also recategorized certain costs that are not allocated to our operating segments. There has been no change in our total consolidated financial condition or results of operations previously reported as a result of the change in our segment structure. The prior period presentation has been revised to reflect the new segment reporting structure. We believe that it is important to not only understand overall revenue and earnings growth, but also operational growth. Operational growth is defined as revenue or earnings growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange. On a global basis, the mix of revenue between livestock and companion animal products was as follows: % Change 15/14 14/13 Related to Related to Year Ended December 31, Foreign Foreign (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 Total Exchange Operational Total Exchange Operational U.S. Livestock $ 1,251 $ 1,163 $ 1,034 8 8 12 12 Companion animal 1,077 896 868 20 20 3 3 2,328 2,059 1,902 13 13 8 8 International Livestock 1,707 1,940 1,882 (12 ) (15 ) 3 3 (4 ) 7 Companion animal 679 736 724 (8 ) (15 ) 7 2 (3 ) 5 2,386 2,676 2,606 (11 ) (15 ) 4 3 (3 ) 6 Total Livestock 2,958 3,103 2,916 (5 ) (9 ) 4 6 (3 ) 9 Companion animal 1,756 1,632 1,592 8 (6 ) 14 3 (1 ) 4 Contract manufacturing 51 50 53 2 (9 ) 11 (6 ) (1 ) (5 ) $ 4,765 $ 4,785 $ 4,561 (8 ) 8 5 (2 ) 7 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. Earnings by segment and the operational and foreign exchange changes versus the comparable prior year period were as follows: % Change 15/14 14/13 Related to Related to Year Ended December 31, Foreign Foreign (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 Total Exchange Operational Total Exchange Operational U.S. $ 1,390 $ 1,176 $ 1,045 18 18 13 13 International 941 1,025 949 (8 ) (18 ) 10 8 (2 ) 10 Total reportable segments 2,331 2,201 1,994 6 (8 ) 14 10 (2 ) 12 Other business activities (293 ) (318 ) (317 ) (8 ) Reconciling Items: Corporate (606 ) (559 ) (555 ) 8 1 Purchase accounting adjustments (57 ) (51 ) (48 ) 12 6 Acquisition-related costs (21 ) (8 ) (22 ) * (64 ) Certain significant items (592 ) (205 ) (240 ) * (15 ) Other unallocated (217 ) (240 ) (122 ) (10 ) 97 Income before income taxes $ 545 $ 820 $ 690 (34 ) 19 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 45 | Table of Contents 2015 vs. 2014 U.S. operating segment U.S. segment revenue increased by $269 million , or 13 %, in 2015 compared with 2014 , of which approximately $ 88 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 181 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock revenue growth was driven by increased sales across the cattle, poultry, and swine portfolios. Sales of cattle products grew across multiple categories, including premium brands, as a result of favorable market conditions. Cattle sales also benefited from new product launches. Growth in sales of poultry products was driven by the re-introduction of a medicated feed additive. Sales of swine products grew due to the continued recovery in the pig population following the PEDv outbreak in the previous year. Companion animal revenue growth was driven by the addition of products acquired from Abbott Animal Health, as well as the solid performance of Apoquel . This growth was partially offset by competitive pressure in other parts of the companion animal portfolio. U.S. segment earnings increased by $ 214 million , or 18 %, in 2015 compared with 2014 , due to strong revenue growth and lower operating expenses, partially offset by unfavorable product mix. International operating segment International segment revenue decreased by $290 million , or 11% , in 2015 compared with 2014 . Segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $389 million , or 15% , primarily driven by the depreciation of the euro and the Brazilian real. Operational revenue increased $99 million , or 4% , reflecting growth of approximately $49 million in livestock products and growth of approximately $50 million in companion animal products. Livestock revenue growth was driven primarily by sales of swine products, particularly in China due to favorable market conditions. Sales of cattle products benefited from growth in Brazil and Mexico, partially offset by the impact of business reduction decisions in Venezuela. Livestock revenue in France also declined due to the anti-infective legislative changes in 2014. Companion animal revenue growth resulted from increased sales of Apoquel , the addition of products acquired from Abbott Animal Health, and the non-recurrence of a prior year inventory buyback related to the termination of a distributor agreement in Japan. International segment earnings decreased by $84 million , or 8% , in 2015 compared with 2014 . Operational earnings growth was $100 million , or 10% , primarily due to higher revenue and lower operating expenses. 2014 vs. 2013 U.S. operating segment U.S. segment revenue increased by $ 157 million , or 8 %, in 2014 compared with 2013 , of which approximately $ 129 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 28 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock revenue growth was driven by increased sales across the cattle, swine, and poultry portfolios. Strong growth in sales of cattle products was primarily due to higher demand for our premium products as a result of improved market conditions, driven by higher cattle prices and lower costs of feed, compared with 2013. Growth in swine products was due to the successful launch of new products, tempered by the impact of PEDv on the number of treatable animals. Sales of poultry products benefited from new vaccines and growth in medicated feed additives. Companion animal revenue growth was driven by the introduction of Apoquel as well as sales growth in other key brands. Results were partially offset by competitive pressures in our vaccine and pain portfolios and were tempered by competition in our parasiticides portfolio. U.S. segment earnings increased by $ 131 million , or 13 %, in 2014 compared with 2013 , due to strong revenue growth and improved gross margin due to the benefit of higher prices and favorable product mix. Segment earnings growth also benefited from limited growth in operating expenses. International operating segment International segment revenue increased $70 million , or 3% , in 2014 compared with 2013 . Operational revenue increased $166 million , or 6% , reflecting growth of approximately $134 million in livestock products and growth of approximately $32 million in companion animal products. Livestock revenue growth benefited from growth across all segments, mostly notably in cattle and swine. Sales of cattle products were driven by price increases from inflationary pressures in Venezuela, in addition to solid performance in Brazil and Canada. In swine, growth was driven by China, Brazil, and Canada. Sales of poultry products grew primarily from performance in India, as well as higher prices in Argentina. Companion animal revenue growth was driven by the introduction of Apoquel , primarily in Germany and the United Kingdom. Growth was partially offset by performance in the vaccines and parasiticides portfolio. Additionally, segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $96 million , or 3% , primarily driven by the depreciation of the Brazilian real and the Argentine peso. International segment earnings increased by $76 million , or 8% , in 2014 compared with 2013 . Operational earnings growth was $97 million , or 10% , primarily due to higher revenue and limited growth in operating expenses. 46 | Table of Contents Other business activities Other business activities includes our CSS contract manufacturing results, as well as expenses associated with our dedicated veterinary medicine R&D organization, research alliances, U.S. regulatory affairs and other operations focused on the development of our products. Other R&D-related costs associated with non-U.S. market and regulatory activities are generally included in the respective regional segment. 2015 vs. 2014 Other business activities net loss declined by $ 25 million , or 8 %, in 2015 compared with 2014 , reflecting favorable foreign exchange, a decrease in R&D spending driven by our operational efficiency initiative, and favorable results in our CSS contract manufacturing business. 2014 vs. 2013 Other business activities net loss increased by $1 million , in 2014 compared with 2013 . The increase is driven primarily by higher salary-related expenses in our veterinary medicine R&D organization, partially offset by favorable results in our CSS contract manufacturing business. Reconciling items Reconciling items include certain costs are not allocated to our operating segments results, such as costs associated with the following: Corporate, which includes costs associated with business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development, and communications, among others. These costs also include compensation costs and other miscellaneous operating expenses not charged to our operating segments, as well as interest income and expense; Certain transactions and events such as (i) Purchase accounting adjustments , which includes expenses associated with the amortization of fair value adjustments to inventory, intangible assets and property, plant and equipment; (ii) Acquisition-related activities , which includes costs for restructuring and integration; and (iii) Certain significant items , which includes non-acquisition-related restructuring charges, certain asset impairment charges, stand-up costs, certain legal and and commercial settlements, and costs associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives; and Other unallocated , which includes certain overhead expenses associated with our global manufacturing operations not charged to our operating segments. Effective January 1, 2014, Other unallocated also includes certain costs associated with business technology and finance that specifically support our global manufacturing operations, as well as procurement costs. These costs were previously reported in Corporate . Also, beginning in the first quarter of 2014, certain supply chain and global logistics costs that were previously reported in the reportable segments are reported in Other unallocated . This presentation better reflects how we measure the performance of the global manufacturing organization. 2015 vs. 2014 Corporate expenses increased by $47 million , or 8% , in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily due to an increase in certain compensation costs not charged to our operating segments, additional costs associated with the build-up of our enabling functions post-separation from Pfizer, including higher business technology costs and higher depreciation on assets recently placed in service, and higher interest expense, net of capitalized interest, associated with the additional debt issued in November 2015. These increases are partially offset by savings associated with our operational efficiency initiative, lower expenses associated with our business development activities and favorable foreign exchange. Other unallocated expenses decreased by $ 23 million , or 10% , in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily due to favorable foreign exchange, partially offset by higher global manufacturing and supply costs. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 19. Segment, Geographic and Other Revenue Information for further information. 2014 vs. 2013 Corporate expenses decreased by $4 million , or 1% , in 2014 compared with 2013 . In 2014 we had additional costs associated with the build-up of our enabling functions post-separation from Pfizer, as well as higher interest expense, net of capitalized interest, primarily related to an additional month of interest expense in 2014 associated with our senior notes which were issued on January 28, 2013. These increases were offset by a decrease in certain inventory-related costs not charged to our operating segments, a reduction in share-based payment expenses as a result of our separation from Pfizer, and a decrease in certain business technology and finance costs that were reported in Corporate in 2013, but are reported in Other unallocated beginning in the first quarter of 2014. Other unallocated expenses increased by $118 million in 2014 compared with 2013 , primarily due to a build-up of our supply chain and logistics organization. In addition, a portion of these costs were reported in the four reportable segments in 2013, but are reported in Other unallocated beginning in the first quarter of 2014. The increase is also attributable to the addition of certain business technology and finance costs that were reported in Corporate in 2013, but are reported in Other unallocated beginning in the first quarter of 2014. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 19. Segment, Geographic and Other Revenue Information for further information. 47 | Table of Contents Adjusted net income General description of adjusted net income (a non-GAAP financial measure) Adjusted net income is an alternative view of performance used by management, and we believe that investors understanding of our performance is enhanced by disclosing this performance measure. We report adjusted net income to portray the results of our major operations, the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of our products, prior to considering certain income statement elements. We have defined adjusted net income as net income attributable to Zoetis before the impact of purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs and certain significant items. The adjusted net income measure is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP reported net income attributable to Zoetis. The adjusted net income measure is an important internal measurement for us. We measure our overall performance on this basis in conjunction with other performance metrics. The following are examples of how the adjusted net income measure is utilized: senior management receives a monthly analysis of our operating results that is prepared on an adjusted net income basis; our annual budgets are prepared on an adjusted net income basis; and other goal setting and performance measurements. Despite the importance of this measure to management in goal setting and performance measurement, adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure that has no standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP and, therefore, has limits in its usefulness to investors. Because of its non-standardized definition, adjusted net income, unlike U.S. GAAP net income, may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. Adjusted net income is presented to permit investors to more fully understand how management assesses performance. We also recognize that, as an internal measure of performance, the adjusted net income measure has limitations, and we do not restrict our performance management process solely to this metric. A limitation of the adjusted net income measure is that it provides a view of our operations without including all events during a period, such as the effects of an acquisition or amortization of purchased intangibles, and does not provide a comparable view of our performance to other companies. We also use other specifically tailored tools designed to achieve the highest levels of performance. Purchase accounting adjustments Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant purchase accounting impacts that result from business combinations and net asset acquisitions. These impacts, primarily associated with the acquisition of the Pharmaq business (acquired in November 2015), certain assets of Abbott Animal Health (acquired in February 2015), KAH (acquired in 2011), FDAH (acquired in 2009) and Pharmacia Animal Health business (acquired in 2003), include amortization related to the increase in fair value of the acquired finite-lived intangible assets and depreciation related to the increase/decrease to fair value of the acquired fixed assets. Therefore, the adjusted net income measure includes the revenue earned upon the sale of the acquired products without considering the aforementioned significant charges. While certain purchase accounting adjustments can occur through 20 or more years, this presentation provides an alternative view of our performance that is used by management to internally assess business performance. We believe the elimination of amortization attributable to acquired intangible assets provides management and investors an alternative view of our business results by providing a degree of parity to internally developed intangible assets for which R&D costs previously have been expensed. A completely accurate comparison of internally developed intangible assets and acquired intangible assets cannot be achieved through adjusted net income. These components of adjusted net income are derived solely from the impact of the items listed above. We have not factored in the impact of any other differences in experience that might have occurred if we had discovered and developed those intangible assets on our own, and this approach does not intend to be representative of the results that would have occurred in those circumstances. For example, our R&D costs in total, and in the periods presented, may have been different; our speed to commercialization and resulting revenue, if any, may have been different; or our costs to manufacture may have been different. In addition, our marketing efforts may have been received differently by our customers. As such, in total, there can be no assurance that our adjusted net income amounts would have been the same as presented had we discovered and developed the acquired intangible assets. Acquisition-related costs Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering transaction, integration and restructuring costs associated with significant business combinations or net-asset acquisitions because these costs are unique to each transaction and represent costs that were incurred to restructure and integrate certain businesses as a result of the acquisition decision. We have made no adjustments for the resulting synergies. We believe that viewing income prior to considering these charges provides investors with a useful additional perspective because the significant costs incurred in a business combination result primarily from the need to eliminate duplicate assets, activities or employees a natural result of acquiring a fully integrated set of activities. For this reason, we believe that the costs incurred to convert disparate systems, to close duplicative facilities or to eliminate duplicate positions (for example, in the context of a business combination) can be viewed differently from those costs incurred in the ordinary course of business. The integration and restructuring costs associated with a business combination may occur over several years, with the more significant impacts ending within three years of the transaction. Because of the need for certain external approvals for some actions, the span of time needed to achieve certain restructuring and integration activities can be lengthy. For example, due to the regulated nature of the animal health medicines and vaccines business, the closure of excess facilities can take several years, as all manufacturing changes are subject to extensive validation and testing and must be approved by the FDA and/or other regulatory authorities. 48 | Table of Contents Certain significant items Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant items. Certain significant items represent substantive, unusual items that are evaluated on an individual basis. Such evaluation considers both the quantitative and the qualitative aspect of their unusual nature. Unusual, in this context, may represent items that are not part of our ongoing business; items that, either as a result of their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis; items that would be nonrecurring; or items that relate to products that we no longer sell. While not all-inclusive, examples of items that could be included as certain significant items would be costs related to becoming an independent public company, a major non-acquisition-related restructuring charge and associated implementation costs for a program that is specific in nature with a defined term, such as those related to our non-acquisition-related cost-reduction and productivity initiatives; amounts related to disposals of products or facilities that do not qualify as discontinued operations as defined by U.S. GAAP; certain intangible asset impairments; adjustments related to the resolution of certain tax positions; significant currency devaluation; the impact of adopting certain significant, event-driven tax legislation; or charges related to legal matters. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 18. Commitments and Contingencies . Our normal, ongoing defense costs or settlements of and accruals on legal matters made in the normal course of our business would not be considered certain significant items. Reconciliation A reconciliation of net income attributable to Zoetis, as reported under U.S. GAAP, to adjusted net income follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 GAAP Reported net income attributable to Zoetis $ 339 $ 583 $ 504 (42 ) 16 Purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 39 34 32 15 6 Acquisition-related costs net of tax 22 5 14 * (64 ) Certain significant items net of tax 489 168 159 * 6 Non-GAAP adjusted net income (a)(b) $ 889 $ 790 $ 709 13 11 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) The effective tax rate on adjusted pretax income is 26.8% , 26.8% and 29.2% for full year 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The change in the effective tax rate in 2015 compared to 2014 is primarily due to changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs, changes in valuation allowances and resolution of other tax items. The lower effective tax rate in 2014 compared to 2013 is primarily due to changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs, changes in valuation allowances and resolution of other tax items. In addition, we recognized an $8 million discrete tax expense during the first quarter of 2014 related to an intercompany inventory adjustment. (b) The impact of the incentive tax rulings in Belgium and in Singapore continued to be a component of the 2015 effective tax rate, as well as the 2015 U.S. Research and Development Tax Credit which was permanently extended on December 18, 2015. For additional information on the impact of the European Commission negative decision on the Belgium excess profits ruling on January 11, 2016, see Note 22. Subsequent Events . The following table provides a reconciliation of reported diluted earnings per share (EPS), as reported under U.S. GAAP, and non-GAAP adjusted diluted EPS: Year Ended December 31, % Change 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Earnings per share diluted (a)(b) : GAAP Reported net income attributable to Zoetis $ 0.68 $ 1.16 $ 1.01 (41 ) 15 Purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 0.08 0.07 0.06 14 17 Acquisition-related costs net of tax 0.04 0.01 0.03 * (67 ) Certain significant items net of tax 0.97 0.33 0.32 * 3 Non-GAAP adjusted net income $ 1.77 $ 1.57 $ 1.42 13 11 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Diluted earnings per share was computed using the weighted-average common shares outstanding during the period plus the common stock equivalents related to stock options, RSUs, DSUs and PSUs. (b) EPS amounts may not add due to rounding. Adjusted net income includes the following charges for each of the periods presented: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest $ 124 $ 117 $ 113 Interest income 6 6 3 Taxes 326 290 292 Depreciation 124 131 138 Amortization 16 17 17 49 | Table of Contents Adjusted net income, as shown above, excludes the following items: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 Purchase accounting adjustments: Amortization and depreciation (a) $ 48 $ 47 $ 46 Cost of sales (b) 9 4 2 Total purchase accounting adjustments pretax 57 51 48 Income taxes (c) 18 17 16 Total purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 39 34 32 Acquisition-related costs: Integration costs (d) 10 8 22 Transaction costs (d) 9 Other (e) 2 Total acquisition-related costs pretax 21 8 22 Income taxes (c) (1 ) 3 8 Total acquisition-related costs net of tax 22 5 14 Certain significant items: Operational efficiency initiative (f) 346 Supply network strategy (g) 27 Other restructuring charges (benefits) and cost-reduction/productivity initiatives (h) 18 (12 ) Certain asset impairment charges (i) 5 6 20 Net gains on sale of assets (j) (5 ) (6 ) Stand-up costs (k) 118 168 206 Foreign currency loss related to Venezuela revaluation (l) 93 Inventory and intercompany account write-offs (m) 24 Other (n) 3 18 8 Total certain significant items pretax 592 205 240 Income taxes (c) 103 37 81 Total certain significant items net of tax 489 168 159 Total purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs, and certain significant items net of tax $ 550 $ 207 $ 205 Certain amounts may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Amortization and depreciation expense related to purchase accounting adjustments with respect to identifiable intangible assets and property, plant and equipment were distributed as follows in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively: $46 million, $45 million, and $46 million included in Amortization of intangible assets; $0 million, $0 million, and $1 million income included in Selling, general and administrative expenses; and $2 million, $2 million, and $1 million included in Research and development expenses. (b) Amortization and depreciation expense, as well as fair value adjustments to acquired inventory, included in Cost of sales. (c) Included in Provision for taxes on income . Income taxes include the tax effect of the associated pre-tax amounts, calculated by determining the jurisdictional location of the pre-tax amounts and applying that jurisdiction's applicable tax rate. Income taxes in Purchase accounting adjustments for 2015, includes a tax benefit related to the revaluation of deferred taxes as a result of a change in tax rates. Income taxes in Acquisition-related costs for 2015, includes a tax charge related to the acquisition of certain assets of Abbott Animal Health. Income taxes in Certain significant items for 2015, includes a net tax benefit related to the revaluation of deferred taxes and other deferred tax adjustments. (d) Included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives for more information. (e) Included in Other (income)/deductions net . (f) Represents restructuring charges of $291 million related to employee termination costs ($253 million) and asset impairments ($38 million), included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs, inventory write-offs of $13 million, included in Cost of sales , accelerated depreciation of $2 million, included in Research and development expenses , and $40 million primarily related to consulting fees, included in Selling, general and administrative expenses . (g) Represents restructuring charges of $10 million related to employee termination costs ($9 million) and asset impairments ($1 million), included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs , accelerated depreciation of $1 million, included in Cost of sales , and $16 million primarily related to consulting fees, included in Cost of sales . (h) Represents charges incurred for restructuring and cost-reduction/productivity initiatives. In 2014, primarily represents employee termination costs in Europe and our global manufacturing operations. In 2013, primarily represents a $27 million decrease in employee termination costs related to the reversal of a previously established termination reserve related to our operation in Europe, partially offset by accelerated depreciation related to the exiting of certain leased manufacturing and research facilities. Included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs . See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives for more information. (i) In 2015, represents impairment charges related to assets held by our joint venture in Taiwan, currently classified as held for sale, and an impairment of IPR&D assets related to the termination of a canine oncology project. In 2014, amounts primarily represent an impairment charge related to an IPR&D project acquired with the FDAH acquisition in 2009 and were included in Other (income)/deductions net . In 2013, amounts primarily relate to restructuring initiatives in 2013 and 50 | Table of Contents were included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs . See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 7. Other (Income)/Deductions Net for more information . (j) In 2014, primarily represents the Zoetis portion of a net gain on the sale of land by our Taiwan joint venture and the net gain on the government-mandated sale of certain product rights in Argentina that were acquired with the FDAH acquisition in 2009. In 2013, represents the net gain on the government-mandated sale of certain product rights in Brazil in 2013 that were acquired with the FDAH acquisition in 2009. Included in Other (income)/deductions net . See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 7. Other (Income)/Deductions Net for more information. (k) Certain non-recurring costs related to becoming an independent public company, such as new branding (including changes to the manufacturing process for required new packaging), the creation of standalone systems and infrastructure, site separation, accelerated vesting and associated cash payment related to certain Pfizer equity awards, and certain legal registration and patent assignment costs which were distributed as follows in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively: $27 million, $32 million and $21 million included in Cost of sales ; $90 million, $131 million and $177 million included in Selling, general and administrative expenses , $0 million, $0 million and $7 million included in Research and development expenses, and $1 million, $5 million and $1 million included in Other (income)/deductions net. (l) For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 8. Foreign Currency Losses Related to Venezuela Revaluation . (m) Amounts relate to write-offs of inventory and intercompany accounts that were transferred to us as part of the Separation from Pfizer and were distributed as follows: $19 million included in Cost of sales and $5 million included in Selling, general and administrative expenses . Because these expenses relate primarily to the periods prior to our initial public offering, we do not consider them to be reflective of our current operations and we have therefore, excluded them from our Adjusted earnings non-GAAP measure. Although fully written off in the current period, all of the adjustments relate back several years. (n) For 2015, represents charges due to unusual investor-related activities. For 2014, primarily includes a charge associated with a commercial settlement in Mexico ($13 million), partially offset by the insurance recovery ($1 million income), charges due to unusual investor-related activities ($5 million), a pension plan settlement charge related to the divestiture of a manufacturing plant ($4 million), and an insurance recovery of other litigation related charge ($2 million income). For 2013, primarily includes litigation-related charges ($5 million) and charges related to transitional manufacturing purchase agreements associated with divestitures ($1 million). Analysis of the consolidated statements of comprehensive income Substantially all changes in other comprehensive income for the periods presented are related to foreign currency translation adjustments. These changes result from the strengthening or weakening of the U.S. dollar as compared to the currencies in the countries in which we do business. The gains and losses associated with these changes are deferred on the balance sheet in Accumulated other comprehensive loss until realized. Analysis of the consolidated balance sheets December 31, 2015 vs. December 31, 2014 For a discussion about the changes in Cash and cash equivalents , Short-term borrowing, including Current portion of long term debt , and Long-term debt , see "Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources" below. Accounts receivable, less allowance for doubtful accounts decreased primarily as a result of the impact of foreign exchange, partially offset by the timing of customer collections and the accounts receivable balances associated with the acquisition of Pharmaq. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Acquisition of Pharmaq. Inventories increased primarily to support certain production transfers and production phasing, increased commercial demand of selected key products, and higher inventory levels as a result of the acquisitions of certain assets from Abbott Animal Health and Pharmaq. These increases were partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange and a reclassification of certain inventories to Assets held for sale . See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments and Note 10. Inventories for additional information . The changes in Current deferred tax assets , Noncurrent deferred tax assets , Noncurrent deferred tax liabilities and Other taxes payable primarily reflect adjustments to the accrual for the income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2015, as well as the 2015 adoption of a new accounting standard requiring all deferred tax assets and liabilities be classified as noncurrent. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies: New Accounting Standards and Note 9. Tax Matters. Assets held for sale primarily reflects the reclassification of certain cash, inventory, goodwill, intangible assets and property, plant and equipment, less accumulated depreciation associated with pending divestitures. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5B. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Divestitures . Property, plant and equipment, less accumulated depreciation decreased primarily as a result of depreciation expense, the impact of foreign exchange, asset impairments and a reclassification of certain assets to Assets held for sale . These decreases were partially offset by capital spending. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5B. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Divestitures . Goodwill increased primarily as a result of the acquisitions of Pharmaq and of certain assets from Abbott Animal Health. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Acquisition of Pharmaq and Acquisition of Abbott Animal Health and Note 13. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. Identifiable intangible assets, less accumulated amortization increased primarily as a result the acquisitions of Pharmaq and of certain assets from Abbott Animal Health. These increases were partially offset by amortization expense, the impact of foreign exchange, intangible asset impairments primarily associated with our operational efficiency initiative and a reclassification of certain intangible assets to Assets held for sale . See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Acquisition of Pharmaq and Acquisition of Abbott Animal Health and Note 13. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. Accounts payable increased as a result of the timing of payments, partially offset by impact of foreign exchange. Dividends payable increased due to the increase in the dividend rate, which was declared on December 16, 2015. 51 | Table of Contents Accrued expenses and Other current liabilities increased primarily as a result of the 2015 accrual of employee termination costs associated with our operational efficiency initiative and supply network strategy, as well as the recognition of the contingent purchase price consideration to be paid to Abbott. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments: Acquisition of Abbott Animal Health and Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives. Long-term debt, net of discount and issuance costs reflects the senior notes issued in November 2015 and the senior notes offering in January 2013. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 2C. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer: Senior Notes Offering and Note 10A. Financial Instruments: Debt. Other non-current liabilities increased primarily as a result of the 2015 accrual of employee termination costs associated with our operational efficiency initiative and supply network strategy. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives. For an analysis of the changes in Total Equity , see the Consolidated Statements of Equity. Analysis of the consolidated statements of cash flows Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 2013 15/14 14/13 Cash provided by/(used in): Operating activities $ 664 $ 626 $ 681 6 (8 ) Investing activities (1,115 ) (187 ) (179 ) * 4 Financing activities 755 (154 ) (200 ) * (23 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (32 ) (13 ) (9 ) * 44 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents $ 272 $ 272 $ 293 (7 ) * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. Operating activities 2015 vs. 2014 Net cash provided by operating activities was $ 664 million in 2015 compared with $ 626 million in 2014 . The increase in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business. This increase was partially offset by lower income before allocation to noncontrolling interests, as adjusted for depreciation and amortization, as well as higher inventory levels and employee termination payments related to our operational efficiency initiative and supply network strategy. 2014 vs. 2013 Net cash provided by operating activities was $ 626 million in 2014 compared with $ 681 million in 2013 . The decrease in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business, the settlement of payables with Pfizer, and a decrease in other liabilities. This decrease was partially offset by higher income before allocation to noncontrolling interests, as adjusted for depreciation and amortization. Investing activities 2015 vs. 2014 Net cash used in investing activities was $ 1,115 million in 2015 compared with $ 187 million in 2014 . The increase in investing cash flows was primarily attributable to the acquisitions of Pharmaq and of certain assets of Abbott Animal Health. 2014 vs. 2013 Net cash used in investing activities was $ 187 million in 2014 compared with $ 179 million in 2013 . The increase in investing cash flows was primarily due to a 2014 milestone payment related to previously acquired intangible assets. Financing activities 2015 vs. 2014 Net cash provided by financing activities was $ 755 million in 2015 compared with $ 154 million in 2014 . The net cash provided by financing activities for 2015 was primarily attributable to proceeds received from the November 2015 issuance of senior notes, partially offset by the purchase of treasury shares and the payment of dividends. The net cash used in financing activities for 2014 was primarily attributable to the payment of dividends. 2014 vs. 2013 Net cash used in financing activities was $ 154 million in 2014 compared with $ 200 million in 2013 . The net cash used in financing activities for 2014 was due primarily to the payment of dividends. The net cash used in financing activities for 2013 was primarily attributable to the net transfers to Pfizer as a result of the Separation. 52 | Table of Contents Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources While we believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand, our operating cash flows and our existing financing arrangements will be sufficient to support our future cash needs, this may be subject to the environment in which we operate. Risks to our meeting future funding requirements include global economic conditions described in the following paragraph. As global financial markets continue their slow and sometimes uneven recovery from the 2008/2009 recession, additional macroeconomic, business and financial volatility may persist. As markets change, we will continue to monitor our liquidity position, but there can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or an economic downturn will not impact our liquidity or our ability to obtain future financing. Selected measures of liquidity and capital resources Certain relevant measures of our liquidity and capital resources follow: December 31, December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2015 2014 Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,154 $ 882 Accounts receivable, net (a) 937 980 Short-term borrowings 5 7 Long-term debt 4,463 3,624 Working capital 2,049 2,379 Ratio of current assets to current liabilities 2.15:1 3.19:1 (a) Accounts receivable are usually collected over a period of 60 to 90 days . For the year ended December 31, 2015 , compared to the year ended December 31, 2014, the number of days that accounts receivables are outstanding remained approximately the same. We regularly monitor our accounts receivable for collectability, particularly in markets where economic conditions remain uncertain. We believe that our allowance for doubtful accounts is appropriate. Our assessment is based on such factors as past due aging, historical and expected collection patterns, the financial condition of our customers, the robust nature of our credit and collection practices and the economic environment. For additional information about the sources and uses of our funds, see the Analysis of the consolidated balance sheets and Analysis of the consolidated statements of cash flows sections of this MD&A. Credit facility and other lines of credit In December 2012, we entered into a revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of banks providing for a five-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility, which became effective in February 2013 upon the completion of the IPO and which expires in December 2017. Subject to certain conditions, we have the right to increase the credit facility to up to $1.5 billion . The credit facility originally contained a financial covenant requiring us to not exceed a maximum total leverage ratio (the ratio of consolidated net debt as of the end of the period to consolidated Earnings Before Interest, Income Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA) for such period) of 4.35:1 for fiscal year 2013, 3.95:1 for fiscal year 2014, 3.50:1 for fiscal year 2015 and 3.00:1 thereafter. On November 2, 2015, we amended this financial covenant to increase the maximum total leverage ratio for fiscal 2016 and thereafter from 3.00:1 to 3.50:1, and, only upon entering into a material acquisition, to 4.25:1. The amended ratio relating to entering into a material acquisition extends until the fourth full consecutive fiscal quarter ended immediately following the consummation of a material acquisition. On November 10, 2015, we designated the acquisition of Pharmaq a material acquisition under the revolving credit agreement. For additional information see Note 5. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments . The credit facility also contains a financial covenant requiring that we maintain a minimum interest coverage ratio (the ratio of EBITDA at the end of the period to interest expense for such period) of 3.50:1 . In addition, the credit facility contains other customary covenants. We were in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 31, 2015 . There were no borrowings outstanding as of both December 31, 2015 , and 2014. We have additional lines of credit and other credit arrangements with a group of banks and other financial intermediaries for general corporate purposes. We maintain cash and cash equivalent balances in excess of our outstanding short-term borrowings. As of December 31, 2015 , we had access to $79 million of lines of credit which expire at various times through 2016. As of December 31, 2015 , we had $4 million of borrowings outstanding related to these facilities, all of which were short-term. As of December 31, 2014 , we had $7 million of short-term borrowings outstanding and $ 3 million of long-term borrowings outstanding related to these facilities. Domestic and international short-term funds Many of our operations are conducted outside the United States. The amount of funds held in the United States will fluctuate due to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business and due to other reasons, such as business development activities. As part of our ongoing liquidity assessments, we regularly monitor the mix of U.S. and international cash flows (both inflows and outflows). Repatriation of overseas funds can result in additional United States, federal, state and local income tax payments. We record U.S. deferred tax liabilities for certain unremitted earnings, but when amounts earned overseas are expected to be indefinitely reinvested outside the United States, no accrual for U.S. taxes is provided. Global economic conditions The challenging economic environment has not had, nor do we anticipate that it will have, a significant impact on our liquidity. Due to our operating cash flows, financial assets, access to capital markets and available lines of credit and revolving credit agreements, we continue to believe that we have the ability to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. As markets change, we continue to monitor our liquidity position. There can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or a further economic downturn would not impact our ability to obtain financing in the future. 53 | Table of Contents Contractual obligations Payments due under contractual obligations as of December 31, 2015, are set forth below: 2017- 2019- There- (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) Total 2016 2018 2020 after Long-term debt, including current portion and interest obligations (a) $ 7,121 $ 563 $ 1,063 $ 796 $ 4,699 Other long-term liabilities reflected on our consolidated balance sheets under U.S. GAAP (b) 117 68 19 7 23 Operating lease commitments 149 27 45 24 53 Purchase obligations and other (c) 76 36 27 8 5 Benefit plans - continuing service credit obligations (d) 26 4 8 8 6 Uncertain tax positions (e) Certain amounts may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Long-term debt consists of senior notes and other notes. Our calculations of expected interest payments incorporate only current period assumptions for interest rates, foreign currency translation rates and Zoetis hedging strategies. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 10A. Financial Instruments: Debt . (b) Includes expected payments to Pfizer related to the transfer of certain product registration and application rights associated with our operations in Indonesia, expected payment to Abbott related to the acquisition of certain assets of Abbott Animal Health, expected employee termination payments that represent contractual obligations, expected payments related to our unfunded U.S. supplemental (non-qualified) savings plans, deferred compensation and expected payments relating to our future benefit payments net of plan assets (included in the determination of the projected benefit obligation) for pension plans that are dedicated to Zoetis employees and those transferred to us from Pfizer. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments, Note 6 . Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 14. Benefit Plans. Excludes approximately $134 million of noncurrent liabilities related to legal and environmental accruals, certain employee termination and exit costs, deferred income and other accruals, most of which do not represent contractual obligations. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 6 . Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 18 . Commitments and Contingencies . (c) Includes agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable and legally binding and includes amounts relating to advertising, information technology services, employee benefit administration services and potential milestone payments deemed reasonably likely to occur. (d) Includes the cost of service credit continuation for certain Zoetis employees in the Pfizer U.S. qualified defined benefit pension and U.S. retiree medical plans, in accordance with the employee matters agreement. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 14. Benefit Plans. (e) Except for amounts reflected in Income taxes payable , we are unable to predict the timing of tax settlements, as tax audits can involve complex issues and the resolution of those issues may span multiple years, particularly if subject to negotiation or litigation. The table above excludes amounts for potential milestone payments unless the payments are deemed reasonably likely to occur. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and/or commercialization milestones, which may span several years and/or which may never occur. Our contractual obligations in the table above are not necessarily indicative of our contractual obligations in the future. Debt On November 13, 2015, we issued $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes (2015 senior notes), with an original issue discount of $2 million. These notes are comprised of $500 million aggregate principal amount of 3.450% senior notes due 2020 and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 4.500% senior notes due 2025. Net proceeds from this offering were used to repay amounts drawn under the revolving credit facility, which were borrowed to fund the purchase price for the acquisition of Pharmaq (see Note 5. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments ). In addition, net proceeds from this offering will be used to repay the principal when due of $400 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.150% senior notes due 2016, and for general corporate purposes. On January 28, 2013, we issued $3.65 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes in a private placement, with an original issue discount of $10 million . The senior notes are comprised of $400 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.150% senior notes due 2016, $750 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.875% senior notes due 2018, $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our 3.250% senior notes due 2023 and $1.15 billion aggregate principal amount of our 4.700% senior notes due 2043. We sold $2.65 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes through the initial purchasers in the senior notes offering and Pfizer transferred $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes to certain of the initial purchasers, who sold such senior notes through the initial purchasers in the senior notes offering. We paid an amount of cash equal to substantially all of the net proceeds that we received in the senior notes offering to Pfizer prior to the completion of the IPO. The senior notes are governed by an indenture and supplemental indenture (collectively, the indenture) between us and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee. The indenture contains certain covenants, including limitations on our and certain of our subsidiaries' ability to incur liens or engage in sale leaseback transactions. The indenture also contains restrictions on our ability to consolidate, merge or sell substantially all of our assets. In addition, the indenture contains other customary terms, including certain events of default, upon the occurrence of which the senior notes may be declared immediately due and payable. Pursuant to the indenture, we are able to redeem the senior notes of any series, in whole or in part, at any time by paying a make whole premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption. Pursuant to our tax matters agreement with Pfizer, we will not be permitted to redeem the 2023 notes pursuant to this optional redemption provision, except under limited circumstances. Upon the occurrence of a change of control of us and a downgrade of the senior notes below an investment grade rating by each of Moody's Investors Service, Inc. and Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, we are, in certain circumstances, required to make an offer to repurchase all of the outstanding senior notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes together with accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of repurchase. In connection with the senior notes offering, we entered into a registration rights agreement (the Registration Rights Agreement) with the representatives of the initial purchasers of the senior notes. Pursuant to the terms of the Registration Rights Agreement, we were obligated, among 54 | Table of Contents other things, to use our commercially reasonable efforts to file a registration statement with the SEC enabling holders of the senior notes to exchange the privately placed notes for publicly registered notes with substantially the same terms. We filed the registration statement with the SEC on September 13, 2013, the SEC declared the registration statement effective on September 24, 2013, and the exchange offer was completed on October 31, 2013. The components of our long-term debt as of the year ended December 31, 2015, follow: Description Principal Amount Interest Rate Terms 2016 Senior Note $400 million 1.150% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2016 (a) 2018 Senior Note $750 million 1.875% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2018 2020 Senior Note $500 million 3.450% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on November 13, 2020 2023 Senior Note $1,350 million 3.250% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2023 2025 Senior Note $750 million 4.500% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on November 13, 2025 2043 Senior Note $1,150 million 4.700% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2043 (a) Aggregate principal amount repaid in February 2016. Credit ratings Two major corporate debt-rating organizations, Moody's and S&P, assign ratings to our short-term and long-term debt. A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and the rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. The following table provides the current ratings assigned by these rating agencies to our commercial paper and senior unsecured non-credit-enhanced long-term debt: Commercial Paper Long-term Debt Date of Name of Rating Agency Rating Rating Outlook Last Action Moody P-2 Baa2 Stable November 2015 S&P A-3 BBB- Stable November 2015 Pension obligations Effective December 31, 2012, our employees ceased to participate in the Pfizer U.S. qualified defined benefit and U.S. retiree medical plans, and liabilities associated with our employees under these plans were retained by Pfizer. As part of the Separation, Pfizer is continuing to credit certain employees' service with Zoetis generally through December 31, 2017 (or termination of employment from Zoetis, if earlier), for certain early retirement benefits with respect to Pfizer's U.S. defined benefit pension and retiree medical plans. In connection with the employee matters agreement, Zoetis will be responsible for payment of three-fifths of the total cost of the service credit continuation (approximately $38 million ) for these plans. The amount of the service cost continuation payment to be paid by Zoetis to Pfizer was determined and fixed based on an actuarial assessment of the value of the grow-in benefits and will be paid in equal installments over a period of 10 years. As of December 31, 2015, the remaining payments due to Pfizer (approximately $26 million in the aggregate) are to be paid over the next 7 years. As part of the Separation, Pfizer transferred to us the net pension obligations associated with certain international defined benefit plans. We expect to contribute a total of approximately $8 million to these plans in 2016. In 2013, Pfizer transferred to us the U.S. supplemental savings plan liability of approximately $14 million , cash of $9 million and a deferred tax asset of $5 million associated with employees transferred to us as part of the Separation. As of December 31, 2015, the supplemental savings plan liability was approximately $21 million. For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 14. Benefit Plans. Share repurchase program In November 2014, the company's Board of Directors authorized a $500 million share repurchase program. Purchases of Zoetis shares may be made at the discretion of management, depending on market conditions and business needs. There were no share repurchases under this program during the year ended December 31, 2014. During 2015, approximately 4 million shares were repurchased. As of December 31, 2015, there was approximately $301 million remaining under this authorization. Off-balance sheet arrangements In the ordinary course of business and in connection with the sale of assets and businesses, we may indemnify our counterparties against certain liabilities that may arise in connection with a transaction or that are related to activities prior to a transaction. These indemnifications typically pertain to environmental, tax, employee and/or product-related matters, and patent-infringement claims. If the indemnified party were to make a successful claim pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, we would be required to reimburse the loss. These indemnifications are generally subject to threshold amounts, specified claim periods and other restrictions and limitations. Historically, we have not paid significant amounts under these provisions and, as of December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, recorded amounts for the estimated fair value of these indemnifications are not significant. 55 | Table of Contents New accounting standards For discussion of our new accounting standards, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies New Accounting Standards . Recently Issued Accounting Standards, not Adopted as of December 31, 2015 In July 2015, the FASB issued an accounting standards update to simplify the measurement of inventory by requiring that inventory be measured at the lower of cost or net realizable value, rather than at the lower of cost or market, with market being defined as either replacement cost, net realizable value or net realizable value less a normal profit margin. The provisions of the new standard are effective beginning January 1, 2017, for annual and interim reporting periods. The guidance will be adopted prospectively and early adoption is permitted. We plan to adopt this guidance as of January 1, 2017, the required effective date, and do not expect this guidance to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. In February 2015, the FASB issued an accounting standards update that provides revised guidance on whether to consolidate certain legal entities, such as limited partnerships, limited liability corporations and securitization structures. We plan to adopt this guidance as of January 1, 2016, the required effective date, and do not expect this guidance to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. In May 2014, the FASB issued an accounting standards update that outlines a new, single comprehensive model for companies to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers. This update supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance under U.S. GAAP. The core principle of the new guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The guidance includes a five-step model for determining how, when and how much revenue should be recognized. This update also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. In July 2015, the FASB issued a one year deferral of the effective date. The provisions of the new standard are now effective for Zoetis beginning January 1, 2018, for annual and interim reporting periods. Early adoption is permitted beginning on January 1, 2017. The new standard allows for either full retrospective or modified retrospective transition upon adoption. We continue to assess the transition method we will elect for adoption as well as the potential impact that adopting this new guidance will have on our consolidated financial statements. Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results This report contains forward-looking statements. We generally identify forward-looking statements by using words such as anticipate, estimate, could, expect, intend, project, plan, predict, believe, seek, continue, outlook, may, might, will, should, can have, likely or the negative version of these words or comparable words or by using future dates in connection with any discussion of future performance, actions or events. In particular, forward-looking statements include statements relating to our indebtedness, our ability to make interest and principal payments on our indebtedness, our ability to satisfy the covenants contained in our indebtedness, the redemption of the notes, new systems infrastructure stand-up, our 2016 financial guidance, future actions, business plans or prospects, prospective products, product approvals or products under development, product supply disruptions, R&D costs, timing and likelihood of success, future operating or financial performance, future results of current and anticipated products and services, strategies, sales efforts, expenses, production efficiencies, production margins, interest rates, tax rates, changes in tax regimes and laws, foreign exchange rates, growth in emerging markets, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, plans related to share repurchases and dividends, our agreements with Pfizer, the expected timing and content of regulatory actions, government regulation and financial results. These statements are not guarantees of future performance, actions or events. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and are potentially inaccurate assumptions. Among the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from past results and future plans and projected future results are the following: emerging restrictions and bans on the use of antibacterials in food-producing animals; perceived adverse effects on human health linked to the consumption of food derived from animals that utilize our products; increased regulation or decreased governmental support relating to the raising, processing or consumption of food-producing animals; fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and potential currency controls; changes in tax laws, regulations, and challenges brought against our incentive tax rulings; legal factors, including product liability claims, antitrust litigation and governmental investigations, including tax disputes, environmental concerns, commercial disputes and patent disputes with branded and generic competitors, any of which could preclude commercialization of products or negatively affect the profitability of existing products; failure to protect our intellectual property rights or to operate our business without infringing the intellectual property rights of others; an outbreak of infectious disease carried by animals; adverse weather conditions and the availability of natural resources; adverse global economic conditions; failure of our R&D, acquisition and licensing efforts to generate new products; the possible impact of competing products, including generic alternatives, on our products and our ability to compete against such products; quarterly fluctuations in demand and costs; 56 | Table of Contents governmental laws and regulations affecting domestic and foreign operations, including without limitation, tax obligations and changes affecting the tax treatment by the United States of income earned outside the United States that may result from pending and possible future proposals; and governmental laws and regulations affecting our interactions with veterinary healthcare providers. However, there may also be other risks that we are unable to predict at this time. These risks or uncertainties may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by a forward-looking statement. You should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law or by the rules and regulations of the SEC. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Form 10-Q and 8-K reports and our other filings with the SEC. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. Consequently, you should not consider the above to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties. 
