CIK: 1555280
Company Name: ZOETIS INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2014-03-26


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Introduction Our management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (MD&A) is provided to assist readers in understanding our performance, as reflected in the results of our operations, our financial condition and our cash flows. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our consolidated and combined financial statements and notes to consolidated and combined financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data . The discussion in this MD&A contains a description of our historical performance for periods in which we operated as a business unit of Pfizer, as well as forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. Our future results could differ materially from historical performance and from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors such as those discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors , and in the Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results and Comparability of historical results and our relationship with Pfizer sections of this MD&A. This MD&A is organized as follows: Section Description Page Overview of our business A general description of our business and the industry in which we operate. For more information regarding our business and the animal health industry, see Item 1. Business. 31 Our operating environment Information regarding the animal health industry and factors that affect our company. 32 Our growth strategies An explanation of our growth strategies. 34 Components of revenue and costs and expenses An explanation of the components of our consolidated and combined statements of income. 35 Comparability of historical results and our relationship with Pfizer Information about the limitations of the predictive value of the consolidated and combined financial statements. 35 Significant accounting policies and application of critical accounting estimates Accounting policies and estimates that we consider important to understanding our consolidated and combined financial statements. 37 Analysis of the consolidated and combined statements of income Consists of the following for all periods presented: Revenue : An analysis of our revenue in total, by operating segment and by species. 40 Costs and expenses : A discussion about the drivers of our costs and expenses. 41 Operating segment results : A discussion of our revenue by operating segment and species and items impacting our earnings before income tax. 46 Adjusted net income A discussion of adjusted net income, an alternative view of performance used by management. Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure. 50 Our financial guidance for 2014 A discussion of our 2014 financial guidance. 54 Analysis of the consolidated and combined statements of comprehensive income An analysis of the components of comprehensive income for all periods presented. 54 Analysis of the consolidated and combined balance sheets A discussion of changes in certain balance sheet accounts for all balance sheets presented. 55 Analysis of the consolidated and combined statements of cash flows An analysis of the drivers of our operating, investing and financing cash flows for all periods presented. 55 Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources An analysis of our ability to meet our short-term and long-term financing needs. 56 New accounting standards Accounting standards that we have recently adopted. 59 Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results A description of the risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those discussed in forward-looking statements presented in this MD&A and elsewhere in this 2013 Annual Report. 60 Overview of our business We are a global leader in the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of animal health medicines and vaccines, with a focus on both livestock and companion animals. For more than 60 years, as a business unit of Pfizer Inc. (Pfizer) and now as an independent public company, we have been committed to enhancing the health of animals and bringing solutions to our customers who raise and care for them. The animal health medicines and vaccines industry is characterized by meaningful differences in customer needs across different regions. As a result of these differences, among other things, we manage our operations through four geographic operating segments. Within each of these operating segments, we offer a diversified product portfolio for both livestock and companion animal customers in order to capitalize on local and regional trends and customer needs. Our four operating segments are the United States (U.S.), Europe/Africa/Middle East (EuAfME), 31 | Table of Contents Canada/Latin America (CLAR) and Asia/Pacific (APAC). See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 18. Segment, Geographic and Other Revenue Information . We directly market our products to livestock producers and veterinarians located in approximately 70 countries across North America, Europe, Africa, Asia, Australia and South America, and are a market leader in nearly all of the major regions in which we operate. Through our efforts to establish an early and direct presence in many emerging markets, such as Brazil, China and India, we believe we are the largest animal health medicines and vaccines business as measured by revenue across emerging markets as a whole. Emerging markets contributed 26% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2013. In markets where we do not have a direct commercial presence, we generally contract with distributors that provide logistics and sales and marketing support for our products. We believe our investments in the industry largest sales organization, including our extensive network of technical and veterinary operations specialists, our high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply, and our long track record of developing products that meet customer needs, has led to enduring and valued relationships with our customers. Our R&D efforts enable us to deliver innovative products to address unmet needs and evolve our product lines so they remain relevant for our customers. A summary of our 2013 performance compared to the comparable 2012 and 2011 periods follows: Years Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Revenue $ 4,561 $ 4,336 $ 4,233 5 2 Net income attributable to Zoetis 504 436 245 16 78 Adjusted net income (a) 709 539 503 32 7 (a) Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure. See the Adjusted net income section of this MD&A for more information. Our ownership On February 6, 2013, an initial public offering (IPO) of our Class A common stock was completed, which represented approximately 19.8% of our total outstanding shares. On February 1, 2013, our Class A common stock began trading on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) under the symbol ZTS. Prior to and in connection with the IPO, we completed a $3.65 billion senior notes offering (senior notes offering) and Pfizer transferred to us substantially all of the assets and liabilities of their animal health business. We paid an amount of cash equal to substantially all of the net proceeds that we received in the senior notes offering to Pfizer prior to the completion of the IPO. We did not receive any of the proceeds from the IPO. In addition, immediately prior to the completion of the IPO, we and Pfizer entered into certain agreements that provide a framework for our ongoing relationship with Pfizer. On June 24, 2013, an exchange offer was completed, whereby Pfizer shareholders exchanged a portion of Pfizer common stock for Zoetis common stock, resulting in the full separation of Zoetis and the disposal of Pfizer's entire ownership and voting interest in Zoetis. We refer to the transactions to separate our business from Pfizer, as described here and elsewhere in this 2013 Annual Report, as the Separation. For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 2. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer . Our operating environment Industry The animal health industry, which focuses on both livestock and companion animals, is a growing industry that impacts billions of people worldwide. The primary livestock species for the production of animal protein are cattle (both beef and dairy), swine, poultry, sheep and fish. Livestock health and production are essential to meeting the growing demand for animal protein of a global population. Factors influencing growth in demand for livestock medicines and vaccines include: human population growth and increasing standards of living, particularly in many emerging markets; increasing demand for improved nutrition, particularly animal protein; natural resource constraints, such as scarcity of arable land, fresh water and increased competition for cultivated land, resulting in fewer resources that will be available to meet this increased demand for animal protein; and increased focus on food safety. The primary companion animal species are dogs, cats and horses. Health professionals indicate that companion animals improve the physical and emotional well-being of pet owners. Factors influencing growth in demand for companion animal medicines and vaccines include: economic development and related increases in disposable income, particularly in many emerging markets; increasing pet ownership; and companion animals living longer, increasing medical treatment of companion animals and advances in companion animal medicines and vaccines. 32 | Table of Contents Product development initiatives Our future success depends on both our existing product portfolio and our pipeline of new products, including new products that we may develop through joint ventures and products that we are able to obtain through license or acquisition. We believe we are an industry leader in animal health R&D, with a track record of generating new products and product lifecycle developments. The majority of our R&D programs focus on product lifecycle development, which is defined as R&D programs that leverage existing animal health products by adding new species or claims, achieving approvals in new markets or creating new combinations and reformulations. Perceptions of product quality, safety and reliability We believe that animal health medicines and vaccines customers value high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply. The importance of quality and safety concerns to pet owners, veterinarians and livestock producers also contributes to animal health brand loyalty, which we believe often continues after the loss of patent-based and regulatory exclusivity. We depend on positive perceptions of the safety and quality of our products, and animal health products generally, by our customers, veterinarians and end-users. The issue of the potential transfer of increased antibacterial resistance in bacteria from food-producing animals to human pathogens, and the causality of that transfer, are the subject of global scientific and regulatory discussion. Antibacterials refer to small molecules that can be used to treat or prevent bacterial infections and are a sub-categorization of the products that make up our anti-infectives and medicated feed additives portfolios. In some countries, this issue has led to government restrictions and bans on the use of specific antibacterials in some food-producing animals, regardless of the route of administration (topical, oral, intramuscular/subcutaneous injections, or intravenous). These restrictions are more prevalent in countries where animal protein is plentiful and governments are willing to take restrictive actions even when there is scientific uncertainty. Our total revenue attributable to antibacterials for livestock was approximately $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013. In December 2013, the FDA announced final guidance establishing procedures for the voluntary phase out in the United States over a three year period of the use of medically important antibacterials in animal feed for growth promotion in food production animals (medically important antibacterials include classes that are prescribed in animal and human health). The guidance provides for continued use of antibacterials in food producing animals for treatment, control and under certain circumstances for prevention of disease, all under the supervision of a veterinarian. We believe the impact of this FDA guidance on our financial performance will not be significant based on the overall diversity and breadth of our product portfolio of medicines, vaccines, and diagnostics serving eight core species. We cannot predict whether antibacterials resistance concerns will result in additional restrictions or bans, expanded regulations or public pressure to discontinue or reduce use of antibacterials in food-producing animals, which could materially adversely affect our operating results and financial condition. The overall economic environment In addition to industry-specific factors, we, like other businesses, continue to face the effects of the current challenging economic environment. Growth in both the livestock and companion animal sectors is driven by overall economic development and related growth, particularly in many emerging markets. Certain of our customers and suppliers have been affected directly by the economic downturn, which decreases the demand for our products and hinders our ability to collect amounts due from customers. The cost of medicines and vaccines to our livestock producer customers is small relative to other production costs, including feed, and the use of these products is intended to improve livestock producers economic outcomes. As a result, demand for our products has historically been more stable than demand for other production inputs. Similarly, industry sources have reported that pet owners indicated a preference for reducing spending on other aspects of their lifestyle, including entertainment, clothing and household goods, before reducing spending on pet care. While these factors have mitigated the impacts of the challenging economic environment, the impact of difficult macroeconomic conditions increases over time. Competition The animal health industry is competitive. Although our business is the largest by revenue in the animal health medicines and vaccines industry, we face competition in the regions in which we operate. Principal methods of competition vary depending on the particular region, species, product category or individual product. Some of these methods include new product development, quality, price, service and promotion to veterinary professionals, pet owners and livestock producers. Our competitors include the animal health businesses of large pharmaceutical companies and specialty animal health businesses. In addition to competition from established market participants, there could be new entrants to the animal health medicines and vaccines industry in the future. In certain markets, we also compete with companies that produce generic products, but the level of competition from generic products varies from market to market. For example, the level of generic competition is higher in Europe and certain emerging markets than in the United States. Weather conditions and the availability of natural resources The animal health industry and demand for many of our animal health products in a particular region are affected by weather conditions, as usage of our products follows varying weather patterns and weather-related pressures from pests, such as ticks. As a result, we may experience regional and seasonal fluctuations in our results of operations. In addition, veterinary hospitals and practitioners depend on visits from and access to the animals under their care. Veterinarians patient volume and ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience prolonged snow, ice or other weather conditions, particularly in regions not accustomed to sustained inclement weather. Furthermore, livestock producers depend on the availability of natural resources, including large supplies of fresh water. Their animals health and their ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience a shortage of fresh water 33 | Table of Contents due to human population growth or floods, droughts or other weather conditions. In the event of adverse weather conditions or a shortage of fresh water, veterinarians and livestock producers may purchase less of our products. For example, drought conditions could negatively impact, among other things, the supply of corn and the availability of grazing pastures. A decrease in harvested corn results in higher corn prices, which could negatively impact the profitability of livestock producers of cattle, pork and poultry. Higher corn prices and reduced availability of grazing pastures contributes to reductions in herd or flock sizes that in turn results in less spending on animal health products. As such, a prolonged drought could have a material adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition. Factors influencing the magnitude and timing of effects of a drought on our performance include, but may not be limited to, weather patterns and herd management decisions. The widespread drought which impacted parts of the United States during 2011, 2012 and in some regions in 2013 was considered the worst in many years and affected our performance in the United States market in 2012 and in the first half of 2013. Disease outbreaks Sales of our livestock products could be adversely affected by the outbreak of disease carried by animals. Outbreaks of disease may reduce regional or global sales of particular animal-derived food products or result in reduced exports of such products, either due to heightened export restrictions or import prohibitions, which may reduce demand for our products. Also, the outbreak of any highly contagious disease near our main production sites could require us to immediately halt production of our products at such sites or force us to incur substantial expenses in procuring raw materials or products elsewhere. Alternatively, sales of products that treat specific disease outbreaks may increase. For example, in 2012, we successfully launched a vaccine for horses against the deadly Hendra virus in Australia. In 2013, there have been several reported cases of the H7N9 avian influenza virus in China. In late March 2013, the Chinese government reported the first case of the H7N9 avian influenza virus. Since that time, over 350 cases have been detected. We are closely monitoring the developments as this situation unfolds and currently believe the impact on our 2014 global revenue will not be significant. While China continues to represent a growth opportunity for us, sales in this country represented less than 2% of our total revenue in 2013 and the majority was generated by our swine business. In addition, since the second quarter of 2013 many producers in the United States have been experiencing an outbreak of the porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDv). PEDv has existed in parts of Asia for many years. It is important to note that the virus, which affects piglets, does not create a food safety issue. We are committed to supporting pork producers in understanding and controlling PEDv, and we are partnering with the key stakeholders, including various academic institutions such as the University of Minnesota and Iowa State University. Since first reported in the United States in the second quarter, the disease has continued to spread and has now been reported in at least 27 U.S. states, Canada, Mexico, and parts of South America. According to recent reports, the outbreak has impacted up to 30% of the sows in the United States. We currently believe the impact on our 2014 revenue will not be significant. However, we are closely monitoring the evolution of this on-going outbreak and its impact on the swine industry and on our 2014 revenue. Foreign exchange rates Significant portions of our revenue and costs are exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates. Our products are sold in more than 120 countries and, as a result, our revenue is influenced by changes in foreign exchange rates. In 2013, approximately 53% of our revenue was denominated in foreign currencies. Prior to the IPO, as a business unit of Pfizer and under Pfizer's global cash management system, our foreign exchange risk was managed through Pfizer. Following the Separation, we seek to manage our foreign exchange risk, in part, through operational means, including managing same-currency revenue in relation to same-currency costs and same-currency assets in relation to same-currency liabilities. As we operate in multiple foreign currencies, including the euro, the Brazilian real, the Australian dollar and other currencies, changes in those currencies relative to the U.S. dollar will impact our revenue, cost of goods and expenses, and consequently, net income. Exchange rate fluctuations may also have an impact beyond our reported financial results and directly impact operations. These fluctuations may affect the ability to buy and sell our goods and services between markets impacted by significant exchange rate variances. In 2013, approximately 47% of our total revenue was in U.S. dollars, and our year-over-year revenue growth was unfavorably impacted by 2 percentage points from changes in foreign currency values relative to the U.S. dollar. On February 13, 2013, the Venezuelan government devalued its currency from a rate of 4.3 to 6.3 Venezuelan bolivars per U.S. dollar. We incurred a foreign currency loss of $9 million immediately on the devaluation as a result of remeasuring the local assets and liabilities, which is included in Other (income)/deductions net for the year ended December 31, 2013 . We will experience ongoing adverse impacts to earnings as our revenue, costs and expenses will be translated into U.S. dollars at lower rates. These impacts are not expected to be significant to our financial condition or results of operations. As of December 31, 2013, in Venezuela we had net monetary assets denominated in local currency of $30 million. We cannot predict whether there will be further devaluation of the Venezuelan bolivar. Our growth strategies We seek to enhance the health of animals and to bring solutions to our customers who raise and care for them. We have a global presence in both developed and emerging markets and we intend to grow our business by pursuing the following core strategies: leverage our direct local presence and strong customer relationships Through our direct selling commercial model, we can deepen our understanding of our customers businesses and can encourage the adoption of more sophisticated animal health products; further penetrate emerging markets We seek to maximize our presence where economic development is driving increased demand for animal protein and increased demand for and spending on companion animals; 34 | Table of Contents pursue new product research and development and value-added product lifecycle development to extend our product portfolio New product R&D and product lifecycle development enable us to deliver innovative products to address unmet needs and evolve our product lines so they remain relevant for our customers. We seek to leverage our strong direct presence in many regions and cost-effectively develop new products; remain the partner of choice for access to new products and technologies We seek to continue to support cutting-edge research and secure the right to develop and commercialize new products and technologies; continue to provide high-quality products and improve manufacturing production margins We believe our manufacturing and supply chain provides us with a global platform for continued expansion, including in emerging markets, and that our quality and reliability differentiate us from our competitors; and expand into complementary businesses to become a more complete, trusted partner in providing solutions We believe we have the potential to generate incremental and complementary revenue, in the areas of diagnostics, genetics, devices, dairy data management, e-learning and professional consulting, which could also enhance the loyalty of our customer base and may lead to increased product sales. Components of revenue and costs and expenses Our revenue, costs and expenses are reported for the year ended December 31 for each year presented, except for operations outside the United States, for which the financial information is included in our consolidated and combined financial statements for the fiscal year ended November 30 for each year presented. Revenue Our revenue is primarily derived from our diversified product portfolio of medicines and vaccines used to treat and protect livestock and companion animals. Generally, our products are promoted to veterinarians and livestock producers by our sales organization which includes sales representatives and technical and veterinary operations specialists, and then sold directly by us or through distributors. The depth of our product portfolio enables us to address the varying needs of customers in different species and geographies. In 2013, our top selling product line, the ceftiofur line, contributed approximately 7% of our revenue. The ceftiofur line and our next two top selling products, Revolution and Draxxin, contributed approximately 20% of our revenue. Our top ten selling product lines contributed approximately 39% of our revenue. For additional information regarding our products, including descriptions of our product lines that each represented approximately 1% or more of our revenue in 2013, see Item 1. Business Products . Costs and expenses Costs of sales consist primarily of cost of materials, facilities and other infrastructure used to manufacture our medicine and vaccine products and royalty expenses associated with the intellectual property of our products, when relevant. Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses consist of, among other things, the internal and external costs of marketing, promotion, advertising and shipping and handling as well as certain costs related to business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development, public affairs and procurement. Research and development (R&D) expenses consist primarily of project costs specific to new product R&D and product lifecycle development, overhead costs associated with R&D operations and investments that support local market clinical trials for approved indications and expenses related to regulatory approvals for our products. We do not disaggregate R&D expenses by research stage or by therapeutic area for purposes of managing our business. Amortization of intangible assets consists primarily of the amortization expense for identifiable finite-life intangible assets that have been acquired through business combinations. These assets consist of, but are not limited to, developed technology, brands and trademarks. Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs consist of all restructuring charges (those associated with acquisition activity and those associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives), as well as costs associated with acquiring and integrating businesses. Restructuring charges are associated with employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the company. Acquisition-related costs are associated with acquiring and integrating acquired businesses, such as the King Animal Health (KAH) business in 2011 and the Fort Dodge Animal Health (FDAH) business acquired as part of Pfizer's acquisition of Wyeth in 2009, and may include transaction costs and expenditures for consulting and the integration of systems and processes. Other (income)/deductions net consist primarily of various items including net (gains)/losses on asset disposals, royalty-related income, foreign exchange translation (gains)/losses and certain asset impairment charges. Comparability of historical results and our relationship with Pfizer During the periods prior to the IPO covered by the combined financial statements in this 2013 Annual Report, we operated solely as a business unit of Pfizer. The related combined financial statements have been derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Pfizer and include allocations for direct costs and indirect costs attributable to the operations of the animal health business of Pfizer. These combined financial statements do not purport to reflect what the results of operations, comprehensive income, financial position, equity or cash flows would have been had we operated as an independent public company during the periods presented. In addition, the historical combined 35 | Table of Contents financial statements may not be reflective of what our results of operations, comprehensive income, financial position, equity or cash flows might be in the future as an independent public company. For a detailed description of the basis of presentation and an understanding of the limitations of the predictive value of the historical combined financial statements, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 3. Basis of Presentation. The historical balance sheets may not be comparable to the balance sheet of the standalone company, which reflects the transfer by Pfizer of substantially all of its animal health business to us. Non-comparable elements include, for example, the allocation of Pfizer debt which was not transferred, cash and cash equivalents which were transferred at a predetermined amount, and other assets and liabilities which were not transferred due to legal restrictions and other decisions taken by Pfizer. Our historical expenses are not necessarily indicative of the expenses we incur as an independent public company. With respect to support functions, for example, for the periods prior to the IPO, our historical combined financial statements include expense allocations for certain support functions that are provided on a centralized basis within Pfizer, such as expenses for business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, and, to a lesser extent, business development, public affairs and procurement, among others. As part of the Separation, pursuant to agreements with Pfizer, Pfizer provides us with some of the services related to these functions on a transitional basis in exchange for agreed-upon fees, and we are incurring other costs to replace the services and resources that will not be provided by Pfizer. As an independent public company, our total costs related to such support functions may differ from the costs that were historically allocated to us from Pfizer. We have also incurred certain non-recurring costs related largely to becoming an independent public company, including new branding (which includes changes to the manufacturing process for required new packaging), the creation of a standalone infrastructure, the implementation of a new enterprise resource planning system, the accelerated vesting of Pfizer equity awards, site separation, certain legal registration and patent assignment costs, asset impairment charges and certain restructuring and other charges. In addition, we have incurred certain costs related to the completion of FDAH integration activities. In 2013, we incurred $262 million of the aforementioned non-recurring costs, and we expect these costs to range between approximately $165 million to $185 million in 2014. These estimates exclude the impact of any depreciation or amortization of capitalized separation expenditures. Some of our products are manufactured at sites that were retained by Pfizer or that are operated by Pfizer under a sale-leaseback arrangement. In 2013, pursuant to the master manufacturing and supply agreement with Pfizer, we purchased these products from Pfizer. The historical combined statements of income for the periods prior to the IPO include allocations of certain manufacturing and supply costs incurred by the manufacturing sites that would not have been charged to us under the master manufacturing and supply agreement with Pfizer had such agreement been in effect in the periods presented, such as operating variances, as well as purchase price and volume variances under a certain threshold. The costs allocated in the historical combined statements of income are higher than the amounts that would have been charged by Pfizer under the master manufacturing and supply agreement, had it been in effect during the periods presented, by approximately $10 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 and approximately $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2011. In connection with the IPO, we and Pfizer have entered into certain agreements that will provide a framework for our ongoing relationship with Pfizer. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 19B. Transactions and Agreements with Pfizer Agreements with Pfizer. Following the IPO, the equity awards previously granted to our employees by Pfizer continued to vest, and service with Zoetis counted as service with Pfizer for equity award purposes. On June 24, 2013, Pfizer completed the Exchange Offer whereby Pfizer disposed of all of its shares of Zoetis common stock owned by Pfizer. Pfizer accelerated the vesting of, and in some cases the settlement of, on a pro-rata basis, outstanding Pfizer RSUs, Total Shareholder Return Units (TSRUs) and Performance Share Awards (PSAs) previously granted to our employees, subject, in each case, to the requirements of Section 409A of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code, the terms of the 2004 Pfizer Stock Plan and the applicable award agreements and any outstanding deferral elections. In addition, unvested Pfizer stock options previously granted to our employees accelerated in full, and our employees generally have the ability to exercise the stock options until the earlier of (i) June 23, 2016 (three years from Pfizer's completion of the Exchange Offer), (ii) termination of employment from Zoetis, or (iii) the expiration date of the stock option. Zoetis employees who held Pfizer stock options and were retirement eligible as of June 24, 2013 will have the full term of the stock option to exercise. The accelerated vesting of the outstanding Pfizer stock options, and the settlement, on a pro-rata basis, of other Pfizer equity awards, resulted in the recognition of additional expense for the year ended December 31, 2013 of $ 9 million , which is included in stock-based compensation. The unvested portion of Pfizer RSUs, TSRUs and PSAs were forfeited as of the completion of the Exchange Offer. In the third quarter of 2013 , Zoetis made a cash payment of approximately $ 20 million to certain non-executive Zoetis employees, based on the value of the employees' forfeited Pfizer RSUs, TSRUs and PSAs (as applicable). This amount is included in the consolidated statement of income as additional compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2013 . Members of the Zoetis Executive Team did not receive a cash payment for any forfeited Pfizer RSUs, TSRUs and PSAs, but instead, in the third quarter of 2013, were granted Zoetis RSUs which were equivalent in value and vest on the same date as their forfeited Pfizer RSUs, TSRUs and PSAs. Public company expenses As a result of the IPO, we became subject to the reporting requirements of the Exchange Act and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We have established additional procedures and practices as an independent public company. As a result, we are incurring additional costs, including, but not limited to, internal audit, investor relations, stock administration and regulatory compliance costs. Recent significant acquisitions and government-mandated divestitures The assets, liabilities, operating results and cash flows of acquired businesses are included in our results commencing from their respective acquisition dates. 36 | Table of Contents The KAH business was acquired by Pfizer as part of its acquisition of King Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (acquired on January 31, 2011), strengthening our position in the poultry business with a medicated feed additives business and other poultry products and further strengthening our position in the cattle and swine businesses. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 5A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments Acquisition of King Animal Health . Our combined financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011 reflect eleven months of KAH U.S. operations and ten months of KAH international operations. Delays in establishing new operating subsidiaries Due to local regulatory and operational requirements in certain non-U.S. jurisdictions, the transfer to us of certain assets and liabilities of Pfizer's animal health business had not yet legally occurred as of the IPO date. These assets and liabilities were not material to our consolidated financial statements, individually or in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2013, all expected subsidiaries have been established and the related assets and liabilities have transferred. Agreements with Pfizer On February 6, 2013, we entered into a transitional services agreement with Pfizer whereby Pfizer agreed to provide us with various corporate support services. This agreement has a service commencement date of January 1, 2013 in the United States and December 1, 2012 for our international locations. In addition, we also entered into a master manufacturing and supply agreement with Pfizer on October 1, 2012, whereby we and Pfizer agreed to manufacture and supply products to each other commencing January 1, 2013. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 19B. Transactions and Agreements with Pfizer: Agreements with Pfizer for more information related to these and other agreements, including the related costs. Significant accounting policies and application of critical accounting estimates In presenting our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies . We believe that the following accounting policies are critical to an understanding of our consolidated and combined financial statements as they require the application of the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments and, therefore, could have the greatest impact on our financial statements: (i) fair value; (ii) revenue; (iii) asset impairment reviews; and (iv) contingencies. Below are some of our more critical accounting estimates. See also Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Estimates and Assumptions for a discussion about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions. Fair value For a discussion about the application of fair value to our long-term debt and financial instruments, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 10 . Financial Instruments . For a discussion about the application of fair value to our asset impairment reviews, see Asset impairment reviews below . Revenue Our gross product revenue is subject to deductions that are generally estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenue is recognized and primarily represents sales returns and revenue incentives. For example: for sales returns, we perform calculations in each market that incorporate the following, as appropriate: local returns policies and practices; returns as a percentage of revenue; an understanding of the reasons for past returns; estimated shelf life by product; an estimate of the amount of time between shipment and return or lag time; and any other factors that could impact the estimate of future returns, product recalls, discontinuation of products or a changing competitive environment; and for revenue incentives, we use our historical experience with similar incentives programs to estimate the impact of such programs on revenue. If any of our ratios, factors, assessments, experiences or judgments are not indicative or accurate predictors of our future experience, our results could be materially affected. Although the amounts recorded for these revenue deductions are heavily dependent on estimates and assumptions, historically our adjustments to actual results have not been material. The sensitivity of our estimates can vary by program, type of customer and geographic location. Amounts recorded for revenue deductions can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions. For further information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Estimates and Assumptions . Asset impairment reviews We review all of our long-lived assets for impairment indicators throughout the year and we perform detailed testing whenever impairment indicators are present. In addition, we perform impairment testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived assets at least annually. When necessary, we record charges for impairments of long-lived assets for the amount by which the fair value is less than the carrying value of these assets. 37 | Table of Contents Our impairment review processes are described below and in Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets and, for deferred tax assets, in Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities and Income Tax Contingencies . Examples of events or circumstances that may be indicative of impairment include: a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used. For example, restrictions imposed by the regulatory authorities could affect our ability to manufacture or sell a product. a projection or forecast that demonstrates losses or reduced profits associated with an asset. This could result, for example, from the introduction of a competitor product that results in a significant loss of market share or the inability to achieve the previously projected revenue growth, or from the lack of acceptance of a product by customers. Our impairment reviews of most of our long-lived assets depend heavily on the determination of fair value, as defined by U.S. GAAP, and these judgments can materially impact our results of operations. A single estimate of fair value can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions. For information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Estimates and Assumptions . Intangible assets other than goodwill We test indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying amount, a quantitative test that compares the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset with its carrying value is performed. If the fair value is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized. As a result of our overall intangible asset impairment review, we recognized a number of impairments of identifiable intangible assets other than goodwill. We recorded the following identifiable intangible asset impairment charges in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs and Other (income)/deductions net , as applicable: In 2013, the intangible asset impairment charges reflect (i) approximately $2 million of finite-lived developed technology rights due to a re-assessment of economic viability; (ii) approximately $2 million of finite-lived developed technology rights and acquired in-process research and development (IPR&D) as a result of exiting a combined manufacturing and R&D facility; and (iii) approximately $2 million related to acquired IPR&D as a result of the termination of certain development programs due to a re-assessment of their economic viability. In 2012, the intangible asset impairment charges reflect: (i) approximately $2 million of finite-lived companion animal developed technology rights; (ii) approximately $1 million of finite-lived trademarks related to genetic testing services; and (iii) approximately $2 million of finite-lived patents related to poultry technology. The intangible asset impairment charges for 2012 reflect, among other things, loss of revenue as a result of negative market conditions and, with respect to the poultry technology, a re-assessment of economic viability. In 2011, the intangible asset impairment charges reflect: (i) approximately $30 million of finite-lived intangible assets related to parasiticides technology as a result of declining gross margins and increased competition; (ii) approximately $12 million of finite-lived intangible assets related to equine influenza and tetanus technology due to third-party supply issues; (iii) approximately $10 million of finite-lived intangible assets related to genetic testing services that did not find consumer acceptance; and (iv) approximately $17 million related to acquired IPR&D projects (acquired from Vetnex in 2010 and from FDAH in 2009), as a result of the termination of the development programs due to a re-assessment of their economic viability. When we are required to determine the fair value of intangible assets other than goodwill, we use an income approach, specifically the multi-period excess earnings method, also known as the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the asset, which includes the application of a terminal value for indefinite-lived assets, and then we apply an asset-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value amount. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, the impact of technological risk associated with IPR&D assets, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the risks inherent in the projected cash flows; foreign currency fluctuations; and the tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. While all identifiable intangible assets can be impacted by events and thus lead to impairment, in general, identifiable intangible assets that are at the highest risk of impairment include IPR&D assets (approximately $ 12 million as of December 31, 2013). IPR&D assets are higher-risk assets because R&D is an inherently risky activity. For a description of our accounting policy, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . 38 | Table of Contents Goodwill Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of net assets of businesses purchased and is assigned to reporting units. We test goodwill for impairment on at least an annual basis, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Some of the factors considered in the assessment include general macroeconomic conditions, conditions specific to the industry and market, cost factors which could have a significant effect on earnings or cash flows, the overall financial performance of the reporting unit, and whether there have been sustained declines in our share price. Additionally, we evaluate the extent to which the fair value exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit at the last date a valuation was performed. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative fair value test is performed. In 2013, we qualitatively assessed, as of September 29, 2013, whether it is more likely than not that the respective fair values of our reporting units are less than their carrying amounts, including goodwill. Based on that assessment, we determined that this condition does not exist for all reporting units and performing a quantitative fair value test for our reporting units was not necessary. As a result, we do not believe that the risk of goodwill impairment for any of our reporting units is significant at this time. When we are required to determine the fair value of a reporting unit, we use the income approach. The income approach is a forward-looking approach to estimating fair value and relies primarily on internal forecasts. Within the income approach, the method that we use is the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the reporting unit, which includes the application of a terminal value, and then we apply a reporting unit-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of technological risk and competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the various risks inherent in the projected cash flows; and the tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. For all of our reporting units, there are a number of future events and factors that may impact future results and that could potentially have an impact on the outcome of subsequent goodwill impairment testing. For a list of these factors, see Forward-looking statements and information that may affect future results. For a description of our accounting policy, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . Contingencies For a discussion about income tax contingencies, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 8D. Tax Matters Tax Contingencies . For a discussion about legal contingencies, guarantees and indemnifications, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statement Note 17. Commitments and Contingencies . Analysis of the consolidated and combined statements of income The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated and combined statements of income should be read along with our consolidated and combined financial statements, and the notes thereto. For more information on the carve-out basis of presentation for the periods prior to the IPO, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 3. Basis of Presentation . 39 | Year Ended December 31, (a) % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Revenue $ 4,561 $ 4,336 $ 4,233 5 2 Costs and expenses: Cost of sales (b) 1,669 1,563 1,652 7 (5 ) % of revenue 37 % 36 % 39 % Selling, general and administrative expenses (b) 1,613 1,470 1,453 10 1 % of revenue 35 % 34 % 34 % Research and development expenses (b) 399 409 427 (2 ) (4 ) % of revenue 9 % 9 % 10 % Amortization of intangible assets 60 64 69 (6 ) (7 ) Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs 26 135 154 (81 ) (12 ) Interest expense, net of capitalized interest 113 31 36 * (14 ) Other (income)/deductions net (9 ) (46 ) 48 * * Income before provision for taxes on income 690 710 394 (3 ) 80 % of revenue 15 % 16 % 9 % Provision for taxes on income 187 274 146 (32 ) 88 Effective tax rate 27.1 % 38.6 % 37.1 % Net income before allocation to noncontrolling interests 503 436 248 15 76 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests (1 ) 3 * (100 ) Net income attributable to Zoetis $ 504 $ 436 $ 245 16 78 % of revenue 11 % 10 % 6 % * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Includes revenue and expenses from acquisitions from the acquisition date. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 5. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments . (b) Exclusive of amortization of intangible assets, except as disclosed in Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . Revenue Total revenue by operating segment was as follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 U.S. $ 1,902 $ 1,776 $ 1,659 7 7 EuAfME 1,168 1,096 1,144 7 (4 ) CLAR 778 769 788 1 (2 ) APAC 713 695 642 3 8 Total $ 4,561 $ 4,336 $ 4,233 5 2 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. On a global basis, the mix of revenue between livestock and companion animal products was as follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Livestock $ 2,931 $ 2,806 $ 2,778 4 1 Companion animal 1,630 1,530 1,455 7 5 Total $ 4,561 $ 4,336 $ 4,233 5 2 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2013 vs. 2012 Total revenue increased $ 225 million , or 5% , in 2013 compared to 2012, with growth across all operating segments, due to higher operational revenue of $ 288 million , or 7 %, comprised of 5% volume and 2% price, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $ 63 million , or 2 %. 40 | Table of Contents 2012 vs. 2011 Total revenue increased $ 103 million , or 2% , in 2012 compared to 2011, due to higher operational revenue of $ 249 million , or 6 %, with growth across all operating segments, which includes an incremental one month of U.S. and two months of international revenue of $37 million, or 1%, from the KAH acquisition, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $ 146 million , or 4 %. Costs and Expenses Cost of sales Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Cost of sales (a) $ 1,669 $ 1,563 $ 1,652 7 (5 ) % of revenue 37 % 36 % 39 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of corporate enabling functions were: $3 million in 2013, $1 million in 2012, and $3 million in 2011. 2013 vs. 2012 Cost of sales increased $ 106 million , or 7% , in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily as a result of: revenue growth and product and geographic mix; additional costs of $21 million related to becoming an independent public company, including expense of $2 million due to the accelerated vesting of certain Pfizer equity awards and associated cash payments, as a result of the Separation; a $19 million charge associated with the write-offs of inventory and intercompany accounts that were transferred to us as part of the Separation from Pfizer; higher costs associated with certain manufacturing agreements related to government-mandated divestitures from prior acquisitions; and unfavorable foreign exchange, partially offset by: operational efficiencies; and lower employee benefit costs due to the termination of the defined benefit pension plan for U.S. employees. 2012 vs. 2011 Cost of sales decreased $ 89 million , or 5% , in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily as a result of: the non-recurrence of approximately $24 million of incremental purchase accounting charges in 2011 reflecting the fair value adjustments to inventory acquired from KAH that was subsequently sold in 2011; the non-recurrence of a $12 million inventory write-off in 2011 related to suspended sales of 3-Nitro; favorable product mix; increased operational efficiencies and savings associated with margin improvement initiatives, including plant network optimization, yield improvements and overall cost reductions; and favorable foreign exchange, partially offset by: base revenue growth; and the inclusion of an incremental one month of U.S. and two months of international KAH operations. Selling, general and administrative expenses Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Selling, general and administrative expenses (a) $ 1,613 $ 1,470 $ 1,453 10 1 % of revenue 35 % 34 % 34 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of corporate enabling functions were: $24 million in 2013, $254 million in 2012, and $268 million in 2011. 41 | Table of Contents 2013 vs. 2012 SG&A expenses increased by $ 143 million , or 10% , in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily as a result of: additional costs of $177 million related to becoming an independent public company, including expense of $25 million due to the accelerated vesting of certain Pfizer equity awards and associated cash payments, as a result of the Separation; a $5 million charge associated with the write-offs of intercompany accounts that were transferred to us as part of the Separation from Pfizer; and increased distribution expenses due to higher sales and increased temperature-controlled supply chain costs in certain regions, partially offset by: lower employee benefit costs due to the termination of the defined benefit pension plan for U.S. employees; lower bad debt expense associated with improved accounts receivable collection experience; and favorable foreign exchange. 2012 vs. 2011 SG&A expenses increased by $ 17 million , or 1% , in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily as a result of: the inclusion of an incremental one month of U.S. and two months of international KAH operations; initiatives to increase our direct sales and marketing presence in certain emerging markets; and additional costs associated with the build-up of our capabilities as an independent company, partially offset by: reductions in costs due to both acquisition-related synergies and cost reduction initiatives; and favorable foreign exchange. Research and development expenses Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Research and development expenses (a) $ 399 $ 409 $ 427 (2 ) (4 ) % of revenue 9 % 9 % 10 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of corporate enabling functions were: $55 million in 2012 and $64 million in 2011. There was no allocation in 2013. 2013 vs. 2012 R&D expenses decreased by $ 10 million , or 2% , in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily as a result of: the non-recurrence of depreciation expense incurred in 2012 related to the closing of an R&D facility in the U.K.; and lower employee benefit costs due to the termination of the defined benefit pension plan for U.S. employees, partially offset by: incremental costs of $7 million related to becoming an independent public company, including expense of $4 million due to the accelerated vesting of certain Pfizer equity awards and associated cash payments, as a result of the Separation; and an increase in the volume of R&D activities. 2012 vs. 2011 R&D expenses decreased $ 18 million , or 4% , in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily as a result of: a decreased allocation of enabling functions from Pfizer; and a decrease in depreciation related to the closing of an R&D facility in the U.K. Amortization of intangible assets Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Amortization of intangible assets $ 60 $ 64 $ 69 (6 ) (7 ) Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 42 | Table of Contents 2013 vs. 2012 Amortization of intangible assets decreased by $ 4 million , or 6% , in 2013 compared to 2012, which reflects the impact of certain intangible assets reaching the end of their respective useful lives. 2012 vs. 2011 Amortization of intangible assets decreased $ 5 million , or 7% , in 2012 compared to 2011, which reflects the impact of impairments taken in 2012 and 2011. Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs (a) $ 26 $ 135 $ 154 (81 ) (12 ) Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs was: $57 million in 2012 and $70 million in 2011. There were no allocations in 2013. We have incurred significant direct costs for restructuring and integrating acquired businesses, such as KAH on January 31, 2011 and FDAH on October 15, 2009, among others, and in connection with our ongoing cost reduction/productivity initiatives. Our acquisition-related costs primarily related to restructuring charges for employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the future. The majority of these charges, or reversals, are related to termination costs, but we also exited a number of distributor and other contracts and performed certain facility rationalization efforts. Our integration costs are generally comprised of consulting costs related to the integration of systems and processes, as well as product transfer costs. The costs associated with our cost reduction/productivity initiatives are predominantly termination costs associated with plant closings. For additional information regarding restructuring charges and acquisition-related costs, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives . 2013 vs. 2012 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs decreased by $ 109 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily as a result of: a $27 million decrease in employee termination costs related to the reversal of a previously established termination reserve related to our operations in Europe; a decrease in integration and restructuring costs related to the KAH and FDAH acquisitions; and the non-recurrence of allocated charges from Pfizer, partially offset by: asset impairment charges of approximately $17 million related to one of our manufacturing facilities in the United States; and employee termination costs of $2 million, exit costs of $4 million, and accelerated depreciation of $5 million as a result of exiting certain manufacturing and research facilities. The aforementioned termination reserve related to our operations in Europe, was established when we were a business unit of Pfizer. For economic reasons, we revisited this restructuring action and decided to no longer implement this restructuring plan. As such, we reversed the existing reserve. 2012 vs. 2011 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs decreased $ 19 million , or 12% , primarily as a result of: a $24 million decrease in integration costs primarily related to the KAH acquisition; and a net $5 million decrease in employee termination expenses which results from lower terminations related to acquisitions and the reversal of a termination reserve upon sale of a manufacturing plant, partially offset by an increase in termination costs associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives primarily related to our operations in Europe, partially offset by: a $7 million increase in asset impairment charges primarily from the allocation of the impairment of a Pfizer facility; a $5 million increase in exit costs primarily from the allocation of the costs incurred to exit certain Pfizer facilities. 43 | Table of Contents Interest expense, net of capitalized interest Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest $ 113 $ 31 $ 36 * (14 ) * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2013 vs. 2012 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased by $ 82 million in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to the issuance of our senior notes on January 28, 2013. Interest expense related to allocated debt was $2 million for 2013. Interest expense related to our long-term debt, including amortization of debt discount and fees, was $111 million for 2013. 2012 vs. 2011 Interest expense related to allocated debt decreased by $5 million in 2012 compared to 2011 due to a lower allocated debt balance. Other (income)/deductions net Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Other (income)/deductions net $ (9 ) $ (46 ) $ 48 * * * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2013 vs. 2012 The change in Other (income)/deductions net reflects an unfavorable impact of $ 37 million on income attributable to Zoetis in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily as a result of: the non-recurrence of income recognized in 2012 from a favorable legal settlement of $14 million and the non-recurrence of a favorable change in estimate for an environmental-related reserve of $7 million in 2012; foreign currency loss of $9 million related to the Venezuela currency devaluation in February 2013; and other foreign currency losses primarily related to Argentina, partially offset by: a net gain on the government-mandated sale of certain product rights in Brazil that were acquired with the FDAH acquisition in 2009 ; and lower asset impairment charges of identifiable intangible assets of approximately $4 million. 2012 vs. 2011 The change in Other (income)/deductions net reflects a favorable impact of $94 million on income attributable to Zoetis in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily as a result of: lower asset impairment charges of identifiable intangible assets of approximately $64 million. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 7. Other (Income)/Deductions Net ; and a favorable $14 million settlement in 2012 regarding an intellectual property matter, as well as a $7 million favorable change in an estimate for an environmental-related reserve. Provision for taxes on income Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Provision for taxes on income $ 187 $ 274 $ 146 (32 ) 88 Effective tax rate 27.1 % 38.6 % 37.1 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. As of the Separation date, we operate under a standalone legal entity structure and the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income has been calculated accordingly. For the periods prior to the Separation, the income tax provision in the combined statements of income has been calculated as if Zoetis filed a separate tax return and includes tax costs and benefits, such as uncertain tax positions, repatriation decisions and audit settlements, among others. 44 | Table of Contents During the third quarter of 2012, Pfizer reached a settlement with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) with respect to the audits of the Pfizer Inc. tax returns for the years 2006 through 2008. The settlement resulted in an income tax benefit to Zoetis of approximately $29.3 million, representing tax and interest. During the first quarter of 2011, Pfizer reached a settlement with the IRS with respect to the audits of the Wyeth tax returns for the years 2002 through 2005. The settlement resulted in an income tax benefit to Zoetis of approximately $9.5 million, representing tax and interest. For more information, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 8A. Tax Matters Taxes on Income . 2013 vs. 2012 The lower effective tax rate in 2013 compared to 2012 is primarily due to: the change in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs. The jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary as a result of repatriation decisions and as a result of operating fluctuations in the normal course of business, the impact of non-deductible items and the extent and location of other income and expense items, such as restructuring charges/(benefits), asset impairments and gains and losses on asset divestitures; incentive tax rulings in Belgium, effective December 1, 2012 through 2017, and Singapore, effective October 29, 2012 through 2016. These incentive tax rulings may be extended for another 5 and 6 years, respectively, if certain requirements are met; and a $2 million discrete income tax benefit during the first quarter of 2013 related to the 2012 U.S. Research and Development Tax Credit which was retroactively extended on January 3, 2013, partially offset by: the tax cost related to changes in uncertain tax positions, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 8D. Tax Matters Tax Contingencies . 2012 vs. 2011 The higher effective tax rate in 2012 compared to 2011 is primarily due to: the change in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs. The jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary as a result of repatriation decisions and as a result of operating fluctuations in the normal course of business, the impact of non-deductible items and the extent and location of other income and expense items, such as restructuring charges, asset impairments and gains and losses on asset divestitures; the tax cost related to changes in uncertain tax positions, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 8D. Tax Matters Tax Contingencies ; the non-recurrence of the aforementioned $9.5 million reduction in tax benefits, representing tax and interest, which were recorded as a result of the favorable tax audit settlement pertaining to prior years; and the expiration of the U.S. Research and Development Tax Credit on December 31, 2011, partially offset by: the tax benefit resulting from the aforementioned $29.3 million settlement in 2012 and international tax benefits of approximately $2.7 million, representing tax and interest, resulting from the resolution of certain tax positions pertaining to prior years with various foreign tax authorities and from the lapse of certain statutes of limitations. On January 3, 2013, the President of the United States signed into law the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 (the 2012 Act), which extends the U.S. Research and Development Tax Credit for tax years 2012 and 2013, as well as other provisions. Given the enactment date of the 2012 Act, the 2012 Act had no impact on our 2012 results. 45 | Operating Segment Results We believe that it is important to not only understand overall revenue and earnings growth, but also operational growth. Operational growth is defined as revenue or earnings growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange. On a global basis, the mix of revenue between livestock and companion animal products was as follows: % Change 13/12 12/11 (a) Related to Related to Year Ended December 31, Foreign Foreign (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 Total Exchange Operational Total Exchange Operational U.S. Livestock $ 1,034 $ 966 $ 904 7 7 7 7 Companion animal 868 810 755 7 7 7 7 1,902 1,776 1,659 7 7 7 7 EuAfME Livestock 777 740 777 5 1 4 (5 ) (7 ) 2 Companion animal 391 356 367 10 2 8 (3 ) (7 ) 4 1,168 1,096 1,144 7 1 6 (4 ) (7 ) 3 CLAR Livestock 605 603 630 (6 ) 6 (4 ) (8 ) 4 Companion animal 173 166 158 4 (5 ) 9 5 (7 ) 12 778 769 788 1 (5 ) 6 (2 ) (7 ) 5 APAC Livestock 515 497 467 4 (4 ) 8 6 (2 ) 8 Companion animal 198 198 175 (7 ) 7 13 13 713 695 642 3 (4 ) 7 8 (1 ) 9 Total Livestock 2,931 2,806 2,778 4 (2 ) 6 1 (4 ) 5 Companion animal 1,630 1,530 1,455 7 (1 ) 8 5 (3 ) 8 $ 4,561 $ 4,336 $ 4,233 5 (2 ) 7 2 (4 ) 6 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) The total operational growth includes an increase of 1% in 2012 versus 2011 due to the acquisition of KAH, acquired by Pfizer on January 31, 2011. 46 | Earnings by segment and the operational and foreign exchange changes versus the comparable prior year period were as follows: % Change 13/12 12/11 Related to Related to Year Ended December 31, Foreign Foreign (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 Total Exchange Operational Total Exchange Operational U.S. $ 1,045 $ 921 $ 820 13 13 12 12 EuAfME 420 375 365 12 1 11 3 (6 ) 9 CLAR 266 253 275 5 (11 ) 16 (8 ) (14 ) 6 APAC 271 236 196 15 (3 ) 18 20 2 18 Total reportable segments 2,002 1,785 1,656 12 (2 ) 14 8 (3 ) 11 Other business activities (320 ) (275 ) (279 ) 16 (1 ) Reconciling Items: Corporate (567 ) (506 ) (504 ) 12 Purchase accounting adjustments (48 ) (52 ) (82 ) (8 ) (37 ) Acquisition-related costs (22 ) (53 ) (122 ) (58 ) (57 ) Certain significant items (240 ) (96 ) (172 ) * (44 ) Other unallocated (115 ) (93 ) (103 ) 24 (10 ) Income before income taxes $ 690 $ 710 $ 394 (3 ) 80 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2013 vs. 2012 U.S. operating segment U.S. segment revenue increased by $ 126 million , or 7 %, 2013 compared to 2012, of which approximately $ 68 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 58 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock revenue growth was achieved in all species. The growth in swine products was due to continued customer acceptance of new products and the successful execution of marketing programs developed for and focused on specific brands, therapeutic categories or customer segments. Growth in sales of poultry products was due to growth in medicated feed additives, and growth in sales of cattle products was driven by improved market conditions in the second half of 2013. Companion animal revenue growth was driven by solid growth in small animal products reflecting the benefit of realigning our field force in late 2012 to more effectively cover our customer base, the positive outcomes of new cross-portfolio pricing programs, and price increases. Growth was slightly offset by a decline in the sales of equine products reflecting a continuing contraction of the market. U.S. segment earnings increased by $ 124 million , or 13 %, in 2013 compared to 2012 due to strong revenue growth and improved gross margin due to the benefit of higher prices and favorable product mix. Segment earnings growth also benefited from limited growth in operating expenses. EuAfME operating segment EuAfME segment revenue increased by $ 72 million , or 7 %, in 2013 compared to 2012. Operational revenue growth was $ 61 million , or 6 %, of which approximately $ 32 million resulted from growth in livestock products and $ 29 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock revenue growth was primarily driven by emerging markets, particularly Russia. Additionally, growth in swine products was favorably impacted by the launch of a new swine vaccine (that prevents porcine circovirus type 2) across many markets in the region, particularly in Germany and Russia. This growth was partially offset by continuing challenging market conditions throughout Western Europe affecting the cattle portfolio. Companion animal revenue growth was favorably impacted by increased sales of products that are related to certain third party manufacturing agreements. Additionally, sales in the UK and France increased due to the benefit of increased promotional programs. Results were partially offset by continuing adverse macroeconomic conditions throughout Western Europe. Additionally, segment revenue was favorably impacted by foreign exchange, which increased revenue by approximately $ 11 million , or 1 %. EuAfME segment earnings increased by $ 45 million , or 12 %, in 2013 compared to 2012. Operational earnings growth was $ 41 million , or 11 %, primarily driven by revenue growth and increased operating efficiencies. 47 | CLAR operating segment CLAR segment revenue increased by $ 9 million , or 1 %, in 2013 compared to 2012. Operational revenue growth was $ 49 million , or 6 %, of which approximately $ 35 million resulted from growth in livestock products and $ 14 million resulted from growth in companion animal product sales. Livestock revenue growth was primarily driven by increased sales in the poultry and cattle portfolios. Growth in sales of poultry products was primarily driven by higher sales of medicated feed additives in Brazil. Increased cattle product sales were primarily due to growth in Mexico, Canada and Venezuela. This growth was partially offset by challenging market conditions affecting the cattle market in Brazil, where sales were relatively flat primarily due to increased local competition and drought conditions in certain areas of the country. Companion animal growth was favorably impacted by an increasing companion animal market in Brazil and marketing programs in Brazil and Mexico. Gains were partially offset by lower sales of equine products as a result of a reduced number of horses in Canada. Additionally, segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $ 40 million , or 5 %. CLAR segment earnings increased by $ 13 million , or 5 %, in 2013 compared to 2012. Operational earnings growth was $ 40 million , or 16 %, in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily driven by revenue growth and favorable product mix. The unfavorable foreign exchange impact was driven by the depreciation of the Brazilian Real as well as the devaluation of the Venezuela Bolivar which occurred in the first quarter of 2013. APAC operating segment APAC segment revenue increased by $ 18 million , or 3 %, in 2013 compared to 2012. Operational revenue growth was $ 52 million , or 7 %, of which approximately $ 38 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 14 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock revenue growth was driven primarily by increased sales in emerging markets across swine, poultry and cattle. Growth in sales of swine products was driven by higher demand and market penetration in China, as well as good performance in Japan which benefited from recently launched vaccines. Growth in the poultry and cattle portfolios was primarily driven by increased sales in India. Results were tempered by flat growth in Australia and New Zealand due to the impact of prolonged drought conditions on cattle and sheep herd sizes. Companion animal revenue growth was primarily due to the successful launch of new products in Japan. Results were partially offset by declines in equine product sales in Australia due to increased competition. Additionally, segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $ 34 million , or 4 %. APAC segment earnings increased by $ 35 million , or 15 %, in 2013 compared to 2012. Operational earnings growth was $ 42 million , or 18 %, in 2013 compared to 2012, primarily due to increased revenue and lower operating expenses, partially offset by the unfavorable impact of geographic and product mix. 2012 vs. 2011 U.S. operating segment U.S. segment revenue increased by $ 117 million , or 7 %, in 2012 compared 2011, of which approximately $ 62 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 55 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenue growth was due principally to increased demand for premium anti-infectives in cattle as a result of continued acceptance of our products based on superior efficacy, supported by economic outcomes studies. There was also increased demand for medicated feed additives in swine, which was partially due to increased incidence of enteric infections in late stage pigs. Additionally, revenue growth was positively impacted by our entry into a new market with the launch of an improved formulation of a swine vaccine that prevents porcine circovirus type 2. This revenue growth was partially offset by the impact of the drought in the United States. Companion animal product revenue growth was driven by parasiticides, benefiting from an extended flea and tick season caused by unusually warm weather and by a temporary competitor supply disruption. Companion animal products also benefited from continued growth in canine vaccines and the success of targeted marketing efforts for anti-infectives and other pharmaceutical products. U.S. segment earnings increased by $ 101 million , or 12 %, in 2012 compared to 2011 as a result of strong revenue growth. EuAfME operating segment EuAfME segment revenue decreased by $ 48 million , or 4 %, in 2012 compared to 2011. Operational revenue growth was $ 29 million , or 3 %, of which approximately $ 16 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 13 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenue growth was driven by strong demand for cattle parasiticides, particularly in France and the UK, along with a continued growing demand for animal proteins in emerging markets. Additionally, the poultry product portfolio grew due to 48 | expansion into emerging markets. Results were partially offset by continued adverse macroeconomic conditions throughout Western Europe and pressure from the ongoing restrictions on the use of certain antibacterials. Companion animal product revenue was favorably impacted by parasiticides and the launch of new branded generic products throughout the region. Revenue was also favorably impacted by equine vaccines due to a temporary competitor supply disruption. Results were partially offset by continued adverse macroeconomic conditions throughout Western Europe. Additionally, segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $ 77 million , or 7 %. EuAfME segment earnings increased by $ 10 million , or 3 %, in 2012 compared to 2011. Operational earnings growth was $ 33 million , or 9 %, primarily due to increased operating efficiencies. CLAR operating segment CLAR segment revenue decreased by $ 19 million , or 2 % in 2012 compared to 2011. Operational revenue growth was $ 42 million , or 5 %, of which approximately $ 23 million resulted from growth in livestock products, and approximately $ 19 million resulted from growth in companion animal product sales. Livestock product revenue was favorably impacted by the launch of an improved formulation of a swine vaccine that prevents porcine circovirus type 2. Swine vaccines also benefited from continued demand in South America for Improvac/Improvest, a product that reduces boar taint without the need for surgical castration. Additionally, marketing initiatives focused on legacy KAH products drove increased demand for poultry medicated feed additives in Brazil. Results were partially offset by the slowdown of the cattle market in Brazil due to increased competition and reduced margins for cattle producers. Additionally, certain markets within the region were impacted by the North American drought. Companion animal product revenue growth was attributable to canine vaccines especially in Brazil. Parasiticides performed well across the region, particularly in Canada due to a temporary competitor supply disruption and an extended flea and tick season caused by unusually warm weather. Additionally, segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $ 61 million , or 7 %. CLAR segment earnings declined by $ 22 million , or 8 % in 2012 compared to 2011. Operational earnings growth was $ 16 million , or 6 %, primarily due to revenue growth, partially offset by a charge related to bad debt. APAC operating segment APAC segment revenue increased by $ 53 million , or 8 %, in 2012 compared to 2011. Operational revenue growth was $ 61 million , or 9 %, of which approximately $ 38 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 23 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenue was favorably impacted by the launch of an improved formulation of a swine vaccine that prevents porcine circovirus type 2, particularly in South East Asia, as well as growth in China, Australia and Japan. Increased sales force presence in China drove growth in premium priced swine products. Australia experienced growth in the dairy cattle segment due to higher sales of intramammary products. Revenue in Japan was also driven by broad growth in the poultry portfolio. Companion animal product revenue benefited from promotional campaigns in Japan and the resulting increased adoption of our products into veterinarian treatment protocols. Australia benefited from growth in parasiticides as a result of focused sales force efforts that drove demand for these products. China experienced growth in canine vaccines due to expansion of the sales organization. Additionally, segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenue by approximately $ 8 million , or 1 %. APAC segment earnings increased by $ 40 million , or 20 %, in 2012 compared to 2011. Operational earnings growth was $ 36 million , or 18 %, primarily due to strong revenue growth, partially offset by increased expenses due to field force expansion. Other business activities Other business activities includes expenses associated with our dedicated veterinary medicine research and development (R&D) organization, research alliances, U.S regulatory affairs and other operations focused on the development of our products. Other R&D-related costs associated with non-U.S. market clinical trials and regulatory activities are generally included in the respective regional segment. 2013 vs. 2012 Other business activities expenses increased by $ 45 million , or 16 %, in 2013 compared to 2012. The increase reflects approximately $38 million in comparable R&D expenses in 2012 previously presented as a component of Corporate and currently presented as Other business activities . 2012 vs. 2011 Other business activities expenses decreased by $ 4 million , or 1 %, in 2012 compared to 2011. 49 | Reconciling items Reconciling items include certain costs are not allocated to our operating segments results, such as costs associated with the following: Corporate, which includes costs associated with business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development, public affairs and procurement, among others. These costs also include compensation costs and other miscellaneous operating expenses not charged to our operating segments, as well as interest income and expense; Certain transactions and events such as (i) Purchase accounting adjustments , which includes expenses associated with the amortization of fair value adjustments to inventory, intangible assets and property, plant and equipment; (ii) Acquisition-related activities , which includes costs for restructuring and integration; and (iii) Certain significant items , which includes non-acquisition-related restructuring charges, certain asset impairment charges and costs associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives; and Other unallocated , which includes certain overhead expenses associated with our manufacturing operations not charged to our operating segments. See Adjusted net income of this MD&A and Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 18. Segment, Geographic and Other Revenue Information for further information. Adjusted net income General description of adjusted net income (a non-GAAP financial measure) Adjusted net income is an alternative view of performance used by management, and we believe that investors understanding of our performance is enhanced by disclosing this performance measure. We report adjusted net income to portray the results of our major operations, the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of our products, prior to considering certain income statement elements. We have defined adjusted net income as net income attributable to Zoetis before the impact of purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs and certain significant items. The adjusted net income measure is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP reported net income attributable to Zoetis. The adjusted net income measure is an important internal measurement for us. We measure our overall performance on this basis in conjunction with other performance metrics. The following are examples of how the adjusted net income measure is utilized: senior management receives a monthly analysis of our operating results that is prepared on an adjusted net income basis; our annual budgets are prepared on an adjusted net income basis; and other goal setting and performance measurements. Despite the importance of this measure to management in goal setting and performance measurement, adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure that has no standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP and, therefore, has limits in its usefulness to investors. Because of its non-standardized definition, adjusted net income, unlike U.S. GAAP net income, may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. Adjusted net income is presented to permit investors to more fully understand how management assesses performance. We also recognize that, as an internal measure of performance, the adjusted net income measure has limitations, and we do not restrict our performance management process solely to this metric. A limitation of the adjusted net income measure is that it provides a view of our operations without including all events during a period, such as the effects of an acquisition or amortization of purchased intangibles, and does not provide a comparable view of our performance to other companies. We also use other specifically tailored tools designed to achieve the highest levels of performance. Purchase accounting adjustments Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant purchase accounting impacts that result from business combinations and net asset acquisitions. These impacts, primarily associated with the Pharmacia Animal Health business (acquired in 2003), FDAH (acquired in 2009) and KAH (acquired in 2011), include the incremental charge to cost of sales from the sale of acquired inventory that was written up to fair value, amortization related to the increase in fair value of the acquired finite-lived intangible assets and depreciation related to the increase/decrease to fair value of the acquired fixed assets. Therefore, the adjusted net income measure includes the revenue earned upon the sale of the acquired products without considering the aforementioned significant charges. While certain purchase accounting adjustments can occur through 20 or more years, this presentation provides an alternative view of our performance that is used by management to internally assess business performance. We believe the elimination of amortization attributable to acquired intangible assets provides management and investors an alternative view of our business results by providing a degree of parity to internally developed intangible assets for which R&D costs previously have been expensed. A completely accurate comparison of internally developed intangible assets and acquired intangible assets cannot be achieved through adjusted net income. These components of adjusted net income are derived solely from the impact of the items listed above. We have not factored in the impact of any other differences in experience that might have occurred if we had discovered and developed those intangible assets on our own, and this approach does not intend to be representative of the results that would have occurred in those circumstances. For example, our R&D costs in total, and in the periods presented, may have been different; our speed to commercialization and resulting revenue, if any, may have been different; or our costs to manufacture may have been different. In addition, our marketing efforts may have been received differently by 50 | Table of Contents our customers. As such, in total, there can be no assurance that our adjusted net income amounts would have been the same as presented had we discovered and developed the acquired intangible assets. Acquisition-related costs Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering transaction, integration, restructuring and additional depreciation costs associated with significant business combinations or net-asset acquisitions because these costs are unique to each transaction and represent costs that were incurred to restructure and integrate certain businesses as a result of the acquisition decision. We have made no adjustments for the resulting synergies. We believe that viewing income prior to considering these charges provides investors with a useful additional perspective because the significant costs incurred in a business combination result primarily from the need to eliminate duplicate assets, activities or employees a natural result of acquiring a fully integrated set of activities. For this reason, we believe that the costs incurred to convert disparate systems, to close duplicative facilities or to eliminate duplicate positions (for example, in the context of a business combination) can be viewed differently from those costs incurred in the ordinary course of business. The integration and restructuring costs associated with a business combination may occur over several years, with the more significant impacts ending within three years of the transaction. Because of the need for certain external approvals for some actions, the span of time needed to achieve certain restructuring and integration activities can be lengthy. For example, due to the regulated nature of the animal health medicines and vaccines business, the closure of excess facilities can take several years, as all manufacturing changes are subject to extensive validation and testing and must be approved by the FDA and/or other regulatory authorities. Certain significant items Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant items. Certain significant items represent substantive, unusual items that are evaluated on an individual basis. Such evaluation considers both the quantitative and the qualitative aspect of their unusual nature. Unusual, in this context, may represent items that are not part of our ongoing business; items that, either as a result of their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis; items that would be nonrecurring; or items that relate to products that we no longer sell. While not all-inclusive, examples of items that could be included as certain significant items would be costs related to becoming an independent public company, a major non-acquisition-related restructuring charge and associated implementation costs for a program that is specific in nature with a defined term, such as those related to our non-acquisition-related cost-reduction and productivity initiatives; amounts related to disposals of products or facilities that do not qualify as discontinued operations as defined by U.S. GAAP; certain intangible asset impairments; adjustments related to the resolution of certain tax positions; the impact of adopting certain significant, event-driven tax legislation; or charges related to legal matters. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 17. Commitments and Contingencies . Our normal, ongoing defense costs or settlements of and accruals on legal matters made in the normal course of our business would not be considered certain significant items. Reconciliation A reconciliation of net income attributable to Zoetis, as reported under U.S. GAAP, to adjusted net income follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 GAAP Reported net income attributable to Zoetis $ 504 $ 436 $ 245 16 78 Purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 32 35 55 (9 ) (36 ) Acquisition-related costs net of tax 14 34 78 (59 ) (56 ) Certain significant items net of tax 159 34 125 * (73 ) Non-GAAP adjusted net income (a) $ 709 $ 539 $ 503 32 7 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) The effective tax rate on adjusted pretax income is 29.2% , 40.8% and 34.3% for full year 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The lower effective tax rate in 2013 compared to 2012 is primarily due to incentive tax rulings in Belgium, effective December 1, 2012, and Singapore, effective October 29, 2012, as well as changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs. In addition, we recognized a $2 million discrete income tax benefit during the first quarter of 2013 related to the 2012 U.S. Research and Development Tax Credit which was retroactively extended on January 3, 2013. The higher effective tax rate in 2012 compared to 2011 is due to an increase in tax cost related to changes in uncertain tax positions, the non-recurrence of approximately $9.5 million in tax benefits, representing tax and interest, which were recorded as a result of a favorable tax audit settlement pertaining to prior years, and the expiration of the U.S. Research and Development Tax Credit, partially offset by international tax benefits of approximately $2.7 million, representing tax and interest, resulting from the resolution of certain tax positions pertaining to prior years with various foreign tax authorities and from the expiration of certain statutes of limitations. 51 | Table of Contents The following table provides a reconciliation of reported diluted earnings per share (EPS), as reported under U.S. GAAP, and non-GAAP adjusted diluted EPS: Year Ended December 31, % Change 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Earnings per share diluted (a)(b) : GAAP Reported net income attributable to Zoetis $ 1.01 $ 0.87 $ 0.49 16 78 Purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 0.06 0.07 0.11 (14 ) (36 ) Acquisition-related costs net of tax 0.03 0.07 0.16 (57 ) (56 ) Certain significant items net of tax 0.32 0.07 0.25 * (72 ) Non-GAAP adjusted net income $ 1.42 $ 1.08 $ 1.01 31 7 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) The weighted-average shares outstanding for diluted earnings per share for the period prior to the IPO was calculated using an aggregate of 500 million shares of common stock outstanding, which was the number of Zoetis Inc. shares outstanding immediately prior to the IPO. For the year ended December 31, 2013 , diluted earnings per share was computed using the weighted-average common shares outstanding during the period plus the common stock equivalents related to stock options, RSUs and DSUs. (b) EPS amounts may not add due to rounding. Adjusted net income includes the following charges for each of the periods presented: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 Interest $ 113 $ 31 $ 36 Taxes 292 372 264 Depreciation 138 119 117 Amortization 17 18 20 52 | Table of Contents Adjusted net income, as shown above, excludes the following items: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 Purchase accounting adjustments: Amortization and depreciation (a) $ 46 $ 48 $ 48 Cost of sales (b) 2 4 34 Total purchase accounting adjustments pretax 48 52 82 Income taxes (c) 16 17 27 Total purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 32 35 55 Acquisition-related costs (d) : Transaction costs (e) 2 Integration costs (e) 22 47 71 Restructuring charges (e) (4 ) 41 Additional depreciation asset restructuring (f) 10 8 Total acquisition-related costs pretax 22 53 122 Income taxes (c) 8 19 44 Total acquisition-related costs net of tax 14 34 78 Certain significant items (g) : Restructuring charges (benefits) (h) (20 ) 92 40 Implementation costs and additional depreciation--asset restructuring (f) 8 23 22 Certain asset impairment charges (i) 20 69 Inventory write-off (in Cost of sales ) 12 Net gains on sale of assets (j) (6 ) Stand-up costs (k) 206 Inventory and intercompany account write-offs (l) 24 Other (m) 8 (19 ) 29 Total certain significant items pretax 240 96 172 Income taxes (c) 81 62 47 Total certain significant items net of tax 159 34 125 Total purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs, and certain significant items net of tax $ 205 $ 103 $ 258 Certain amounts may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Amortization and depreciation expense related to purchase accounting adjustments with respect to identifiable intangible assets and property, plant and equipment were distributed as follows in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively: $46 million, $49 million and $49 million included in Amortization of intangible assets; $1 million income, $1 million income and $2 million income included in Selling, general and administrative expenses; and $1 million, $0 million and $1 million included in Research and development expenses. (b) Depreciation expense included in Cost of sales. Also includes fair value adjustments of acquired inventory of $24 million in 2011. (c) Included in Provision for taxes on income . (d) Acquisition-related costs were distributed as follows in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively: $0 million, $9 million and $6 million included in Cost of sales ; $0 million, $1 million and $3 million included in Selling, general and administrative expenses; $22 million, $43 million and $114 million included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs; and $0 million, $0 million and $1 million income included in Other (income)/deductions net. (e) Included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives for more information. (f) Amounts primarily relate to our cost-reduction/productivity initiatives and other asset restructuring. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives . (g) Certain significant items were distributed as follows in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively: $42 million, $1 million and $31 million included in Cost of sales ; $188 million, $18 million and $5 million included in Selling, general and administrative expenses ; $7 million, $10 million and $19 million included in Research and development expenses ; $4 million, $92 million and $40 million, included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs ; and $1 million income, $25 million income and $77 million included in Other (income)/deductions net. (h) Represents restructuring charges incurred for our cost-reduction/productivity initiatives. The restructuring benefit in the year ended December 31, 2013 is primarily due to a $27 million decrease in employee termination expenses related to the reversal of a previously established termination reserve related to our operations in Europe. Included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs . See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives for more information. (i) Asset impairment charges primarily related to restructuring initiatives in 2013 and were distributed as follows in 2013, 2012 and 2011: $19 million, $0 million and $0 million included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs and $1 million, $0 million and $69 million included in Other (income)/deductions net . See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 7. Other (Income)/Deductions Net for more information . 53 | Table of Contents (j) R epresents the net gain on the government-mandated sale of certain product rights in Brazil in 2013 that were acquired with the FDAH acquisition in 2009. Included in Other (income)/deductions net . See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 7. Other (Income)/Deductions Net for more information. (k) Certain non-recurring costs related to becoming an independent public company, such as new branding (including changes to the manufacturing process for required new packaging), the creation of standalone systems and infrastructure, site separation, accelerated vesting and associated cash payment related to certain Pfizer equity awards, and certain legal registration and patent assignment costs which were distributed as follows in 2013: $21 million included in Cost of sales ; $177 million included in Selling, general and administrative expenses , $7 million included in Research and development expenses, and $1 million included in Other (income)/deductions net. (l) Amounts relate to write-offs of inventory and intercompany accounts that were transferred to us as part of the Separation from Pfizer and were distributed as follows: $19 million included in Cost of sales and $5 million included in Selling, general and administrative expenses . Because these expenses relate primarily to the periods prior to our initial public offering, we do not consider them to be reflective of our current operations and we have therefore, excluded them from our Adjusted earnings non-GAAP measure. Although fully written off in the current period, all of the adjustments relate back several years. (m) For 2013, primarily relates to litigation-related charges ($5 million) and charges related to transitional manufacturing purchase agreements associated with divestitures ($1 million). For 2012, primarily relates to income related to a favorable legal settlement for an intellectual property matter ($14 million) and income due to a change in estimate related to transitional manufacturing purchase agreements associated with divestitures ($4 million). See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 7. Other (Income)/Deductions Net for more information . For 2011, primarily all reflected charges are related to transitional manufacturing purchase agreements associated with divestitures. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 5. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments for more information. Our financial guidance for 2014 Our 2014 financial guidance is summarized below: Selected Line Items Revenue $4,650 to $4,750 million Adjusted cost of sales as a percentage of revenue (a) Approximately 35.5% Adjusted SG&A expenses (a) $1,430 to $1,480 million Adjusted R&D expenses (a) $390 to $405 million Adjusted interest expense and other (income)/deductions (a) Approximately $105 million Effective tax rate on adjusted income (a) Approximately 29% Adjusted diluted EPS (a) $1.48 to $1.54 Certain significant items (b) and acquisition-related costs $165 to $185 million Reported diluted EPS $1.15 to $1.21 (a) For an understanding of adjusted net income and its components, see the Adjusted net income section of this MD&A. (b) Includes certain nonrecurring costs related to becoming an independent public company, such as new branding (including changes to the manufacturing process for required new packaging), the creation of standalone systems and infrastructure, site separation and certain legal registration and patent assignment costs. Full year 2014 guidance reflects late January 2014 exchange rates. A reconciliation of 2014 adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS guidance to 2014 reported net income attributable to Zoetis and reported diluted EPS attributable to Zoetis common shareholders guidance follows: Full-Year 2014 Guidance (MILLION OF DOLLARS, EXCEPT PER SHARE AMOUNTS) Net Income Diluted EPS Adjusted net income/diluted EPS (a) guidance ~$740 - $770 ~$1.48 - $1.54 Purchase accounting adjustments ~(30) ~(0.06) Certain significant items (b) and acquisition-related costs ~(125 - 140) ~(0.25 - 0.28) Reported net income attributable to Zoetis Inc./diluted EPS guidance ~$580 - $610 ~$1.15 - $1.21 (a) For an understanding of adjusted net income, see the Adjusted net income section of this MD&A. (b) Includes certain nonrecurring costs related to becoming an independent public company, such as new branding (including changes to the manufacturing process for required new packaging), the creation of standalone systems and infrastructure, site separation and certain legal registration and patent assignment costs. Our 2014 financial guidance is subject to a number of factors and uncertainties as described in the Forward-looking information and factors that may affect future results , Our operating environment and Our growth strategies of this MD&A and in Part I , Item 1A . Risk Factors . Analysis of the consolidated and combined statements of comprehensive income Virtually all changes in other comprehensive income for the periods presented are related to foreign currency translation adjustments. These changes result from the strengthening or weakening of the U.S. dollar as compared to the currencies in the countries in which we do business. The gains and losses associated with these changes are deferred on the balance sheet in Accumulated other comprehensive loss until realized. 54 | Table of Contents Analysis of the consolidated and combined balance sheets December 31, 2013 vs. December 31, 2012 For a discussion about the changes in Cash and cash equivalents , Short-term borrowing, including current portion of allocated long term debt , and Long-term debt , see Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources below. Accounts receivable, less allowance for doubtful accounts increased as a result of operational increases due to higher net sales and accounts receivable from Pfizer in 2013 as a result of Pfizer no longer being a related party. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 2B. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer: Adjustments Associated with the Separation. Inventories decreased primarily as a result of Separation Adjustments. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 2B. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer: Adjustments Associated with the Separation and Note 11. Inventories. The net changes in Current deferred tax assets , Noncurrent deferred tax assets , Noncurrent deferred tax liabilities and Other taxes payable primarily reflect Separation Adjustments. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 2B. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer: Adjustments Associated with the Separation and Note 8. Tax Matters. Property, plant and equipment, less accumulated depreciation increased slightly. Operational activity (depreciation and capital spending) was partially offset by Separation Adjustments. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 2B. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer: Adjustments Associated with the Separation. Accrued Compensation and related items increased primarily due to increases in sales-related bonus accruals and accrued employee savings plan contributions. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 14C. Benefit Plans: Defined Contribution Plans. Dividends payable relate to the dividend declared on December 18, 2013. Long-term debt reflects the senior notes offering. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 2C. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer: Senior Notes Offering and Note 10A. Financial Instruments: Debt. Allocated long-term debt decreased as a result of Separation Adjustments. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 2B. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer: Adjustments Associated with the Separation. Other noncurrent liabilities increased as a result of Separation Adjustments. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 2B. The Separation, Adjustments Associated with the Separation, Senior Notes Offering, Initial Public Offering and Exchange Offer: Adjustments Associated with the Separation. For an analysis of the changes in Total Equity , see the Consolidated and Combined Statements of Equity. Analysis of the consolidated and combined statements of cash flows Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 2011 13/12 12/11 Cash provided by/(used in): Operating activities $ 681 $ 454 $ 497 50 (9 ) Investing activities (179 ) (135 ) (449 ) 33 (70 ) Financing activities (200 ) (78 ) (30 ) * * Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (9 ) (3 ) (2 ) * 50 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents $ 293 $ 238 $ 16 23 * Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. * Calculation not meaningful. Operating activities 2013 vs. 2012 Net cash provided by operating activities was $ 681 million in 2013 compared with $ 454 million in 2012 and was primarily attributable to income before allocation to non-controlling interests, as adjusted for depreciation and amortization. The net change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions and divestitures and transfers with Pfizer, was primarily driven by an increase in other liabilities, reflecting higher accrued interest on long-term debt and higher accrued compensation, partially offset by higher inventory levels. In addition, net cash provided by operating activities was impacted by the timing and of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business. 55 | 2012 vs. 2011 Net cash provided by operating activities was $ 454 million in 2012 compared with $ 497 million in 2011. This decrease in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to higher inventory balances due to increased demand, achieving higher targeted inventory levels for certain products and changes in our supply points, partially offset by the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business. Investing activities 2013 vs. 2012 Net cash used in investing activities was $ 179 million in 2013 compared to $ 135 million in 2012 primarily due to increased capital investment in property, plant and equipment. 2012 vs. 2011 Net cash used in investing activities was $ 135 million in 2012 compared to $ 449 million in 2011. In 2011, Pfizer acquired KAH for $345 million in cash. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 5A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments Acquisition of King Animal Health . Financing activities 2013 vs. 2012 Net cash used in financing activities was $ 200 million in 2013 compared to $ 78 million in 2012. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to: the net transfers to Pfizer as a result of the IPO; and an increase in cash dividends paid, partially offset by: net proceeds from long-term and short-term borrowings. 2012 vs. 2011 Net cash used in financing activities was $ 78 million in 2012, compared to $ 30 million in 2011. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to: a decrease in net financing from Pfizer, partially offset by: a decrease in cash dividends paid and a decrease in allocated principal payments on long-term debt. Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources While we believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand, our operating cash flows and our existing financing arrangements will be sufficient to support our future cash needs, this may be subject to the environment in which we operate. Risks to our meeting future funding requirements include global economic conditions described in the following paragraph. As global financial markets continue their slow and sometimes uneven recovery from the 2008/2009 recession, additional macroeconomic, business and financial volatility may persist. As markets change, we will continue to monitor our liquidity position, but there can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or an economic downturn will not impact our liquidity or our ability to obtain future financing. Selected measures of liquidity and capital resources Certain relevant measures of our liquidity and capital resources follow: December 31, December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2013 2012 Cash and cash equivalents (a) $ 610 $ 317 Accounts receivable, net (b) 1,138 900 Short-term borrowings, including current portion of allocated long-term debt in 2012 (c) 15 73 Allocated long-term debt (c) 509 Long-term debt (d) 3,642 Working capital 1,942 1,741 Ratio of current assets to current liabilities 2.37:1 2.55:1 (a) Prior to our IPO, we participated in Pfizer's centralized cash management system, and generally all of our excess cash was transferred to Pfizer on a daily basis. Cash disbursements for operations and/or investing activities were funded, as needed, by Pfizer. 56 | Table of Contents (b) Accounts receivable are usually collected over a period of 60 to 90 days . For the year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the year ended December 31, 2012, the number of days that accounts receivables are outstanding remained approximately the same, excluding receivables from Pfizer, which were not reflected in our accounts receivable balances at December 31, 2012. We regularly monitor our accounts receivable for collectability, particularly in markets where economic conditions remain uncertain. We believe that our allowance for doubtful accounts is appropriate. Our assessment is based on such factors as past due aging, historical and expected collection patterns, the financial condition of our customers, the robust nature of our credit and collection practices and the economic environment. (c) The combined financial statements for December 31, 2012 include an allocation of long-term debt from Pfizer that was issued to partially finance the acquisition of Wyeth (including FDAH). The debt has been allocated on a pro-rata basis using the deemed acquisition cost of FDAH as a percentage of the total acquisition cost of Wyeth. After the IPO, Pfizer retained the allocated debt. (d) Primarily consists of $3.65 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes, with an original issue discount of $10 million . The senior notes are comprised of $400 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.150% senior notes due 2016, $750 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.875% senior notes due 2018, $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our 3.250% Senior Notes due 2023 and $1.15 billion aggregate principal amount of our 4.700% senior notes due 2043. For additional information about the sources and uses of our funds, see the Analysis of the consolidated and combined balance sheets and Analysis of the consolidated and combined statements of cash flows sections of this MD&A. Credit facility and other lines of credit In December 2012, we entered into a revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of banks providing for a five-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility, which became effective in February 2013 upon the completion of the IPO and which expires in December 2017. Subject to certain conditions, we have the right to increase the credit facility to up to $1.5 billion . The credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us to not exceed a maximum total leverage ratio (the ratio of consolidated net debt as of the end of the period to consolidated Earnings Before Interest, Income Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA) for such period) of 4.35:1 for fiscal year 2013, 3.95:1 for fiscal year 2014, 3.50:1 for fiscal year 2015 and 3.00:1 thereafter. The credit facility also contains a financial covenant requiring that we maintain a minimum interest coverage ratio (the ratio of EBITDA at the end of the period to interest expense for such period) of 3.50:1 . In addition, the credit facility contains other customary covenants. We were in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 31, 2013. There were no borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2013. We have additional lines of credit with a group of banks and other financial intermediaries for general corporate purposes. We maintain cash and cash equivalent balances in excess of our outstanding short-term borrowings. As of December 31, 2013, we had access to $69 million of lines of credit which expire at various times through 2016. As of December 31, 2013 we had $15 million of short-term borrowings outstanding and $ 2 million of long-term borrowings outstanding related to these facilities. Domestic and international short-term funds Many of our operations are conducted outside the United States. The amount of funds held in U.S. tax jurisdictions will fluctuate due to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business and due to other reasons, such as business development activities. As part of our ongoing liquidity assessments, we regularly monitor the mix of domestic and international cash flows (both inflows and outflows). Repatriation of overseas funds can result in additional United States, federal, state and local income tax payments. We record U.S. deferred tax liabilities for certain unremitted earnings, but when amounts earned overseas are expected to be indefinitely reinvested outside the United States, no accrual for U.S. taxes is provided. Global economic conditions The challenging economic environment has not had, nor do we anticipate that it will have, a significant impact on our liquidity. Due to our operating cash flows, financial assets, access to capital markets and available lines of credit and revolving credit agreements, we continue to believe that we have the ability to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. As markets change, we continue to monitor our liquidity position. There can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or a further economic downturn would not impact our ability to obtain financing in the future. Contractual obligations Payments due under contractual obligations as of December 31, 2013 are set forth below: 2015- 2017- There- (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) Total 2014 2016 2018 after Long-term debt, including current portion and interest obligations (a) $ 5,742 $ 117 $ 630 $ 962 $ 4,033 Other long-term liabilities reflected on our consolidated and combined balance sheets under U.S. GAAP (b) 50 17 1 1 31 Operating lease commitments 67 18 26 13 10 Purchase obligations and other (c) 66 16 18 13 19 Benefit plans - continuing service credit obligations (d) 34 4 8 8 14 Uncertain tax positions (e) Certain amounts may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Long-term debt consists of senior notes and other notes. Our calculations of expected interest payments incorporate only current period assumptions for interest rates, foreign currency translation rates and Zoetis hedging strategies, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 10A. Financial Instruments Debt . (b) Includes expected payments for an obligation associated with a development and commercialization agreement, expected payments related to our unfunded U.S. supplemental (non-qualified) savings plans, deferred compensation and expected payments relating to our future benefit payments net of plan assets 57 | Table of Contents (included in the determination of the projected benefit obligation) for pension plans that are dedicated to Zoetis employees in the Netherlands, Germany, India and Korea, and those transferred to us from Pfizer in 2013. Excludes pension obligations associated with certain defined benefit plans outside the United States that Pfizer will transfer to us in 2014 in certain countries as described in the applicable local separation agreement or employee matters agreement. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 14. Benefit Plans and Note 19B. Transactions and Agreements with Pfizer Agreements with Pfizer Employee matters agreement. Excludes approximately $117 million of noncurrent liabilities related to legal and environmental accruals, employee termination and exit costs, deferred income and other accruals, most of which do not represent contractual obligations. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 6 . Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 17 . Commitments and Contingencies . (c) Includes agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable and legally binding and includes amounts relating to advertising, information technology services, employee benefit administration services and potential milestone payments deemed reasonably likely to occur. (d) Includes the cost of service credit continuation for certain Zoetis employees in the Pfizer U.S. qualified defined benefit pension and U.S. retiree medical plans, in accordance with the employee matters agreement. See Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 14. Benefit Plans. (e) Except for amounts reflected in Income taxes payable , we are unable to predict the timing of tax settlements, as tax audits can involve complex issues and the resolution of those issues may span multiple years, particularly if subject to negotiation or litigation. The table above excludes amounts for potential milestone payments unless the payments are deemed reasonably likely to occur. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and/or commercialization milestones, which may span several years and/or which may never occur. Our contractual obligations in the table above are not necessarily indicative of our contractual obligations in the future. Debt On January 28, 2013, we issued $3.65 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes in a private placement, with an original issue discount of $10 million . The senior notes are comprised of $400 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.150% senior notes due 2016, $750 million aggregate principal amount of our 1.875% senior notes due 2018, $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our 3.250% senior notes due 2023 and $1.15 billion aggregate principal amount of our 4.700% senior notes due 2043. We sold $2.65 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes through the initial purchasers in the senior notes offering and Pfizer transferred $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes to certain of the initial purchasers, who sold such senior notes through the initial purchasers in the senior notes offering. We paid an amount of cash equal to substantially all of the net proceeds that we received in the senior notes offering to Pfizer prior to the completion of the IPO. The senior notes are governed by an indenture and supplemental indenture (collectively, the indenture) between us and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee. The indenture contains certain covenants, including limitations on our and certain of our subsidiaries' ability to incur liens or engage in sale leaseback transactions. The indenture also contains restrictions on our ability to consolidate, merge or sell substantially all of our assets. In addition, the indenture contains other customary terms, including certain events of default, upon the occurrence of which the senior notes may be declared immediately due and payable. Pursuant to the indenture, we are able to redeem the senior notes of any series, in whole or in part, at any time by paying a make whole premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption. Pursuant to our tax matters agreement with Pfizer, we will not be permitted to redeem the 2023 notes pursuant to this optional redemption provision, except under limited circumstances. Upon the occurrence of a change of control of us and a downgrade of the senior notes below an investment grade rating by each of Moody's Investors Service, Inc. and Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, we are, in certain circumstances, required to make an offer to repurchase all of the outstanding senior notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes together with accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of repurchase. In connection with the senior notes offering, we entered into a registration rights agreement (the Registration Rights Agreement) with the representatives of the initial purchasers of the senior notes. Pursuant to the terms of the Registration Rights Agreement, we were obligated, among other things, to use our commercially reasonable efforts to file a registration statement with the SEC enabling holders of the senior notes to exchange the privately placed notes for publicly registered notes with substantially the same terms. We filed the registration statement with the SEC on September 13, 2013, the SEC declared the registration statement effective on September 24, 2013, and the exchange offer was completed on October 31, 2013. The components of our long-term debt follow: Description Principal Amount Interest Rate Terms Lines of credit $2 million 6.400% Due 2016-2017 2016 Senior Note $400 million 1.150% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2016 2018 Senior Note $750 million 1.875% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2018 2023 Senior Note $1,350 million 3.250% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2023 2043 Senior Note $1,150 million 4.700% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2043 Credit Ratings Two major corporate debt-rating organizations, Moody's and S&P, assign ratings to our short-term and long-term debt. A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and the rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. 58 | Table of Contents The following table provides the current ratings assigned by these rating agencies to our commercial paper and senior unsecured non-credit-enhanced long-term debt: Commercial Paper Long-term Debt Date of Name of Rating Agency Rating Rating Outlook Last Action Moody P-2 Baa2 Stable January 2013 S&P A-3 BBB- Stable January 2013 Pension Obligations As part of the Separation, Pfizer transferred to us the net pension obligation of $21 million associated with certain international defined benefit plans in 2013. We expect to contribute a total of approximately $1 million to the plans in 2014. Also as part of the Separation, a net liability has been recognized for the pension obligations less the fair value of plan assets associated with additional defined benefit pension plans in certain international locations that will be transferred to us in 2014 (approximately $21 million ), in accordance with the applicable local separation agreements or employee matters agreement. We expect to contribute a total of approximately $7 million to these additional plans in 2014. Effective December 31, 2012 , our employees ceased to participate in the Pfizer U.S. qualified defined benefit and U.S. retiree medical plans, and liabilities associated with our employees under these plans were retained by Pfizer. As part of the Separation, Pfizer is continuing to credit certain employees' service with Zoetis generally through December 31, 2017 (or termination of employment from Zoetis, if earlier) for certain early retirement benefits with respect to Pfizer's U.S. defined benefit pension and retiree medical plans. In connection with the employee matters agreement, Zoetis will be responsible for payment of three-fifths of the total cost of the service credit continuation (approximately $38 million ) for these plans. The amount of the service cost continuation payment to be paid by Zoetis to Pfizer was determined and fixed based on an actuarial assessment of the value of the grow-in benefits and will be paid in equal installments over a period of 10 years. In 2013, Pfizer transferred to us the U.S. supplemental savings plan liability of approximately $14 million , cash of $9 million and a deferred tax asset of $5 million associated with employees transferred to us as part of the Separation. For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 14. Benefit Plans. Off-balance sheet arrangements In the ordinary course of business and in connection with the sale of assets and businesses, we may indemnify our counterparties against certain liabilities that may arise in connection with a transaction or that are related to activities prior to a transaction. These indemnifications typically pertain to environmental, tax, employee and/or product-related matters, and patent-infringement claims. If the indemnified party were to make a successful claim pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, we would be required to reimburse the loss. These indemnifications are generally subject to threshold amounts, specified claim periods and other restrictions and limitations. Historically, we have not paid significant amounts under these provisions and, as of December 31, 2013 or December 31, 2012, recorded amounts for the estimated fair value of these indemnifications are not significant. New accounting standards For discussion of our new accounting standards, see Notes to Consolidated and Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Significant Accounting Policies: New Accounting Standards . Recently Issued Accounting Standards, Not Adopted as of December 31, 2013 In July 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued an accounting standards update regarding the presentation of an unrecognized tax benefit related to a net operating loss carryforward, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward. Under this new standard, this unrecognized tax benefit, or a portion thereof, should be presented in the financial statements as a reduction to a deferred tax asset if available under the tax law of the applicable jurisdiction to settle any additional income taxes that would result from the disallowance of a tax position. Otherwise, the unrecognized tax benefit should be presented in the financial statements as a separate liability. The assessment is based on the unrecognized tax benefits and deferred tax assets that exist at the reporting date. The provisions of the new standard are effective January 1, 2014 for annual and interim reporting periods and we do not expect the provisions of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. In March 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued an accounting standards update regarding the accounting for cumulative translation adjustment (CTA) upon derecognition of assets or investment within a foreign entity. This new standard provides additional CTA accounting guidance on sales or transfers of foreign entity investments and assets as well as step acquisitions involving a foreign entity. The provisions of the new standard are effective January 1, 2014 and we do not expect the provisions of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. In February 2013, the FASB issued an accounting standards update regarding the measurement of obligations resulting from joint and several liability arrangements that may include debt agreements, other contractual obligations and settled litigation or judicial rulings. The provisions of this standard require that these obligations are measured at the amount representing the agreed upon obligation of the company as well as additional liability amounts it expects to assume on behalf of other parties in the arrangement. The provisions of the new standard are effective January 1, 2014 and we do not expect the provisions of this standard to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. 59 | Table of Contents Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results This report contains forward-looking statements. We generally identify forward-looking statements by using words such as anticipate, estimate, expect, intend, project, plan, predict, believe, seek, continue, outlook, may, might, will, should, can have, likely or the negative version of these words or comparable words or by using future dates in connection with any discussion of future performance, actions or events. In particular, forward-looking statements include statements relating to our indebtedness, our ability to make interest and principal payments on our indebtedness, our ability to satisfy the covenants contained in our indebtedness, the redemption of the notes, new systems infrastructure stand-up, our 2014 financial guidance, future actions, business plans or prospects, prospective products, product approvals or products under development, product supply disruptions, R&D costs, timing and likelihood of success, future operating or financial performance, future results of current and anticipated products and services, strategies, sales efforts, expenses, production efficiencies, production margins, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, growth in emerging markets, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, dividend plans, our agreements with Pfizer, government regulation and financial results. These statements are not guarantees of future performance, actions or events. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and are potentially inaccurate assumptions. Among the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from past results and future plans and projected future results are the following: emerging restrictions and bans on the use of antibacterials in food-producing animals; perceived adverse effects on human health linked to the consumption of food derived from animals that utilize our products; increased regulation or decreased governmental support relating to the raising, processing or consumption of food-producing animals; fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and potential currency controls; changes in tax laws and regulation; an outbreak of infectious disease carried by animals; adverse weather conditions and the availability of natural resources; adverse global economic conditions; failure of our R&D, acquisition and licensing efforts to generate new products; quarterly fluctuations in demand and costs; and governmental laws and regulations affecting domestic and foreign operations, including without limitation, tax obligations and changes affecting the tax treatment by the United States of income earned outside the United States that may result from pending and possible future proposals. However, there may also be other risks that we are unable to predict at this time. These risks or uncertainties may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by a forward-looking statement. You should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Form 10-Q and 8-K reports and our other filings with the SEC. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. Consequently, you should not consider the above to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties. 
