CIK: 1555280
Company Name: ZOETIS INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-03-28


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Introduction Our management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (MD&A) is provided to assist readers in understanding our performance, as reflected in the results of our operations, our financial condition and our cash flows. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our combined financial statements and notes to combined financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data . The discussion in this MD&A contains a description of our historical performance for periods in which we operated as a business unit of Pfizer, as well as forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. Our future results could differ materially from historical performance and from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors such as those discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors , and in the Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results and Comparability of historical results and our relationship with Pfizer sections of this MD&A. This MD&A is organized as follows: Section Description Page Overview of our business A general description of our business and the industry in which we operate. For more information regarding our business and the animal health industry, see Item 1. Business . 34 Our performance Information regarding our 2012 and 2011 financial performance. 35 Our operating environment Information regarding the animal health industry and factors that affect our company. 35 Our growth strategies An explanation of our growth strategies. 37 Components of revenues and costs and expenses An explanation of the components of our combined statements of income. 37 Comparability of historical results and our relationship with Pfizer Information about the limitations of the predictive value of the combined financial statements. 38 Significant accounting policies and application of critical accounting estimates Accounting policies and estimates that we consider important to understanding our combined financial statements. 39 Analysis of the combined Consists of the following for all periods presented: statements of income Revenues: An analysis of our revenues in total, by operating segment and by species. 41 Costs and expenses: A discussion about the drivers of our costs and expenses. 44 Provision for taxes on income: A discussion of items impacting our effective tax rates. 47 Adjusted net income A discussion of adjusted net income, an alternative view of performance used by management. Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure. 47 Analysis of the combined statements of comprehensive income/(loss ) An analysis of the components of comprehensive income for all periods presented. 50 Analysis of the combined balance sheets A discussion of changes in certain balance sheet accounts for all balance sheets presented. 50 Analysis of the combined statements of cash flows An analysis of the drivers of our operating, investing and financing cash flows for all periods presented. 50 Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources An analysis of our ability to meet our short-term and long-term financing needs. 51 New accounting standards Accounting standards that we have recently adopted. 53 Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results A description of the risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those discussed in forward-looking statements presented in this MD&A and elsewhere in this 2012 Annual Report. 53 Overview of our business We are a global leader in the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of animal health medicines and vaccines, with a focus on both livestock and companion animals. For more than 60 years, as a business unit of Pfizer, we have been committed to enhancing the health of animals and bringing solutions to our customers who raise and care for them. The animal health medicines and vaccines industry is characterized by meaningful differences in customer needs across different regions. As a result of these differences, among other things, we manage our operations through four geographic operating segments. Within each of these operating segments, we offer a diversified product portfolio for both livestock and companion animal customers in order to capitalize on local and regional trends and customer needs. Our four operating segments are the United States (U.S.), Europe/Africa/Middle East (EuAfME), Canada/Latin America (CLAR) and Asia/Pacific (APAC). See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 17. Segment, Geographic and Other Revenue Information . On February 6, 2013, an initial public offering (IPO) of our Class A common stock was completed, which represented approximately 19.8% of our total outstanding shares. Currently, Pfizer owns 100% of our outstanding Class B common stock and no shares of our Class A common 34 | Table of Contents stock, giving Pfizer 80.2% of the economic interest and the combined voting power in shares of our outstanding common stock other than with respect to the election of directors and 97.6% of the combined voting power of our outstanding common stock with respect to the election of directors. On February 1, 2013, our Class A common stock began trading on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol ZTS. Prior to and in connection with the IPO, we completed a $3.65 billion senior notes offering and Pfizer transferred to us substantially all of the assets and liabilities of their animal health business. We refer to the transactions to separate our business from Pfizer as described here and elsewhere in the 2012 Annual Report, as the Separation. For additional information, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 19. Subsequent Events. Pfizer has informed us that it may make a tax-free distribution to its shareholders of all or a portion of its remaining equity interest in us, which may include one or more distributions effected as a dividend to all Pfizer shareholders, one or more distributions in exchange for Pfizer shares or other securities, or any combination thereof. We refer to any such potential distribution as the Distribution. Pfizer has no obligation to pursue or consummate any further dispositions of its ownership interest in us, including through the Distribution, by any specified date or at all. We directly market our products to livestock producers and veterinarians located in approximately 70 countries across North America, Europe, Africa, Asia, Australia and Latin America, and are a market leader in nearly all of the major regions in which we operate. Through our efforts to establish an early and direct presence in many emerging markets, such as Brazil, China and India, we believe we are the largest animal health medicines and vaccines business as measured by revenues across emerging markets as a whole. Emerging markets contributed 26% of our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2012. In markets where we do not have a direct commercial presence, we generally contract with distributors that provide logistics and sales and marketing support for our products. We believe our investments in the industry largest sales organization, including our extensive network of technical and veterinary operations specialists, our high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply, and our long track record of developing products that meet customer needs, has led to enduring and valued relationships with our customers. Our R&D efforts enable us to deliver innovative products to address unmet needs and evolve our product lines so they remain relevant for our customers. Our performance A summary of our 2012 performance compared to 2011 follows: (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 % Change Revenues $ 4,336 $ 4,233 2 Net income attributable to Zoetis 436 245 78 Adjusted net income (a) 539 503 7 (a) Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure. See page 48 for more information. Our operating environment Industry The animal health industry, which focuses on both livestock and companion animals, is a growing industry that impacts billions of people worldwide. The primary livestock species for the production of animal protein are cattle (both beef and dairy), swine, poultry, sheep and fish. Livestock health and production are essential to meeting the growing demand for animal protein of a global population. Factors influencing growth in demand for livestock medicines and vaccines include: human population growth and increasing standards of living, particularly in many emerging markets; increasing demand for improved nutrition, particularly animal protein; natural resource constraints, such as scarcity of arable land, fresh water and increased competition for cultivated land, resulting in fewer resources that will be available to meet this increased demand for animal protein; and increased focus on food safety. The primary companion animal species are dogs, cats and horses. Industry sources indicate that companion animals improve the physical and emotional well-being of pet owners. Factors influencing growth in demand for companion animal medicines and vaccines include: economic development and related increases in disposable income, particularly in many emerging markets; increasing pet ownership; and companion animals living longer, increasing medical treatment of companion animals and advances in companion animal medicines and vaccines. Product development initiatives Our future success depends on both our existing product portfolio and our pipeline of new products, including new products that we may develop through joint ventures and products that we are able to obtain through license or acquisition. We believe we are an industry leader in animal health R&D, with a track record of generating new products and brand lifecycle developments. The majority of our R&D programs focus on brand lifecycle development, which is defined as R&D programs that leverage existing animal health products by adding new species or claims, achieving approvals in new markets or creating new combinations and reformulations. 35 | Table of Contents Perceptions of product quality, safety and reliability We believe that animal health medicines and vaccines customers value high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply. The importance of quality and safety concerns to pet owners, veterinarians and livestock producers also contributes to animal health brand loyalty, which we believe often continues after the loss of patent-based and regulatory exclusivity. We depend on positive perceptions of the safety and quality of our products, and animal health products generally, by our customers, veterinarians and end-users. The issue of the potential transfer of increased antibacterial resistance in bacteria from food-producing animals to human pathogens, and the causality of that transfer, are the subject of global scientific and regulatory discussion. In some countries, this issue has led to government restrictions and bans on the use of specific antibacterials in some food-producing animals, regardless of the route of administration (topical, oral, intramuscular/subcutaneous injections, or intravenous). These restrictions are more prevalent in countries where animal protein is plentiful and governments are willing to take restrictive actions even when there is scientific uncertainty. Historically, antibacterials for livestock have represented a significant portion of our revenues. We cannot predict whether antibacterial resistance concerns will result in additional restrictions or bans, expanded regulations or public pressure to discontinue or reduce use of antibacterials in food-producing animals. The overall economic environment In addition to industry-specific factors, we, like other businesses, continue to face the effects of the current challenging economic environment. Growth in both the livestock and companion animal sectors is driven by overall economic development and related growth, particularly in many emerging markets. Certain of our customers and suppliers have been affected directly by the economic downturn, which could decrease the demand for our products or hinder our ability to collect amounts due from customers. However, the cost of medicines and vaccines to our livestock producer customers is small relative to other production costs, including feed, and the use of these products improves livestock producers economic outcomes. As a result, demand for our products has typically been more stable than demand for other production inputs. Similarly, industry sources report that pet owners indicate a preference for reducing spending on other aspects of their lifestyle, including entertainment, clothing and household goods, before reducing spending on pet care. Competition The animal health industry is competitive. Although our business is the largest by revenues in the animal health medicines and vaccines industry, we face competition in the regions and sectors in which we compete. Principal methods of competition vary depending on the particular region, species, product category or individual product. Some of these methods include new product development, quality, price, service and promotion to veterinary professionals, pet owners and livestock producers. Our competitors include the animal health businesses of large pharmaceutical companies and specialty animal health businesses. In addition to competition from established market participants, there could be new entrants to the animal health medicines and vaccines industry in the future. In certain markets, we also compete with companies that produce generic products, but the level of competition from generic products varies from market to market. For example, the level of generic competition is higher in Europe and certain emerging markets than in the U.S. However, there is no large, well-capitalized company focused on generic animal health products that exists as a global competitor in the industry. Weather conditions and the availability of natural resources The animal health industry and demand for many of our animal health products in a particular region are affected by weather conditions, as usage of our products follows varying weather patterns and weather-related pressures from pests, such as ticks. As a result, we may experience regional and seasonal fluctuations in our results of operations. In addition, livestock producers depend on the availability of natural resources, including large supplies of fresh water. Their animals health and their ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience a shortage of fresh water due to human population growth or floods, droughts or other weather conditions. In the event of adverse weather conditions or a shortage of fresh water, livestock producers may purchase less of our products. For example, the drought currently impacting the U.S. is considered the worst in many years, impacting both the supply of corn and the availability of grazing pasture. The decrease in harvested corn has resulted in higher corn prices, which has impacted the profitability of livestock producers of cattle, pork and poultry. Higher corn prices may contribute to reductions in herd or flock size that may result in reduced spending on animal health products. Reduced availability of grazing pasture may also force cattle producers to cull their herds. Fewer heads of cattle would result in reduced demand for our products. A prolonged drought could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. Our current expectations are that the drought may affect our performance in 2013. Factors influencing the magnitude and timing of any effects of a drought on our performance include, but may not be limited to, weather patterns and herd management decisions taken by livestock producers Disease outbreaks Sales of our livestock products could be adversely affected by the outbreak of disease carried by animals. Outbreaks of disease may reduce regional or global sales of particular animal-derived food products or result in reduced exports of such products, either due to heightened export restrictions or import prohibitions, which may reduce demand for our products. Also, the outbreak of any highly contagious disease near our main production sites could require us to immediately halt production of our products at such sites or force us to incur substantial expenses in procuring raw materials or products elsewhere. Alternatively, sales of products that treat specific disease outbreaks may increase. For example, in 2012, we successfully launched a vaccine for horses against the deadly Hendra virus in Australia. Foreign exchange rates Significant portions of our revenues and costs are exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates. Our products are sold in more than 120 countries and, as a result, our revenues are influenced by changes in foreign exchange rates. In 2012, approximately 54% of our revenues were 36 | Table of Contents denominated in foreign currencies. As a business unit of Pfizer and under Pfizer global cash management system, we sought to manage our foreign exchange risk in part through operating means, including managing same-currency revenues in relation to same-currency costs and same-currency assets in relation to same-currency liabilities. Going forward, we will evaluate if a similar approach to managing foreign exchange risk is appropriate for our company. As we operate in multiple foreign currencies, including the euro, the Brazilian real, the Australian dollar and other currencies, changes in those currencies relative to the U.S. dollar will impact our revenues and expenses, and consequently, net income. Exchange rate fluctuations may also have an impact beyond our reported financials and directly impact operations. These fluctuations may affect the ability to buy and sell our goods and services between markets impacted by significant exchange rate variances. Approximately 46% of our total revenues occur in U.S. dollars, and in 2012 our year-over-year revenue growth was unfavorably impacted by 4% from changes in foreign currency values relative to the U.S. dollar. For example, on February 13, 2013, the Venezuelan government devalued its currency from a rate of 4.3 to 6.3 Venezuelan bolivar per U.S. dollar. We incurred a foreign currency loss immediately on the devaluation as a result of remeasuring the local balance sheets, and we will experience ongoing adverse impacts to earnings as our revenues, costs and expenses will be translated into U.S. dollars at lower rates. The impacts are not expected to be significant to our financial condition or results of operations. Our growth strategies We seek to enhance the health of animals and to bring solutions to our customers who raise and care for them. We have a global presence in both developed and emerging markets and we intend to grow our business by pursuing the following core strategies: leverage our direct local presence and strong customer relationships Through our direct selling commercial model, we can deepen our understanding of our customers businesses and can encourage the adoption of more sophisticated animal health products; further penetrate emerging markets We seek to maximize our presence where economic development is driving increased demand for animal protein and increased demand for and spending on companion animals; pursue new product development and value-added brand lifecycle development to extend our product portfolio New product R&D and brand lifecycle development enable us to deliver innovative products to address unmet needs and evolve our product lines so they remain relevant for our customers. We seek to leverage our strong direct presence in many regions and cost-effectively develop new products; remain the partner of choice for access to new products and technologies We seek to continue to support cutting-edge research and secure the right to develop and commercialize new products and technologies; continue to provide high-quality products and improve manufacturing production margins We believe our manufacturing and supply chain provides us with a global platform for continued expansion, including in emerging markets, and that our quality and reliability differentiate us from our competitors; and expand into complementary businesses to become a more complete, trusted partner in providing solutions We believe we have the potential to generate incremental and complementary revenues, in the areas of diagnostics, genetics, devices and services such as dairy data management, e-learning and professional consulting, which could also enhance the loyalty of our customer base and may lead to increased product sales. Components of revenues and costs and expenses Our revenues, costs and expenses are reported for the fiscal year ended December 31 for each year presented, except for operations outside the U.S., for which the financial information is included in our combined financial statements for the fiscal year ended November 30 for each year presented. Revenues Our revenues are primarily derived from our diversified product portfolio of medicines and vaccines used to treat livestock and companion animals. Generally, our products are sold to veterinarians and livestock producers by our sales organization which includes sales representatives and technical and veterinary operations specialists. The depth of our product portfolio enables us to address the varying needs of different customers. In 2012, our top selling product line, the Ceftiofur line, contributed approximately 7% of our revenues. The Ceftiofur line and our next two top selling products, Revolution and Draxxin, contributed approximately 20% of our revenues. Our top ten best-selling product lines contributed approximately 39% of our revenues. For additional information regarding our products, including descriptions of our product lines that each represented approximately 1% or more of our revenues in 2012, see Item 1. Business Products . Costs and expenses Costs of sales consist primarily of cost of materials, facilities and other infrastructure used to manufacture our medicine and vaccine products and royalty expenses associated with the intellectual property of our products, when relevant. Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses consist of, among other things, the internal and external costs of marketing, promotion, advertising and shipping and handling as well as certain costs related to business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development, public affairs and procurement. Research and development (R&D) expenses consist primarily of project costs specific to new product R&D and brand lifecycle development, overhead costs associated with R&D operations and investments that support local market clinical trials for approved indications. We do not disaggregate R&D expenses by research stage or by therapeutic area for purposes of managing our business. 37 | Table of Contents Amortization of intangible assets consists primarily of the amortization expense for identifiable finite-life intangible assets that have been acquired through business combinations. These assets consist of, but are not limited to, developed technology, brands and trademarks. Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs consist of all restructuring charges (those associated with acquisition activity and those associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives), as well as costs associated with acquiring and integrating businesses. Restructuring charges are associated with employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the company. Acquisition-related costs are associated with acquiring and integrating acquired businesses, such as the King Animal Health business in 2011 and the Fort Dodge Animal Health business in 2009, and may include transaction costs and expenditures for consulting and the integration of systems and processes. Other (income)/deductions net consist primarily of various items including net interest (income)/expense, net (gains)/losses on asset disposals, royalty-related income and certain asset impairment charges. Comparability of historical results and our relationship with Pfizer During the periods covered by the combined financial statements in this 2012 Annual Report, we operated solely as a business unit of Pfizer. The combined financial statements have been derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of Pfizer and include allocations for direct costs and indirect costs attributable to the operations of the animal health business of Pfizer. These combined financial statements do not purport to reflect what the results of operations, comprehensive income/(loss), financial position, equity or cash flows would have been had we operated as a standalone public company during the periods presented. In addition, the historical combined financial statements may not be reflective of what our results of operations, comprehensive income/(loss), financial position, equity or cash flows might be in the future as a standalone public company. For a detailed description of the basis of presentation and an understanding of the limitations of the predictive value of the historical combined financial statements, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 2. Basis of Presentation. The historical balance sheets may not be comparable to the opening balance sheet of the standalone company, which will reflect the transfer by Pfizer of substantially all of its animal health business to us. Non-comparable elements will include, for example, the allocation of Pfizer debt, which was not transferred, and cash and cash equivalents, which were adjusted in conjunction with the completion of the IPO. Our historical expenses are not necessarily indicative of the expenses we may incur in the future as a standalone public company. With respect to support functions, for example, our historical combined financial statements include expense allocations for certain support functions that are provided on a centralized basis within Pfizer, such as expenses for business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, and, to a lesser extent, business development, public affairs and procurement, among others. Pursuant to agreements with Pfizer, Pfizer will continue to provide us with some of the services related to these functions on a transitional basis in exchange for agreed-upon fees, and we will incur other costs to replace the services and resources that will not be provided by Pfizer. We will also incur additional costs as a standalone public company. As a standalone public company, our total costs related to such support functions may differ from the costs that were historically allocated to us from Pfizer. We estimate that these costs may exceed the allocated amounts for full year 2012 by a range of approximately $15 million to $25 million in 2013. In addition, we expect to incur internal costs to implement certain new systems, including infrastructure and an enterprise resource planning system, while our legacy systems are being fully supported by Pfizer under the transitional services agreement. We estimate these costs to range between approximately $30 million to $40 million in 2013 and 2014. We also expect to incur certain non-recurring costs related to becoming a standalone public company, including new branding (which includes changes to the manufacturing process for required new packaging), the creation of a standalone infrastructure, site separation and certain legal registration and patent assignment costs. We expect these costs to range between approximately $170 million to $200 million in 2013 and $70 million to $100 million in 2014. These estimates exclude the impact of any depreciation or amortization of capitalized separation expenditures. In addition, many of our employees currently participate in certain Pfizer equity award plans. Upon any Distribution, Pfizer will accelerate the vesting of, or in some cases the settlement of, on a pro rata basis, certain of the outstanding Pfizer equity awards, which will result in the recognition of additional expense. Some of our products are manufactured at sites that will be retained by Pfizer or that were operated by Pfizer under a sale-leaseback arrangement. In 2013, pursuant to the master manufacturing and supply agreement with Pfizer, we purchase these products from Pfizer. The historical combined statements of income include allocations of certain manufacturing and supply costs incurred by the manufacturing sites that would not have been charged to us under the master manufacturing and supply agreement with Pfizer had such agreement been in effect in the periods presented, such as operating variances, as well as purchase price and volume variances under a certain threshold. The costs allocated in the historical combined statements of income are higher than the amounts that would have been charged by Pfizer under the master manufacturing and supply agreement, had it been in effect during the periods presented, by approximately $10 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 and approximately $14 million for the year ended December 31, 2011. In connection with the IPO, we and Pfizer have entered into certain agreements that will provide a framework for our ongoing relationship with Pfizer. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 19D. Subsequent Events Agreements with Pfizer. Public company expenses As a result of the IPO, we became subject to the reporting requirements of the Exchange Act and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. We will have additional procedures and practices to establish as a standalone public company. As a result, we will incur additional costs, including internal audit, investor relations, stock administration and regulatory compliance costs. Recent significant acquisitions and government-mandated divestitures The assets, liabilities, operating results and cash flows of acquired businesses are included in our results commencing from their respective acquisition dates. 38 | Table of Contents The King Animal Health business (KAH) was acquired by Pfizer as part of its acquisition of King Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (acquired on January 31, 2011), strengthening our position in the poultry business with a medicated feed additives business and other poultry products and further strengthening our position in the cattle and swine businesses. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 4A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments Acquisition of King Animal Health . Our combined financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2011 reflect eleven months of KAH U.S. operations and ten months of KAH international operations. The Fort Dodge Animal Health business (FDAH) was acquired by Pfizer as part of its acquisition of Wyeth (acquired on October 15, 2009), adding to our portfolio a broad array of companion animal and livestock brands and strengthening our vaccine portfolio, including a complementary poultry vaccines business. In connection with this acquisition, we made certain government-mandated divestitures. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 4C. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments Divestitures . Delays in establishing new operating subsidiaries Due to local regulatory and operational requirements in certain non-U.S. jurisdictions, the transfer to us of certain assets and liabilities of Pfizer's animal health business has not yet legally occurred. We do not expect these assets and liabilities to be material to our combined financial statements, individually or in the aggregate. Significant accounting policies and application of critical accounting estimates In presenting our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies . We believe that the following accounting policies are critical to an understanding of our combined financial statements as they require the application of the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments and, therefore, could have the greatest impact on our financial statements: (i) acquisitions ( Note 3C ); (ii) fair value ( Note 3D ); (iii) revenues ( Note 3F ); (iv) asset impairment reviews ( Note 3J ); and (v) contingencies ( Notes 3N and 3Q ). Below are some of our more critical accounting estimates. See also Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3B. Significant Accounting Policies Estimates and Assumptions for a discussion about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions. Acquisitions and fair value For a discussion about the application of fair value to our recent acquisitions, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 4 . Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments . For a discussion about the application of fair value to our allocated long-term debt, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 9D . Financial Instruments Allocated Long-Term Debt . For a discussion about the application of fair value to our asset impairment reviews, see Asset impairment reviews below . Revenues Our gross product revenues are subject to deductions that are generally estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenues are recognized and primarily represent sales returns and revenue incentives. For example: for sales returns, we perform calculations in each market that incorporate the following, as appropriate: local returns policies and practices; returns as a percentage of revenues; an understanding of the reasons for past returns; estimated shelf life by product; an estimate of the amount of time between shipment and return or lag time; and any other factors that could impact the estimate of future returns, product recalls, discontinuation of products or a changing competitive environment; and for revenue incentives, we use our historical experience with similar incentives programs to estimate the impact of such programs on revenues. If any of our ratios, factors, assessments, experiences or judgments are not indicative or accurate predictors of our future experience, our results could be materially affected. Although the amounts recorded for these revenue deductions are heavily dependent on estimates and assumptions, historically our adjustments to actual results have not been material. The sensitivity of our estimates can vary by program, type of customer and geographic location. Amounts recorded for revenue deductions can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions. For further information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3B. Significant Accounting Policies Estimates and Assumptions . Asset impairment reviews We review all of our long-lived assets for impairment indicators throughout the year and we perform detailed testing whenever impairment indicators are present. In addition, we perform impairment testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived assets at least annually. When necessary, we record charges for impairments of long-lived assets for the amount by which the fair value is less than the carrying value of these assets. Our impairment review processes are described below and in Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3J. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets and, for deferred tax assets, in Note 3N. Significant Accounting Policies Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities and Income Tax Contingencies . Examples of events or circumstances that may be indicative of impairment include: 39 | Table of Contents a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used. For example, restrictions imposed by the regulatory authorities could affect our ability to manufacture or sell a product. a projection or forecast that demonstrates losses or reduced profits associated with an asset. This could result, for example, from the introduction of a competitor product that results in a significant loss of market share or the inability to achieve the previously projected revenue growth, or from the lack of acceptance of a product by customers. Our impairment reviews of most of our long-lived assets depend heavily on the determination of fair value, as defined by U.S. GAAP, and these judgments can materially impact our results of operations. A single estimate of fair value can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions. For information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3B. Significant Accounting Policies Estimates and Assumptions . Intangible assets other than goodwill As a result of our intangible asset impairment review work, we recognized a number of impairments of identifiable intangible assets other than goodwill. We recorded the following identifiable intangible asset impairment charges in Other (income)/deductions net : In 2012, the asset impairment charges reflect: (i) approximately $2 million of finite-lived companion animal developed technology rights; (ii) approximately $1 million of finite-lived trademarks related to genetic testing services; and (iii) approximately $2 million of finite-lived patents related to poultry technology. The intangible asset impairment charges for 2012 reflect, among other things, loss of revenues as a result of negative market conditions and, with respect to the poultry technology, a re-assessment of economic viability. In 2011, the asset impairment charges reflect: (i) approximately $30 million of finite-lived intangible assets related to parasiticides technology as a result of declining gross margins and increased competition; (ii) approximately $12 million of finite-lived intangible assets related to equine influenza and tetanus technology due to third-party supply issues; (iii) approximately $10 million of finite-lived intangible assets related to genetic testing services that did not find consumer acceptance; and (iv) approximately $17 million related to acquired in-process research and development, or IPR&D projects (acquired from Vetnex in 2010 and from FDAH in 2009), as a result of the termination of the development programs due to a re-assessment of their economic viability. When we are required to determine the fair value of intangible assets other than goodwill, we use an income approach, specifically the multi-period excess earnings method, also known as the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the asset, which includes the application of a terminal value for indefinite-lived assets, and then we apply an asset-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, the impact of technological risk associated with IPR&D assets, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the risks inherent in the projected cash flows; and the tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. While all identifiable intangible assets can be impacted by events and thus lead to impairment, in general, identifiable intangible assets that are at the highest risk of impairment include IPR&D assets (approximately $20 million as of December 31, 2012) and newly acquired or recently impaired indefinite-lived brand assets (none at December 31, 2012). IPR&D assets are higher-risk assets, because R&D is an inherently risky activity. Newly acquired and recently impaired indefinite-lived assets are more vulnerable to impairment because the assets are recorded at fair value and are then subsequently measured at the lower of fair value or carrying value at the end of each reporting period. As such, immediately after acquisition or impairment, even small declines in the outlook for these assets can negatively impact our ability to recover the carrying value and can result in an impairment charge. For a description of our accounting policy, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3J. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . Goodwill As a result of our goodwill impairment review work, we concluded that none of our goodwill is impaired as of December 31, 2012. While all reporting units can confront events and circumstances that can lead to impairment, we do not believe that the risk of goodwill impairment for any of our reporting units is significant at this time. When we are required to determine the fair value of a reporting unit, we use the income approach. The income approach is a forward-looking approach to estimating fair value and relies primarily on internal forecasts. Within the income approach, the method that we use is the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the reporting unit, which includes the application of a terminal value, and then we apply a reporting unit-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of technological risk and competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the various risks inherent in the projected cash flows; and the tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. For all of our reporting units, there are a number of future events and factors that may impact future results and that could potentially have an impact on the outcome of subsequent goodwill impairment testing. For a list of these factors, see Forward-looking statements and information that may affect future results. For a description of our accounting policy, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3J. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . 40 | Table of Contents Contingencies For a discussion about income tax contingencies, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 7C. Tax Matters Tax Contingencies . For a discussion about legal contingencies, guarantees and indemnifications, see Notes to Combined Financial Statement Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies . Analysis of the combined statements of income The following discussion and analysis of our combined statements of income should be read along with our combined financial statements and the notes thereto, which reflect the results of operations of the business transferred to us from Pfizer. For more information on the carve-out basis of presentation, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 2. Basis of Presentation . Year Ended December 31, (a) % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Revenues $ 4,336 $ 4,233 $ 3,582 2 18 Costs and expenses: Cost of sales (b) 1,563 1,652 1,444 (5 ) 14 % of revenues 36 % 39 % 40 % Selling, general and administrative expenses (b) 1,470 1,453 1,382 1 5 % of revenues 34 % 34 % 39 % Research and development expenses (b) 409 427 411 (4 ) 4 % of revenues 9 % 10 % 11 % Amortization of intangible assets 64 69 58 (7 ) 19 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs 135 154 202 (12 ) (24 ) Other (income)/deductions net (c) (15 ) 84 (93 ) * * Income before provision for taxes on income 710 394 178 80 121 % of revenues 16 % 9 % 5 % Provision for taxes on income 274 146 67 88 118 Effective tax rate 38.6 % 37.1 % 37.6 % Net income before allocation to noncontrolling interests 436 248 111 76 123 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 3 1 (100 ) 200 Net income attributable to Zoetis $ 436 $ 245 $ 110 78 123 % of revenues 10 % 6 % 3 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. * Calculation not meaningful. (a) Includes revenues and expenses from acquisitions from the acquisition date. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments . (b) Exclusive of amortization of intangible assets, except as disclosed in Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3J. Significant Accounting Policies Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . (c) Includes interest expense on allocated long-term debt of $31 million , $36 million and $37 million for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Other (Income)/Deductions Net. Revenues Revenues-overview Global revenues by operating segment were as follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 U.S. $ 1,776 $ 1,659 $ 1,384 7 20 EuAfME 1,096 1,144 1,020 (4 ) 12 CLAR 769 788 664 (2 ) 19 APAC 695 642 514 8 25 Total $ 4,336 $ 4,233 $ 3,582 2 18 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. On a global basis, the mix of our revenues between livestock and companion animal products was as follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Livestock $ 2,806 $ 2,778 $ 2,233 1 24 Companion animal 1,530 1,455 1,349 5 8 Total $ 4,336 $ 4,233 $ 3,582 2 18 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 41 | Table of Contents As a result of the impact of a recent significant acquisition and the related government-mandated divestitures on the revenue numbers in our statements of income for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, the growth trend on our existing portfolio from year to year is not readily apparent. We believe that it is not only important to understand overall revenue growth, but also existing portfolio growth year over year. As such, we utilize base revenue growth. Base revenue growth is defined as revenue growth excluding the impact of incremental revenues from recent significant acquisitions, government-mandated divestitures and foreign exchange. Resulting Resulting from Resulting from Base Resulting Government- from % Change in Revenue: Revenue from KAH Mandated Foreign increases/(decreases) Reported Growth (a) Acquisition (b) Divestitures (c) Exchange 2012 vs. 2011 U.S. 7 6 1 EuAfME (4) 2 1 (7) CLAR (2) 4 1 (7) APAC 8 8 1 (1) Total revenues 2 5 1 (4) 2011 vs. 2010 U.S. 20 7 13 EuAfME 12 3 6 3 CLAR 19 9 7 (1) 4 APAC 25 12 7 (2) 8 Total revenues 18 7 9 (1) 3 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Reflects changes in reported growth excluding the impact of incremental revenues from recent significant acquisitions, government-mandated divestitures and foreign exchange. (b) Reflects the acquisition of KAH, acquired by Pfizer on January 31, 2011. (c) Reflects government-mandated divestitures of legacy FDAH and our legacy products in connection with the FDAH acquisition. Revenue Total 2012 vs. 2011 Total revenues increased $ 103 million , or 2% , in 2012 compared to 2011, due to: base revenue growth of $ 212 million , or 5% , with growth across all operating segments; and the inclusion of an incremental one month of U.S. and two months of international revenues of $ 37 million , or 1% , from the KAH acquisition, partially offset by: the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange, which decreased revenues by approximately $ 146 million , or 4% . 2011 vs. 2010 Total revenues increased $651 million, or 18%, in 2011 compared to 2010, due to: base revenue growth of $239 million, or 7%, from growth across all operating segments; the inclusion of revenues of $329 million, or 9%, from the acquisition of KAH; and the favorable impact of foreign exchange, which increased revenues by approximately $104 million, or 3%, partially offset by: the unfavorable impact of government-mandated divestitures of $21 million, or 1%. Revenues-operating segment 2012 vs. 2011 U.S. operating segment U.S. segment revenues increased by $ 117 million , or 7% , in 2012 compared to 2011. Base revenue growth was $ 103 million , or 6% , of which approximately $ 46 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 57 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenue growth was due principally to increased demand for premium anti-infectives in cattle as a result of continued acceptance of our products based on superior efficacy, supported by economic outcomes studies. There was also increased 42 | Table of Contents demand for medicated feed additives in swine, which was partially due to increased incidence of enteric infections in late stage pigs. Additionally, revenue growth was positively impacted by our entry into a new market with the launch of an improved formulation of a swine vaccine that prevents porcine circovirus type 2. This revenue growth was partially offset by the impact of the drought in the U.S. Companion animal product revenue growth was driven by parasiticides, benefiting from an extended flea and tick season caused by unusually warm weather and by a temporary competitor supply disruption. Companion animal products also benefited from continued growth in canine vaccines and the success of targeted marketing efforts for anti-infectives and other pharmaceutical products. EuAfME operating segment EuAfME segment revenues decreased by $ 48 million , or 4% , in 2012 compared to 2011. Base revenue growth was $ 21 million , or 2% , of which approximately $ 12 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 9 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenue growth was driven by strong demand for cattle parasiticides, particularly in France and the UK, along with a continued growing demand for animal proteins in emerging markets. Additionally, the poultry product portfolio grew due to expansion into emerging markets. Results were partially offset by continued adverse macroeconomic conditions throughout Western Europe and pressure from the ongoing restrictions on the use of certain antibacterials. Companion animal product revenues were favorably impacted by parasiticides and the launch of new branded generic products throughout the region. Revenue was also favorably impacted by equine vaccines due to a temporary competitor supply disruption. Results were partially offset by continued adverse macroeconomic conditions throughout Western Europe. Additionally, segment revenues were unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenues by approximately $ 77 million or 7% . CLAR operating segment CLAR segment revenues decreased by $ 19 million , or 2% , in 2012 compared to 2011. Base revenue growth was $ 35 million , or 4% , of which approximately $ 17 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 18 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenues were favorably impacted by the launch of an improved formulation of a swine vaccine that prevents porcine circovirus type 2. Swine vaccines also benefited from continued demand in South America for Improvac/Improvest, a product that reduces boar taint without the need for surgical castration. Additionally, marketing initiatives focused on legacy KAH products drove increased demand for poultry medicated feed additives in Brazil. Results were partially offset by the slowdown of the cattle market in Brazil due to increased competition and reduced margins for cattle producers. Additionally, certain markets within the region were impacted by the North American drought. Companion animal product revenue growth was attributable to canine vaccines especially in Brazil. Parasiticides performed well across the region, particularly in Canada due to a temporary competitor supply disruption and an extended flea and tick season caused by unusually warm weather. Additionally, segment revenues were unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenues by approximately $ 61 million or 7% . APAC operating segment APAC segment revenues increased by $ 53 million , or 8% , in 2012 compared to 2011. Base revenue growth was $ 53 million , or 8% , of which approximately $ 30 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $ 23 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenues were favorably impacted by the launch of an improved formulation of a swine vaccine that prevents porcine circovirus type 2, particularly in South East Asia, as well as growth in China, Australia and Japan. Increased sales force presence in China drove growth in premium priced swine products. Australia experienced growth in the dairy cattle segment due to higher sales of intramammary products. Revenues in Japan were also driven by broad growth in the poultry portfolio. Companion animal product revenues benefited from promotional campaigns in Japan and the resulting increased adoption of our products into veterinarian treatment protocols. Australia benefited from growth in parasiticides as a result of focused sales force efforts that drove demand for these products. China experienced growth in canine vaccines due to expansion of the sales organization. Additionally, segment revenues were unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange, which decreased revenues by approximately $ 8 million or 1% . 2011 vs. 2010 U.S. operating segment U.S. segment revenues increased by $275 million, or 20%, in 2011 compared to 2010. Base revenue growth was $89 million, or 7%, of which approximately $65 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $24 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. 43 | Table of Contents Livestock product revenue growth was in large part due to increased demand for anti-infectives in cattle and swine as a result of new promotional campaigns focused on superior efficacy supported by economic outcomes studies, as well as general growth in the cattle market. Cattle vaccine growth was driven by FDA approvals for new treatment indications. Additionally, the re-launch of Inovocox, a poultry vaccine, contributed to growth. Companion animal product revenue growth was primarily attributable to Rimadyl, an anti-inflammatory, Convenia, a single-injection anti-infective, and canine respiratory vaccines. In addition, we benefited from the full year impact of contracts signed with large veterinary clinic networks during 2010. Segment revenues were also favorably impacted by the inclusion of $186 million, or 13%, from the acquisition of KAH. EuAfME operating segment EuAfME segment revenues increased by $124 million, or 12%, in 2011 compared to 2010. Base revenue growth in the EuAfME operating segment was $31 million, or 3%, of which approximately $13 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $18 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Adverse macroeconomic conditions throughout Western Europe negatively impacted growth rates for both livestock and companion animal product sales. Livestock product revenues were driven by emerging markets, including Turkey, Russia and North Africa, due to strong demand for animal health products used in swine and poultry production. Additionally, growth was driven by Draxxin, a premium anti-infective used in cattle and swine. Livestock product revenues were negatively impacted by $22 million due to the loss of government subsidies of a FDAH product in France, Germany and Spain for the eradication of blue tongue virus in cattle and sheep. Companion animal product revenue growth was primarily driven by increased use of Convenia and Clavamox across the region, and by other anti-infective medicines in Germany, France and emerging markets. Increases in vaccine utilization drove additional growth in the U.K. and emerging markets. Segment revenues were also favorably impacted by the inclusion of $59 million, or 6%, from the acquisition of KAH. Additionally, revenues were favorably impacted by 3% due to foreign exchange. CLAR operating segment CLAR segment revenues increased by $124 million, or 19%, in 2011 compared to 2010. Base revenue growth was $56 million, or 9%, of which approximately $38 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $18 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenue growth was driven by the demand for Improvac/Improvest, a product that reduces boar taint without the need for surgical castration, in Brazil and Colombia. Growth also resulted from the implementation of marketing initiatives in Brazil and Mexico, which increased demand for Draxxin and Lincospectin for cattle and poultry, respectively, across the region. Companion animal product revenue growth was driven by the demand for canine vaccines, primarily in Brazil and other emerging Latin America markets, and demand for parasiticides in Brazil and Canada. Segment revenues were also favorably impacted by the inclusion of $49 million, or 7%, from the acquisition of KAH and were negatively impacted by government-mandated divestitures in 2011 related to the acquisition of FDAH, which decreased revenues by 1%. Additionally, revenues were favorably impacted by 4% due to foreign exchange. APAC operating segment APAC segment revenues increased $128 million, or 25%, in 2011 compared to 2010. Base revenue growth in the APAC operating segment was $63 million, or 12%, of which approximately $38 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $25 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock product revenue growth was broad-based, driven by both developed and emerging markets. Sales organization investments in China and India further accelerated growth in anti-infectives and vaccines in these two countries. Growth also continued in sheep and cattle vaccines in Australia. Companion animal product revenue growth was impacted by broad-based demand for parasiticides, canine vaccines and anti-infectives due to favorable market conditions in developed and emerging markets. Segment revenues were also favorably impacted by the inclusion of $35 million, or 7%, from the acquisition of KAH and were negatively impacted by government-mandated divestitures in 2011 related to the acquisition of FDAH, which decreased revenues by 2%. Additionally, revenues were favorably impacted by 8% due to foreign exchange. Costs and expenses Cost of sales Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Cost of sales (a) $ 1,563 $ 1,652 $ 1,444 (5 ) 14 % of revenues 36 % 39 % 40 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of corporate enabling functions was: $1 million in 2012, $3 million in 2011, and $6 million in 2010. 2012 vs. 2011 Cost of sales decreased $ 89 million , or 5% , in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily as a result of: the non-recurrence of approximately $24 million of incremental purchase accounting charges in 2011 reflecting the fair value adjustments to inventory acquired from KAH that was subsequently sold in 2011; the non-recurrence of a $12 million inventory write-off in 2011 related to suspended sales of 3-Nitro; favorable product mix; increased operational efficiencies and savings associated with margin improvement initiatives, including plant network optimization, yield improvements and overall cost reductions; and favorable foreign exchange, partially offset by: base revenue growth; and the inclusion of an incremental one month of U.S. and two months of international KAH operations. 2011 vs. 2010 Cost of sales increased $208 million, or 14%, in 2011 compared to 2010, primarily as a result of: the addition of approximately $200 million in costs associated with KAH products inclusive of incremental purchase accounting charges of $24 million reflecting the fair value adjustments to inventory acquired from KAH that was subsequently sold; base revenue growth; and unfavorable product mix between our legacy portfolio and KAH portfolio, partially offset by: increased operational efficiencies and savings associated with margin improvement initiatives, including plant network optimization, yield improvements and overall cost reductions. Selling, general and administrative expenses Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Selling, general and administrative expenses (a) $ 1,470 $ 1,453 $ 1,382 1 5 % of revenues 34 % 34 % 39 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of corporate enabling functions was: $254 million in 2012, $268 million in 2011 and $260 million in 2010. 44 | Table of Contents 2012 vs. 2011 SG&A expenses increased by $ 17 million , or 1% , in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily as a result of: the inclusion of an incremental one month of U.S. and two months of international KAH operations; initiatives to increase our direct sales and marketing presence in certain emerging markets; and additional costs associated with the build-up of our capabilities as a standalone company, partially offset by: reductions in costs due to both acquisition-related synergies and cost reduction initiatives; and favorable foreign exchange. 2011 vs. 2010 SG&A expenses increased $71 million, or 5%, in 2011 compared to 2010, primarily as a result of: the addition of KAH operations, eleven months in the U.S. and ten months internationally; and initiatives to increase our direct sales and marketing presence in certain emerging markets, partially offset by: reductions in costs due to both acquisition-related synergies and cost reduction initiatives. Research and development expenses Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Research and development expenses (a) $ 409 $ 427 $ 411 (4 ) 4 % of revenues 9 % 10 % 11 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of corporate enabling functions was: $55 million in 2012, $64 million in 2011 and $79 million in 2010. 2012 vs. 2011 R&D expenses decreased $ 18 million , or 4% , in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily as a result of: a decreased allocation of enabling functions; and a decrease in depreciation related to the closing of an R&D facility in the U.K. 2011 vs. 2010 R&D expenses increased $16 million, or 4%, in 2011 compared to 2010, primarily as a result of $19 million in additional depreciation related to the closing of an R&D facility in the U.K. Also, an incremental $10 million of R&D expenses from the acquisition of KAH and the acquisition of a diagnostics business (in December 2010) contributed to the increase in R&D expenses. These expenses were partially offset by reductions in costs due to acquisition-related synergies and cost reduction initiatives. Amortization of intangible assets Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Amortization of intangible assets $ 64 $ 69 $ 58 (7 ) 19 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2012 vs. 2011 Amortization of intangible assets decreased $ 5 million , or 7% , in 2012 compared to 2011, which reflects the impact of impairments taken in 2012 and 2011. 2011 vs. 2010 Amortization of intangible assets increased $11 million, or 19%, in 2011 compared to 2010, primarily as a result of the addition of finite-lived intangible assets acquired as part of our acquisition of KAH. 45 | Table of Contents Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs (a) $ 135 $ 154 $ 202 (12 ) (24 ) Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocation of Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs was: $57 million in 2012, $70 million in 2011 and $104 million in 2010. We have incurred significant direct costs for restructuring and integrating acquired businesses, such as KAH on January 31, 2011 and FDAH on October 15, 2009, among others, and in connection with our ongoing cost reduction/productivity initiatives. Our acquisition-related costs primarily related to restructuring charges for employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the combined company. The majority of these charges are termination costs, but we also exited a number of distributor and other contracts and performed some facility rationalization efforts. Our integration costs are generally comprised of consulting costs related to the integration of systems and processes. The costs associated with our cost reduction/productivity initiatives are predominantly termination costs associated with plant closings initiated by Pfizer's manufacturing division, as well as termination costs associated with reorganization of our commercial operations in Europe. These cost reduction/productivity initiatives are ongoing. For additional information regarding restructuring charges and acquisition-related costs, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 5. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost Reduction/Productivity Initiatives . 2012 vs. 2011 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs decreased $ 19 million , or 12% , primarily as a result of: a $24 million decrease in integration costs primarily related to the KAH acquisition; and a net $5 million decrease in employee termination expenses which results from lower terminations related to acquisitions and the reversal of a termination reserve upon sale of a manufacturing plant, partially offset by an increase in termination costs associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives primarily related to our operations in Europe, partially offset by: a $7 million increase in asset impairment charges primarily from the allocation of the impairment of a Pfizer facility; a $5 million increase in exit costs primarily from the allocation of the costs incurred to exit certain Pfizer facilities. 2011 vs. 2010 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs decreased $48 million, or 24%, in 2011 compared to 2010, primarily as a result of lower integration and restructuring costs related to the KAH acquisition in 2011 and the integration and restructuring costs related to FDAH in 2010 as the FDAH acquisition was significantly larger and more complex than the KAH acquisition. Other (income)/deductions net Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Other (income)/deductions net $ (15 ) $ 84 $ (93 ) * * Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. * Calculation not meaningful. Interest expense related to allocated debt of $ 31 million , $36 million and $37 million was included in Other (income)/deductions net for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Considering the impact of our senior notes offering in January 2013, we expect total interest expense, including amortization of debt discount and fees, to be approximately $114 million in 2013 and $121 million in 2014. 2012 vs. 2011 The change in Other (income)/deductions net reflects a favorable impact of $ 99 million on income attributable to Zoetis in 2012 compared to 2011, primarily as a result of: lower asset impairment charges of identifiable intangible assets of approximately $64 million. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Other (Income)/Deductions Net ; and a favorable $14 million settlement in 2012 regarding an intellectual property matter, as well as a $7 million favorable change in an estimate for an environmental-related reserve. 2011 vs. 2010 The change in other (income)/deductions net reflects an unfavorable impact of $177 million on income attributable to Zoetis in 2011 compared to 2010, primarily as a result of: 46 | Table of Contents the non-recurrence of net gains of $104 million on asset disposals included in 2010 on government-mandated divestitures in connection with the acquisition of FDAH; and asset impairment charges of identifiable intangible assets of $69 million. For additional information about Other (income)/deductions net , see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 6 . Other (Income)/Deductions Net . Provision for taxes on income Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Provision for taxes on income $ 274 $ 146 $ 67 88 118 Effective tax rate 38.6 % 37.1 % 37.6 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. The income tax provision in the combined statements of income has been calculated as if Zoetis filed a separate tax return and includes tax costs and benefits, such as uncertain tax positions, repatriation decisions and audit settlements, among others. During the third quarter of 2012, Pfizer reached a settlement with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) with respect to the audits of the Pfizer Inc. tax returns for the years 2006 through 2008. The settlement resulted in an income tax benefit to Zoetis of approximately $29.3 million, representing tax and interest. During the first quarter of 2011, Pfizer reached a settlement with the IRS with respect to the audits of the Wyeth tax returns for the years 2002 through 2005. The settlement resulted in an income tax benefit to Zoetis of approximately $9.5 million, representing tax and interest. During the fourth quarter of 2010, Pfizer reached a settlement with the IRS related to issues Pfizer had appealed with respect to the audits of the Pfizer Inc. tax returns for the years 2002 through 2005, as well as the Pharmacia audit for the year 2003 through the date of merger with Pfizer (April 16, 2003). The settlement resulted in an income tax benefit to Zoetis of approximately $33.4 million, representing tax and interest. For more information, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 7A. Tax Matters Taxes on Income . 2012 vs. 2011 The higher effective tax rate in 2012 compared to 2011 is primarily due to: the change in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs. The jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary as a result of repatriation decisions and as a result of operating fluctuations in the normal course of business, the impact of non-deductible items and the extent and location of other income and expense items, such as restructuring charges, asset impairments and gains and losses on asset divestitures; the tax cost related to changes in uncertain tax positions, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 7C. Tax Matters Tax Contingencies ; the non-recurrence of the aforementioned $9.5 million reduction in tax benefits, representing tax and interest, which were recorded as a result of the favorable tax audit settlement pertaining to prior years; and the expiration of the research and development tax credit on December 31, 2011, partially offset by: the tax benefit resulting from the aforementioned $29.3 million settlement in 2012 and international tax benefits of approximately $2.7 million, representing tax and interest, resulting from the resolution of certain tax positions pertaining to prior years with various foreign tax authorities and from the lapse of certain statutes of limitations. 2011 vs. 2010 The lower effective tax rate in 2011 compared to 2010 is primarily due to: the change in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs. The jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary as a result of repatriation decisions and as a result of operating fluctuations in the normal course of business, the impact of non-deductible items and the extent and location of other income and expense items, such as restructuring charges, asset impairments and gains and losses on asset divestitures; the aforementioned $9.5 million in tax benefits, representing tax and interest, which were recorded as a result of the favorable tax audit settlement pertaining to prior years; and the non-recurrence of the write-off of a deferred tax asset of approximately $21.3 million in 2010 to record the impact of the U.S. healthcare legislation concerning the tax treatment of the Medicare Part D subsidy for retiree prescription drug coverage, partially offset by: the non-recurrence of the aforementioned $33.4 million in tax benefits, representing tax and interest, which were recorded as a result of the favorable tax audit settlement pertaining to prior years. On January 3, 2013, the President of the United States signed into law the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 (the 2012 Act), which extends the U.S. research and development tax credit for tax years 2012 and 2013, as well as other provisions. Given the enactment date of the 2012 Act, the 2012 Act had no impact on our 2012 results. The expected impact in 2013 is not significant. Adjusted net income General description of adjusted net income (a non-GAAP financial measure) Adjusted net income is an alternative view of performance used by management, and we believe that investors understanding of our performance is enhanced by disclosing this performance measure. We report adjusted net income to portray the results of our major operations, the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of animal health medicine and vaccine products, prior to considering certain income statement elements. We have defined adjusted net income as net income attributable to Zoetis before the impact of purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs and certain significant items. The adjusted net income measure is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP reported net income attributable to Zoetis. The adjusted net income measure is an important internal measurement for us. We measure our overall performance on this basis in conjunction with other performance metrics. The following are examples of how the adjusted net income measure is utilized: 47 | Table of Contents senior management receives a monthly analysis of our operating results that is prepared on an adjusted net income basis; our annual budgets are prepared on an adjusted net income basis; and other goal setting and performance measurements. Despite the importance of this measure to management in goal setting and performance measurement, adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure that has no standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP and, therefore, has limits in its usefulness to investors. Because of its non-standardized definition, adjusted net income, unlike U.S. GAAP net income, may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. Adjusted net income is presented to permit investors to more fully understand how management assesses performance. We also recognize that, as an internal measure of performance, the adjusted net income measure has limitations, and we do not restrict our performance-management process solely to this metric. A limitation of the adjusted net income measure is that it provides a view of our operations without including all events during a period, such as the effects of an acquisition or amortization of purchased intangibles, and does not provide a comparable view of our performance to other companies. We also use other specifically tailored tools designed to achieve the highest levels of performance. Purchase accounting adjustments Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant purchase accounting impacts that result from business combinations and net asset acquisitions. These impacts, primarily associated with the Pharmacia Animal Health business (acquired in 2003), FDAH (acquired in 2009) and KAH (acquired in 2011), include the incremental charge to cost of sales from the sale of acquired inventory that was written up to fair value, amortization related to the increase in fair value of the acquired finite-lived intangible assets and depreciation related to the increase/decrease in fair value of the acquired fixed assets. Therefore, the adjusted net income measure includes the revenues earned upon the sale of the acquired products without considering the aforementioned significant charges. While certain purchase accounting adjustments can occur through 20 or more years, this presentation provides an alternative view of our performance that is used by management to internally assess business performance. We believe the elimination of amortization attributable to acquired intangible assets provides management and investors an alternative view of our business results by providing a degree of parity to internally developed intangible assets for which R&D costs previously have been expensed. A completely accurate comparison of internally developed intangible assets and acquired intangible assets cannot be achieved through adjusted net income. These components of adjusted net income are derived solely from the impact of the items listed above. We have not factored in the impact of any other differences in experience that might have occurred if we had discovered and developed those intangible assets on our own, and this approach does not intend to be representative of the results that would have occurred in those circumstances. For example, our R&D costs in total, and in the periods presented, may have been different; our speed to commercialization and resulting revenues, if any, may have been different; or our costs to manufacture may have been different. In addition, our marketing efforts may have been received differently by our customers. As such, in total, there can be no assurance that our adjusted net income amounts would have been the same as presented had we discovered and developed the acquired intangible assets. Acquisition-related costs Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering transaction, integration, restructuring and additional depreciation costs associated with significant business combinations or net-asset acquisitions because these costs are unique to each transaction and represent costs that were incurred to restructure and integrate certain businesses as a result of the acquisition decision. We have made no adjustments for the resulting synergies. We believe that viewing income prior to considering these charges provides investors with a useful additional perspective because the significant costs incurred in a business combination result primarily from the need to eliminate duplicate assets, activities or employees a natural result of acquiring a fully integrated set of activities. For this reason, we believe that the costs incurred to convert disparate systems, to close duplicative facilities or to eliminate duplicate positions (for example, in the context of a business combination) can be viewed differently from those costs incurred in the ordinary course of business. The integration and restructuring costs associated with a business combination may occur over several years, with the more significant impacts ending within three years of the transaction. Because of the need for certain external approvals for some actions, the span of time needed to achieve certain restructuring and integration activities can be lengthy. For example, due to the regulated nature of the animal health medicines and vaccines business, the closure of excess facilities can take several years, as all manufacturing changes are subject to extensive validation and testing and must be approved by the FDA and/or other regulatory authorities. 48 | Table of Contents Certain significant items Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant items. Certain significant items represent substantive, unusual items that are evaluated on an individual basis. Such evaluation considers both the quantitative and the qualitative aspect of their unusual nature. Unusual, in this context, may represent items that are not part of our ongoing business; items that, either as a result of their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis; items that would be non-recurring; or items that relate to products that we no longer sell. While not all-inclusive, examples of items that could be included as certain significant items would be a major non-acquisition-related restructuring charge and associated implementation costs for a program that is specific in nature with a defined term, such as those related to our non-acquisition-related cost-reduction and productivity initiatives; amounts related to disposals of products or facilities that do not qualify as discontinued operations as defined by U.S. GAAP; certain intangible asset impairments; adjustments related to the resolution of certain tax positions; the impact of adopting certain significant, event-driven tax legislation; or charges related to legal matters. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies . Our normal, ongoing defense costs or settlements of and accruals on legal matters made in the normal course of our business would not be considered certain significant items. Reconciliation and detailed descriptions A reconciliation of net income attributable to Zoetis, as reported under U.S. GAAP, to non-GAAP adjusted net income follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 GAAP Reported net income attributable to Zoetis $ 436 $ 245 $ 110 78 123 Purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 35 55 103 (36 ) (47 ) Acquisition-related costs net of tax 34 78 145 (56 ) (46 ) Certain significant items net of tax 34 125 (83 ) (73 ) * Non-GAAP adjusted net income (a) $ 539 $ 503 $ 275 7 83 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. * Calculation not meaningful. (a) The effective tax rate on adjusted pretax income is 40.8% , 34.3% and 39.9% for full year 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The higher effective tax rate in 2012 compared to 2011 is due to an increase in tax cost related to changes in uncertain tax positions, the non-recurrence of approximately $9.5 million in tax benefits, representing tax and interest, which were recorded as a result of a favorable tax audit settlement pertaining to prior years, and the expiration of the U.S. research and development tax credit; partially offset by international tax benefits of approximately $2.7 million, representing tax and interest, resulting from the resolution of certain tax positions pertaining to prior years with various foreign tax authorities and from the expiration of certain statutes of limitations. Throughout 2012, we have undertaken a number of internal reorganization steps designed to improve our operational efficiency and reduce costs. We have been granted an incentive tax ruling in Belgium, effective December 1, 2012 that provides for incentive tax rates on certain of our Belgium earnings through 2017. As a result of these items, which will change our jurisdictional mix of earnings, among other impacts, we expect that our future effective tax rate on adjusted pretax income will be lower than historical levels. The following table provides a reconciliation of reported diluted EPS, as reported under U.S. GAAP, and non-GAAP adjusted diluted EPS: Year Ended December 31, % Change 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Earnings per share diluted (a)(b) : GAAP Reported net income attributable to Zoetis $ 0.87 $ 0.49 $ 0.22 78 123 Purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 0.07 0.11 0.21 (36 ) (48 ) Acquisition-related costs net of tax 0.07 0.16 0.29 (56 ) (45 ) Certain significant items net of tax 0.07 0.25 (0.17 ) (72 ) * Non-GAAP adjusted net income $ 1.08 $ 1.01 $ 0.55 7 84 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. * Calculation not meaningful. (a) The weighted average shares outstanding for diluted earnings per share for all periods presented was calculated using an aggregate of 500 million shares of Class A and Class B common stock outstanding, which was the number of Zoetis Inc. shares outstanding at the time of the IPO. There were no Zoetis restricted stock units, stock options or performance shares outstanding prior to the IPO. (b) EPS amounts may not add due to rounding. Adjusted net income includes the following charges for each of the periods presented: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 Interest $ 31 $ 36 $ 37 Taxes 372 264 183 Depreciation 119 117 103 Amortization 18 20 19 49 | Table of Contents Adjusted net income, as shown above, excludes the following items: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 Purchase accounting adjustments: Amortization and depreciation (a) $ 48 $ 48 $ 41 Cost of sales (b) 4 34 107 Total purchase accounting adjustments pretax 52 82 148 Income taxes (k) 17 27 45 Total purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 35 55 103 Acquisition-related costs (c) : Transaction costs (d) 2 1 Integration costs (d) 47 71 92 Restructuring charges (d) (4 ) 41 107 Additional depreciation asset restructuring (g) 10 8 17 Total acquisition-related costs pretax 53 122 217 Income taxes (k) 19 44 72 Total acquisition-related costs net of tax 34 78 145 Certain significant items ( e) : Restructuring charges (f) 92 40 2 Implementation costs and additional depreciation--asset restructuring (g) 23 22 Certain asset impairment charges (h) 69 Inventory write-off ( in Cost of sales) 12 13 Net gains on sale of assets (i) (104 ) Other (j) (19 ) 29 5 Total certain significant items pretax 96 172 (84 ) Income taxes (k) 62 47 (1 ) Total certain significant items net of tax 34 125 (83 ) Total purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs, and certain significant items net of tax $ 103 $ 258 $ 165 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Amortization and depreciation expense related to purchase accounting adjustments with respect to identifiable intangible assets and property, plant and equipment were distributed as follows in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively: $49 million, $49 million and $41 million in Amortization of intangible assets ; $0 million, $1 million and $0 million in Research and development expenses ; $1 million income, $2 million income and $0 million in Selling, general and administrative expenses . (b) Depreciation expense in Cost of Sales of $4 million, $10 million and $22 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010 respectively. Also includes fair value adjustments of acquired inventory of $24 million and $85 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. (c) Acquisition-related costs were distributed as follows in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively: $9 million, $6 million and $0 million in Cost of sale s; $1 million, $3 million and $17 million in Selling, general and administrative expenses ; $0 million, $1 million income and $0 million in Other (income)/deductions net; $43 million, $114 million and $200 million in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs . (d) Included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs . See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 5. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives for more information . (e) Certain significant items were distributed as follows in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively: $1 million, $31 million and $19 million in Cost of sales ; $18 million, $5 million and $0 million in Selling, general and administrative expenses ; $10 million, $19 million and $0 million in Research and development expenses ; $25 million income, $77 million and $105 million income in Other (income)/deductions net ; $92 million, $40 million and $2 million in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs . (f) Represents restructuring charges incurred for our cost-reduction/productivity initiatives. Included in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs . See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 5. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives for more information . (g) Amounts in certain significant items relate to our cost-reduction/productivity initiatives and amounts in acquisition-related costs relate to our acquisition activity. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 5. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives for more information . (h) Included in Other (income)/deductions net . See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Other (Income)/Deductions Net for more information . (i) Included in Other (income)/deductions net . See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Other (Income)/Deductions Net for more information. (j) For the year ended December 31, 2012, primarily represents income from a favorable legal settlement related to an intellectual property matter of $14 million income and a change in estimate with respect to transitional manufacturing agreements associated with divestitures of $4 million income. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Other (Income)/Deductions Net. For the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, significantly all reflected charges are related to transitional manufacturing purchase agreements associated with divestitures. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 4C. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments Divestitures for more information. (k) Included in Provision for taxes on income . Income taxes include the tax effect of the associated pre-tax amounts, calculated by determining the jurisdictional location of the pretax amounts and applying that jurisdiction applicable tax rate. In addition, income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2012 includes a $29.3 million tax benefit recorded in the third quarter and for the year ended December 31, 2010 includes a $33.4 million tax benefit recorded in the fourth quarter, both as a result of settlements of certain audits. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 7A. Tax Matters Taxes on Income for more information . Analysis of the combined statements of comprehensive income/(loss) Virtually all changes in other comprehensive income for all periods presented are related to foreign currency translation adjustments. These chang es result from the strengthening or weakening of the U.S. dollar as compared to the currencies in the countries in which we do business. The gains and losses associated with these changes are deferred on the balance sheet in Accumulated other comprehensive loss until realized. Specifically, the changes to Accumulated other comprehensive loss for 2012 reflect the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the euro and the Brazilian real. T he changes for 2011 reflect the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the Australian dollar and the Indian rupee partially offset by the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the euro. The changes for 2010 reflect the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the euro, Australian dollar and the Brazilian real. Analysis of the combined balance sheets For information about certain of our financial assets and liabilities, including Cash and cash equivalents, Accounts receivable, less allowance for doubtful accounts and Allocated long-term debt , see Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources below. For Inventories , the increase reflects production increases due to increased demand, achieving higher targeted inventory levels for certain products and changes in our supply points. For Accounts payable , the increase was primarily related to increases in trade accounts payable due to timing of payments, and increases in VAT payable. For Other current liabilities , the overall increase is due primarily to accruals for inventory in the U.S and an increase in deferred revenue, partially offset by a decrease in environmental reserves due to a favorable settlement. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 6. Other (Income)/Deductions Net. For Other noncurrent liabilities , the decrease reflects the movement of certain balances to Other current liabilities and certain changes to estimates related to contingency reserves. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 16A. Commitments and Contingencies Legal Proceedings. Virtually all of our assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2012 compared to December 31, 2011, also reflect changes due to the impact of foreign exchange. Analysis of the combined statements of cash flows Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 2010 12/11 11/10 Cash provided by/(used in): Operating activities $ 454 $ 497 $ 254 (9 ) 96 Investing activities (135 ) (449 ) (9 ) (70 ) * Financing activities (78 ) (30 ) (277 ) 160 * Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (3 ) (2 ) (4 ) * * Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 238 $ 16 $ (36 ) * * Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. * Calculation not meaningful. Operating activities 2012 vs. 2011 Our net cash provided by operating activities was $ 454 million in 2012, compared to $497 million in 2011. This decrease in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to: higher inventory balances due to increased demand, achieving higher targeted inventory levels for certain products and changes in our supply points, partially offset by: the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business. 50 | Table of Contents 2011 vs. 2010 Our net cash provided by operating activities was $497 million in 2011 compared to $254 million in 2010. The increase in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to: the inclusion of operating cash flows from KAH acquired on January 31, 2011; and the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business. Investing activities 2012 vs. 2011 Our net cash used in investing activities was $ 135 million in 2012 compared to $449 million in 2011. In 2011, Pfizer acquired KAH for $345 million in cash. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 4A. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments Acquisition of King Animal Health . 2011 vs. 2010 Our net cash used in investing activities was $449 million in 2011 compared to $9 million in 2010. The increase in net cash used by investing activities was primarily attributable to: net cash of $345 million paid for the acquisition of KAH; and higher 2010 proceeds of $169 million from sales of assets. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 4. Acquisitions, Divestitures and Certain Investments . Financing activities 2012 vs. 2011 Our net cash used in financing activities was $ 78 million in 2012, compared to $30 million in 2011. The increase in net cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to: a decrease in net financing from Pfizer, partially offset by: a decrease in cash dividends paid and a decrease in allocated principal payments on long-term debt. 2011 vs. 2010 Our net cash used in financing activities was $30 million in 2011, compared to $277 million in 2010. The decrease in net cash used in financing activities was primarily attributable to: an increase in our financing activities with Pfizer of $596 million primarily related to the acquisition of KAH in 2011, partially offset by: an allocation of principal payments of long-term debt of $143 million; and an increase in dividends paid of $209 million. Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources While we believe our cash on hand, our operating cash flows and our anticipated financing arrangements will be sufficient to support our future cash needs, this may be subject to the environment in which we operate. Risks to our meeting future funding requirements include global economic conditions described in the following paragraph. Over the last five years, the global financial markets have undergone and may continue to experience significant volatility and disruption. The timing and sustainability of an economic recovery is uncertain and additional macroeconomic, business and financial disruptions may arise. As markets change, we will continue to monitor our liquidity position, and there can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or an economic downturn would not impact our liquidity or our ability to obtain future financing. Selected measures of liquidity and capital resources Certain relevant measures of our liquidity and capital resources follow: 51 | Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2012 2011 Cash and cash equivalents (a) $ 317 $ 79 Accounts receivable, net (b) 900 871 Current portion of allocated long-term debt (c) 73 Allocated long-term debt (c) 509 575 Working capital 1,741 1,468 Ratio of current assets to current liabilities 2.55:1 2.74:1 (a) We have historically participated in Pfizer's centralized cash management system, and generally all of our excess cash was transferred to Pfizer on a daily basis. Cash disbursements for operations and/or investing activities were funded as needed by Pfizer. The cash and cash equivalents presented here are amounts recorded on legal entities that are dedicated to Zoetis. (b) Accounts receivable are usually collected over a period of 60 to 90 days . For the years ended December 31, 2012 compared to 2011, the number of days that accounts receivables are outstanding was essentially the same. We regularly monitor our accounts receivable for collectability, particularly in markets where economic conditions remain uncertain. We believe that our allowance for doubtful accounts is appropriate. Our assessment is based on such factors as past due history, historical and expected collection patterns, the financial condition of our customers, the robust nature of our credit and collection practices and the economic environment. (c) The combined financial statements include an allocation of long-term debt from Pfizer that was issued to partially finance the acquisition of Wyeth (including FDAH). The debt has been allocated on a pro-rata basis using the deemed acquisition cost of FDAH as a percentage of the total acquisition cost of Wyeth. No other allocations of debt have been made as none are specifically related to our operations. For additional information about the sources and uses of our funds, see Analysis of the combined balance sheets and Analysis of the combined statements of cash flows . In December 2012, we entered into a revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of banks providing for a five-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility, which became effective in February 2013 and expires in December 2017. The credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us to not exceed a maximum total leverage ratio of 4.35:1 for fiscal year 2013, 3.95:1 for fiscal year 2014, 3.50:1 for fiscal year 2015 and 3.00:1 thereafter. In addition, the credit facility contains other customary covenants. Subject to certain conditions, we have the right to increase the credit facility to up to $1.5 billion. The credit facility became available for borrowings upon the completion of the IPO, and there are currently no borrowings under credit facility. Domestic and international short-term funds Many of our operations are conducted outside the U.S. As part of the animal health assets transferred to us by Pfizer on January 28, 2013, we received significant portions of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments held internationally. Approximately 60% of cash transferred was held outside the U.S. Going forward, the amount of funds held in U.S. tax jurisdictions will fluctuate due to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business and due to other reasons, such as business-development activities. As part of our ongoing liquidity assessments, we regularly monitor the mix of domestic and international cash flows (both inflows and outflows). Repatriation of overseas funds can result in additional U.S. federal, state and local income tax payments. We record U.S. deferred tax liabilities for certain unremitted earnings, but when amounts earned overseas are expected to be indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S., no accrual for U.S. taxes is provided. Global economic conditions The challenging economic environment has not had, nor do we anticipate that it will have, a significant impact on our liquidity. Due to our operating cash flows, financial assets, access to capital markets and available lines of credit and revolving credit agreements, we continue to believe that we have the ability to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. As markets change, we continue to monitor our liquidity position. There can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or a further economic downturn would not impact our ability to obtain financing in the future. Subsequent events On January 28, 2013, we issued $3.65 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes (the senior notes offering) in a private placement, with an original issue discount of $10 million, including the $1.0 billion of our senior notes that were transferred to Pfizer and subsequently sold by Pfizer. On January 28, 2013, Pfizer transferred to us substantially all of the assets and liabilities of its animal health business in exchange for all of our Class A and Class B common stock, $1.0 billion of the $3.65 billion senior notes and an amount of cash equal to substantially all of the cash proceeds received by us from the remaining $2.65 billion senior notes issued. The senior note offering resulted in a change to our balance sheet. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 19A. Subsequent Events Pro forma Information . After completion of the senior notes offering the Long-term debt was $3.64 billion. On February 6, 2013 , an IPO of 99,015,000 shares of our Class A common stock (including the exercise of the underwriters' over-allotment option) at a price of $26.00 per share was completed. We did not receive any of the net proceeds from the IPO. Immediately following the IPO, there were 99,015,000 outstanding shares of Class A common stock and 400,985,000 outstanding shares of Class B common stock. In February 2013, we entered into a commercial paper program with a capacity of up to $1.0 billion. While no commercial paper has been issued under the commercial paper program at this time, we may incur indebtedness under this program in the future. For additional information, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 19 . Subsequent Events. Contractual obligations Payments due under contractual obligations as of December 31, 2012 are set forth below: 52 | Table of Contents 2014- 2016- There- (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) Total 2013 2015 2017 after Allocated long-term debt, including current portion and allocated interest obligations (a) $ 915 $ 102 $ 144 $ 120 $ 549 Other long-term liabilities reflected on our combined balance sheet under U.S. GAAP (b) 19 15 4 Operating lease commitments 58 16 22 9 11 Purchase obligations and other (c) 99 44 19 14 22 Uncertain tax positions (d) Certain amounts may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Allocated long-term debt obligations include both expected principal and interest obligations of Pfizer that have been allocated to Zoetis in the combined financial statements. The allocated debt is comprised of U.S. dollar and foreign-currency denominated senior unsecured notes issued by Pfizer to partially finance the acquisition of FDAH. Our calculations of expected interest payments incorporate only current period assumptions for interest rates, foreign currency translation rates and Pfizer hedging strategies, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 9D. Financial Instruments Allocated Long-Term Debt . (b) Includes expected payments for an obligation associated with a development and commercialization agreement and expected payments relating to our future benefit payments net of plan assets (included in the determination of the projected benefit obligation) for pension plans that are dedicated to Zoetis employees in the Netherlands, Germany, India and Korea. Excludes pension obligations associated with certain defined benefit plans outside the U.S. that Pfizer intends to transfer to us in 2013 in certain countries as described in the applicable local separation agreement. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 13. Benefit Plans. Excludes approximately $87 million of noncurrent liabilities related to legal and environmental accruals, employee terminations and exit costs, deferred income and other accruals, most of which do not represent contractual obligations. See Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 5 . Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 16 . Commitments and Contingencies . (c) Includes agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable and legally binding and includes amounts relating to advertising, information technology services, employee benefit administration services and potential milestone payments deemed reasonably likely to occur. (d) Except for amounts reflected in Income taxes payable , we are unable to predict the timing of tax settlements, as tax audits can involve complex issues and the resolution of those issues may span multiple years, particularly if subject to negotiation or litigation. The table above excludes amounts for potential milestone payments unless the payments are deemed reasonably likely to occur. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and/or commercialization milestones, which may span several years and/or which may never occur. Our historical contractual obligations in the table above are not necessarily indicative of our contractual obligations in the future as a standalone public company. The senior notes offering will result in a change to our contractual obligations and the Allocated long-term debt presented in the table above, which was retained by Pfizer in the Separation. As a result, we expect that our total payments due under contractual obligations associated with the senior notes will be $5,794 million, representing expected principal and interest obligations of $107 million in 2013, $233 million in 2014 through 2015, $624 million in 2016 through 2017 and $4,830 million thereafter. Off-balance sheet arrangements We do not currently use off-balance sheet arrangements for the purpose of credit enhancement, hedging transactions, investment or other financial purposes. In the ordinary course of business and in connection with the sale of assets and businesses, we may indemnify our counterparties against certain liabilities that may arise in connection with a transaction or that are related to activities prior to a transaction. These indemnifications typically pertain to environmental, tax, employee and/or product-related matters, and patent-infringement claims. If the indemnified party were to make a successful claim pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, we would be required to reimburse the loss. These indemnifications generally are subject to threshold amounts, specified claim periods and other restrictions and limitations. Historically, we have not paid significant amounts under these provisions and, as of December 31, 2012 or December 31, 2011, recorded amounts for the estimated fair value of these indemnifications are not significant. New accounting standards For discussion of our new accounting standards, see Notes to Combined Financial Statements Note 3A. Significant Accounting Policies New Accounting Standards . Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results This report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements reflect our current views with respect to, among other things, future events and performance. We generally identify forward-looking statements by using words such as anticipate, estimate, expect, intend, project, plan, predict, believe, seek, continue, outlook, may, might, will, should, can have, likely or the negative version of these words or comparable words or by using future dates in connection with any discussion of future performance, actions or events. Forward-looking statements are based on beliefs and assumptions made by management using currently available information. These statements are not guarantees of future performance, actions or events. In particular, forward-looking statements include statements relating to the Separation, our indebtedness, our ability to make interest and principal payments on our indebtedness, our ability to satisfy the covenants contained in our indebtedness, the redemption of the notes, future actions, business plans or prospects, prospective products, product approvals or products under development, R&D costs, timing and likelihood of success, future operating or financial performance, future results of current and anticipated products and services, strategies, sales efforts, expenses, production efficiencies, production margins, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, growth in emerging markets, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, dividend plans, the Distribution, our agreements with Pfizer, Pfizer's control of our company, government regulation and financial results. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and are potentially inaccurate assumptions. These risks and uncertainties include those set forth under Item 1A. Risk Factors but are not limited to: emerging restrictions and bans on the use of antibacterials in food-producing animals; perceived adverse effects on human health linked to the consumption of food derived from animals that utilize our products; increased regulation or decreased governmental support relating to the raising, processing or consumption of food-producing animals; an outbreak of infectious disease carried by animals; 53 | Table of Contents adverse weather conditions and the availability of natural resources; adverse global economic conditions; failure of our R&D, acquisition and licensing efforts to generate new products; failure to achieve the expected benefits of the Separation or the Distribution, which include improved strategic and operational efficiency, the adoption of a capital structure and investment and dividend policies that are best suited to our standalone company, the use of our equity to facilitate future acquisitions and improved alignment of employee incentives with our performance and growth objectives; operation as a standalone public company without many of the resources previously available to us as a business unit of Pfizer; control of a majority of the voting power of our common stock by Pfizer and, as a result, Pfizer's ability to determine the outcome of our future corporate actions, including the election of our directors; actual or potential conflicts of interest as a result of the fact that several of our directors will simultaneously serve as employees of Pfizer; and governmental laws and regulations affecting domestic and foreign operations, including without limitation, tax obligations and changes affecting the tax treatment by the U.S. of income earned outside the U.S. that may result from pending and possible future proposals. However, there may also be other risks that we are unable to predict at this time. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or if management's underlying beliefs and assumptions prove to be incorrect, actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by a forward-looking statement. You should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Form 10-Q and 8-K reports and our other filings with the SEC. We note these factors for investors as permitted by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. Consequently, you should not consider the above to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties. 
