CIK: 1555280
Company Name: ZOETIS INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2019-02-14


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Introduction Our management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (MD&A) is provided to assist readers in understanding our performance, as reflected in the results of our operations, our financial condition and our cash flows. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to consolidated financial statements included in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data . The discussion in this MD&A contains forward-looking statements that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. Our future results could differ materially from historical performance and from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors such as those discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors and Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results sections of this MD&A. Overview of our business We are a global leader in the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of animal health medicines, vaccines, and diagnostic products with a focus on both livestock and companion animals. For more than 65 years we have been committed to enhancing the health of animals and bringing solutions to our customers who raise and care for them. We manage our operations through two geographic operating segments: the United States (U.S.) and International. Within each of these operating segments, we offer a diversified product portfolio for both livestock and companion animal customers in order to capitalize on local and regional trends and customer needs. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 18. Segment Information . We directly market our products to veterinarians and livestock producers located in approximately 45 countries across North America, Europe, Africa, Asia, Australia and South America, and are a market leader in nearly all of the major regions in which we operate. Through our efforts to establish an early and direct presence in many emerging markets, such as Brazil, China and Mexico, we believe we are one of the largest animal health medicines and vaccines business as measured by revenue across emerging markets as a whole. In markets where we do not have a direct commercial presence, we generally contract with distributors that provide logistics and sales and marketing support for our products. We believe our investments in one of the industry largest sales organizations, including our extensive network of technical and veterinary operations specialists, our high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply, and our long track record of developing products that meet customer needs, has led to enduring and valued relationships with our customers. Our research and development (R&D) efforts enable us to deliver innovative products to address unmet needs and evolve our product lines so they remain relevant for our customers. A summary of our 2018 performance compared with the comparable 2017 and 2016 periods follows: Years Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Revenue $ 5,825 $ 5,307 $ 4,888 10 9 Net income attributable to Zoetis 1,428 864 821 65 5 Adjusted net income (a) 1,525 1,185 975 29 22 (a) Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure. See the Non-GAAP financial measures and Adjusted net income sections of this MD&A for more information. Our operating environment Industry The animal health industry, which focuses on both livestock and companion animals, is a growing industry that impacts billions of people worldwide. The primary livestock species for the production of animal protein are cattle (both beef and dairy), swine, poultry, fish and sheep. Livestock health and production are essential to meeting the growing demand for animal protein of a global population. Factors influencing growth in demand for livestock medicines and vaccines include: human population growth and increasing standards of living, particularly in many emerging markets; increasing demand for improved nutrition, particularly animal protein; natural resource constraints, such as scarcity of arable land, fresh water and increased competition for cultivated land, resulting in fewer resources that will be available to meet an increasing demand for animal protein; increasing urbanization; and increased focus on food safety and food security. The primary companion animal species are dogs, cats and horses. Factors influencing growth in demand for companion animal medicines, vaccines and diagnostics include: economic development and related increases in disposable income, particularly in many emerging markets; increasing pet ownership; companion animals living longer; increasing medical treatment of companion animals; and advances in companion animal medicines, vaccines and diagnostics. 32 | Table of Contents Product development initiatives Our future success depends on both our existing product portfolio and our pipeline of new products, including new products that we may develop through joint ventures and products that we are able to obtain through license or acquisition. We believe we are an industry leader in animal health R&D, with a track record of generating new products and product lifecycle innovation. The majority of our R&D programs focus on product lifecycle innovation, which is defined as R&D programs that leverage existing animal health products by adding new species or claims, achieving approvals in new markets or creating new combinations and reformulations. Perceptions of product quality, safety and reliability We believe that animal health customers value high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply. The importance of quality and safety concerns to pet owners, veterinarians and livestock producers also contributes to animal health brand loyalty, which we believe often continues after the loss of patent-based and regulatory exclusivity. We depend on positive perceptions of the safety and quality of our products by our customers, veterinarians and end-users. In addition, negative beliefs about animal health products generally could impact demand for our products. For example, the issue of the potential transfer of increased antibacterial resistance in bacteria from food-producing animals to human pathogens, and the causality of that transfer, continue to be the subject of global scientific and regulatory discussion. Antibacterials refer to small molecules that can be used to treat or prevent bacterial infections and are a sub-categorization of the products that make up our anti-infectives and medicated feed additives portfolios. In some countries, this issue has led to government restrictions and bans on the use of specific antibacterials in some food-producing animals, regardless of the route of administration (in feed or injectable). These restrictions are more prevalent in countries where animal protein is plentiful and governments are willing to take action even when there is scientific uncertainty. Our total revenue attributable to antibacterials for livestock was approximately $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018 . We cannot predict whether antibacterial resistance concerns will result in additional restrictions or bans, expanded regulations, public pressure to discontinue or reduce use of antibacterials in food-producing animals or increased consumer preference for antibiotic-free protein. The overall economic environment In addition to industry-specific factors, we, like other businesses, face challenges related to global economic conditions. Growth in both the livestock and companion animal sectors is driven by overall economic development and related growth, particularly in many emerging markets. In the past, certain of our customers and suppliers have been affected directly by economic downturns, which decreased the demand for our products and, in some cases, hindered our ability to collect amounts due from customers. The cost of medicines and vaccines to our livestock producer customers is small relative to other production costs, including feed, and the use of these products is intended to improve livestock producers economic outcomes. As a result, demand for our products has historically been more stable than demand for other production inputs. Similarly, industry sources have reported that pet owners indicated a preference for reducing spending on other aspects of their lifestyle, including entertainment, clothing and household goods, before reducing spending on pet care. While these factors have mitigated the impact of prior downturns in the global economy, future economic challenges could increase cost sensitivity among our customers, which may result in reduced demand for our products, which could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and financial condition. Competition The animal health industry is competitive. Although our business is the largest by revenue in the animal health medicines, vaccines and diagnostics industry, we face competition in the regions in which we operate. Principal methods of competition vary depending on the particular region, species, product category or individual product. Some of these methods include new product development, quality, price, service and promotion to veterinary professionals, pet owners and livestock producers. Our competitors include standalone animal health businesses and the animal health businesses of large pharmaceutical companies. In recent years, there has been an increase in consolidation in the animal health industry. There are also several new start-up companies working in the animal health area. In addition to competition from established market participants, there could be new entrants to the animal health medicines, vaccines and diagnostics industry in the future. In certain markets, we also compete with companies that produce generic products, but the level of competition from generic products varies from market to market. For example, the level of generic competition is higher in Europe and certain emerging markets than in the United States. Weather conditions and the availability of natural resources The animal health industry and demand for many of our animal health products in a particular region are affected by weather conditions, as usage of our products follows varying weather patterns and weather-related pressures from pests, such as ticks. As a result, we may experience regional and seasonal fluctuations in our results of operations. In addition, veterinary hospitals and practitioners depend on visits from and access to the animals under their care. Veterinarians patient volume and ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience prolonged snow, ice or other severe weather conditions, particularly in regions not accustomed to sustained inclement weather. Furthermore, livestock producers depend on the availability of natural resources, including large supplies of fresh water. Their animals health and their ability to operate could be adversely affected if they experience a shortage of fresh water due to human population growth or floods, droughts or other weather conditions. In the event of adverse weather conditions or a shortage of fresh water, veterinarians and livestock producers may purchase less of our products. For example, drought conditions could negatively impact, among other things, the supply of corn and the availability of grazing pastures. A decrease in harvested corn results in higher corn prices, which could negatively impact the profitability of livestock producers of cattle, pork and poultry. Higher corn prices and reduced availability of grazing pastures contribute to reductions in herd or flock sizes that in turn result in less spending on animal health products. As such, a prolonged drought could have a material adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition. Factors influencing the magnitude and timing of effects of a drought on our performance include, but may not be limited to, weather patterns and herd management decisions. 33 | Table of Contents Adverse weather conditions may also impact the aquaculture business. Changes in water temperatures could affect the timing of reproduction and growth of various fish species, as well as trigger the outbreak of certain water borne diseases. Disease outbreaks Sales of our livestock products could be adversely affected by the outbreak of disease carried by animals. Outbreaks of disease may reduce regional or global sales of particular animal-derived food products or result in reduced exports of such products, either due to heightened export restrictions or import prohibitions, which may reduce demand for our products. Also, the outbreak of any highly contagious disease near our main production sites could require us to immediately halt production of our products at such sites or force us to incur substantial expenses in procuring raw materials or products elsewhere. Alternatively, sales of products that treat specific disease outbreaks may increase. Manufacturing and supply In order to sell our products, we must be able to produce and ship our products in sufficient quantities. Many of our products involve complex manufacturing processes and are sole-sourced from certain manufacturing sites. Minor deviations in our manufacturing or logistical processes, such as temperature excursions or improper package sealing, could result in delays, inventory shortages, unanticipated costs, product recalls, product liability and/or regulatory action. In addition, a number of factors could cause production interruptions that could result in launch delays, inventory shortages, recalls, unanticipated costs or issues with our agreements under which we supply third parties. Our manufacturing network may be unable to meet the demand for our products or we may have excess capacity if demand for our products changes. The unpredictability of a product's regulatory or commercial success or failure, the lead time necessary to construct highly technical and complex manufacturing sites, and shifting customer demand increase the potential for capacity imbalances. Foreign exchange rates Significant portions of our revenue and costs are exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates. Our products are sold in more than 100 countries and, as a result, our revenue is influenced by changes in foreign exchange rates. For the year ended December 31, 2018 , approximately 47% of our revenue was denominated in foreign currencies. We seek to manage our foreign exchange risk, in part, through operational means, including managing same-currency revenue in relation to same-currency costs and same-currency assets in relation to same-currency liabilities. As we operate in multiple foreign currencies, including the euro, Brazilian real, Chinese renminbi, Canadian dollar, Australian dollar, U.K. pound and other currencies, changes in those currencies relative to the U.S. dollar will impact our revenue, cost of goods and expenses, and consequently, net income. Exchange rate fluctuations may also have an impact beyond our reported financial results and directly impact operations. These fluctuations may affect the ability to buy and sell our goods and services between markets impacted by significant exchange rate variances. For the year ended December 31, 2018 , approximately 53% of our total revenue was in U.S. dollars. Our year-over-year total revenue growth did not have a net impact from changes in foreign currency values relative to the U.S. dollar. Our growth strategies We seek to enhance the health of animals and to bring solutions to our customers who raise and care for them. We have a global presence in both developed and emerging markets and we intend to grow our business by pursuing the following core strategies: bring innovative new products and services to market We seek to deliver more innovations across core areas of vaccines, pharmaceuticals, diagnostics and the complementary spaces we have been adding over time such as genetics, biodevices, digital and data analytics; maintain a diversified, market-leading portfolio We believe our diversity across species, geographies and therapeutic areas balances economic cycles and regulatory changes, while minimizing dependency in any one area; maximize opportunities in fast-growing international markets We seek to maximize our presence where economic development is driving increased demand for animal protein and increased demand for and spending on companion animals. We intend to capitalize on investments we have made in high-growth markets such as China and Brazil; develop more data analytics and digital solutions We believe that healthcare insights enabled by data and digital technology and complemented with our portfolio of vaccines, therapeutics, and diagnostics will be critical in enhancing care for animals and improving livestock productivity; support our customers direct engagement with pet owners and consumers We believe that we have an important role to play in supporting our veterinary customers engagement with pet owners, who are increasingly influencing care decisions for their animals, and consumers, who are demanding more transparency about where their food comes from and how it is produced; and enhance our capabilities across the continuum of care We are focused on providing greater value to our customers through the integration of our portfolio that spans from disease prediction and prevention to detection and treatment. Components of revenue and costs and expenses Our revenue, costs and expenses are reported for the year ended December 31 for each year presented, except for operations outside the United States, for which the financial information is included in our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended November 30 for each year presented. 34 | Table of Contents Revenue Our revenue is primarily derived from our diversified product portfolio of medicines, vaccines and diagnostic products used to treat and protect livestock and companion animals. Generally, our products are promoted to veterinarians and livestock producers by our sales organization which includes sales representatives and technical and veterinary operations specialists, and then sold directly by us or through distributors. The depth of our product portfolio enables us to address the varying needs of customers in different species and geographies. In 2018 , our top two selling products, Apoquel and Draxxin, contributed approximately 8% and 6% , respectively, of our revenue, and combined with our next two top selling products, the ceftiofur line and Revolution/Stronghold, these four contributed approximately 25% of our revenue. Our top ten product lines contributed 40% of our revenue. For additional information regarding our products, including descriptions of our product lines that each represented approximately 1% or more of our revenue in 2018 , see Item 1. Business Products . Costs and expenses Costs of sales consist primarily of cost of materials, facilities and other infrastructure used to manufacture our medicine and vaccine products and royalty expenses associated with the intellectual property of our products, when relevant. Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses consist of, among other things, the internal and external costs of marketing, promotion, advertising and shipping and handling as well as certain costs related to business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development, public affairs and procurement. Research and development (R&D) expenses consist primarily of project costs specific to new product R&D and product lifecycle innovation, overhead costs associated with R&D operations and investments that support local market clinical trials for approved indications and expenses related to regulatory approvals for our products. We do not disaggregate R&D expenses by research stage or by therapeutic area for purposes of managing our business. Amortization of intangible assets consists primarily of the amortization expense for identifiable finite-lived intangible assets that have been acquired through business combinations. These assets consist of, but are not limited to, developed technology, brands and trademarks. Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs consist of all restructuring charges (those associated with acquisition activity and those associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives), as well as costs associated with acquiring and integrating businesses. Restructuring charges are associated with employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the company. Acquisition-related costs are associated with acquiring and integrating acquired businesses, such as Abaxis in 2018, and Pharmaq Holding AS and Abbott Animal Health (AAH) both acquired in 2015, and may include transaction costs and expenditures for consulting and the integration of systems and processes. Other (income)/deductions net consist primarily of various items including net (gains)/losses on asset disposals, royalty-related income, foreign exchange translation (gains)/losses and certain asset impairment charges. Significant accounting policies and application of critical accounting estimates In presenting our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies . We believe that the following accounting policies are critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements as they require the application of the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments and, therefore, could have the greatest impact on our financial statements: (i) fair value; (ii) revenue; (iii) asset impairment reviews; and (iv) contingencies. Below are some of our more critical accounting estimates. See also Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies: Estimates and Assumptions for a discussion about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions. Fair value For a discussion about the application of fair value to our long-term debt and financial instruments, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 9 . Financial Instruments . For a discussion about the application of fair value to our business combinations, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies: Fair Value . For a discussion about the application of fair value to our asset impairment reviews, see Asset impairment reviews below . Revenue Our gross product revenue is subject to deductions that are generally estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenue is recognized and primarily represents sales returns and revenue incentives. For example: for sales returns, we perform calculations in each market that incorporate the following, as appropriate: local returns policies and practices; returns as a percentage of revenue; an understanding of the reasons for past returns; estimated shelf life by product; an estimate of the amount of time between shipment and return or lag time; and any other factors that could impact the estimate of future returns, product recalls, discontinuation of products or a changing competitive environment; and for revenue incentives, we use our historical experience with similar incentives programs to estimate the impact of such programs on revenue. 35 | Table of Contents If any of our ratios, factors, assessments, experiences or judgments are not indicative or accurate predictors of our future experience, our results could be materially affected. Although the amounts recorded for these revenue deductions are dependent on estimates and assumptions, historically our adjustments to actual results have not been material. The sensitivity of our estimates can vary by program, type of customer and geographic location. Amounts recorded for revenue deductions can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely on estimates and assumptions. For further information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies: Estimates and Assumptions . Asset impairment reviews We review all of our long-lived assets for impairment indicators throughout the year and we perform detailed testing whenever impairment indicators are present. In addition, we perform impairment testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets at least annually. When necessary, we record charges for impairments of long-lived assets for the amount by which the fair value is less than the carrying value of these assets. Our impairment review processes are described below and in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies: Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets and, for deferred tax assets, in Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies: Deferred Tax Assets and Liabilities and Income Tax Contingencies . Examples of events or circumstances that may be indicative of impairment include: a significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used. For example, restrictions imposed by the regulatory authorities could affect our ability to manufacture or sell a product, and a projection or forecast that demonstrates losses or reduced profits associated with an asset. This could result, for example, from the introduction of a competitor product that results in a significant loss of market share or the inability to achieve the previously projected revenue growth, or from the lack of acceptance of a product by customers. For finite-lived identifiable intangible assets, such as developed technology rights, and for other long-lived assets, such as property, plant and equipment, whenever impairment indicators are present, we calculate the undiscounted value of the projected cash flows associated with the asset, or asset group, and compare this estimated amount to the carrying amount. If the carrying amount is found to be greater, we record an impairment loss for the excess of book value over fair value. In addition, in all cases of an impairment review, we re-evaluate the remaining useful lives of the assets and modify them, as appropriate. Our impairment reviews of most of our long-lived assets depend on the determination of fair value, as defined by U.S. GAAP, and these judgments can materially impact our results of operations. A single estimate of fair value can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely on estimates and assumptions. For information about the risks associated with estimates and assumptions, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies: Estimates and Assumptions . Intangible assets other than goodwill We test indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset is less than its carrying amount. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying amount, a quantitative test that compares the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset with its carrying value is performed. If the fair value is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized. Impairments of identifiable intangible assets other than goodwill, are recorded in Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs and Other (income)/deductions net , as applicable. We did not have any significant intangible asset impairment charges for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016. When we are required to determine the fair value of intangible assets other than goodwill, we use an income approach, specifically the multi-period excess earnings method, also known as the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the asset, which includes the application of a terminal value for indefinite-lived assets, and then we apply an asset-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value amount. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, the impact of technological risk associated with IPR&D assets, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the risks inherent in the projected cash flows; foreign currency fluctuations; and the effective tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. While all identifiable intangible assets can be impacted by events and thus lead to impairment, in general, identifiable intangible assets that are at the highest risk of impairment include IPR&D assets (approximately $197 million as of December 31, 2018 ). IPR&D assets are higher-risk assets because R&D is an inherently risky activity. For a description of our accounting policy, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies: Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . Goodwill Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of net assets of businesses purchased and is assigned to reporting units. We test goodwill for impairment on at least an annual basis, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, either by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount or by performing a quantitative assessment. 36 | Table of Contents Factors considered in the qualitative assessment include general macroeconomic conditions, conditions specific to the industry and market, cost factors which could have a significant effect on earnings or cash flows, the overall financial performance of the reporting unit and whether there have been sustained declines in our share price. Additionally, we evaluate the extent to which the fair value exceeded the carrying value of the reporting unit at the date of the last quantitative assessment performed. When performing a quantitative assessment to test for goodwill impairment we utilize the income approach, which is forward-looking, and relies primarily on internal forecasts. Within the income approach, the method that we use is the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the reporting unit, which includes the application of a terminal value, and then apply a reporting unit-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of technological risk and competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the various risks inherent in the projected cash flows; and the effective tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows. In 2018, we performed a quantitative impairment assessment as of September 30, 2018, which did not result in the impairment of goodwill associated with any of our reporting units. In 2017, we performed both qualitative and select quantitative impairment assessments as of October 1, 2017, which did not result in the impairment of goodwill associated with any of our reporting units. For all of our reporting units, there are a number of future events and factors that may impact future results and that could potentially have an impact on the outcome of subsequent goodwill impairment testing. For a list of these factors, see Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results. For a description of our accounting policy, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies: Amortization of Intangible Assets, Depreciation and Certain Long-Lived Assets . Contingencies For a discussion about income tax contingencies, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 8D. Tax Matters: Tax Contingencies . For a discussion about legal contingencies, guarantees and indemnifications, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statement Note 17. Commitments and Contingencies . Non-GAAP financial measures We report information in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Management also measures performance using non-GAAP financial measures that may exclude certain amounts from the most directly comparable GAAP measure. Despite the importance of these measures to management in goal setting and performance measurement, non-GAAP financial measures have no standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP and, therefore, have limits in their usefulness to investors and may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. We present certain identified non-GAAP measures solely to provide investors with useful information to more fully understand how management assesses performance. Operational Growth We believe that it is important to not only understand overall revenue and earnings growth, but also operational growth. Operational growth is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as revenue or earnings growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange. This measure provides information on the change in revenue and earnings as if foreign currency exchange rates had not changed between the current and prior periods to facilitate a period-to-period comparison. We believe this non-GAAP measure provides a useful comparison to previous periods for the company and investors, but should not be viewed as a substitute for U.S. GAAP reported growth. Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings Per Share Adjusted net income and the corresponding adjusted earnings per share (EPS) are non-GAAP financial measures of performance used by management. We believe these financial measures are useful supplemental information to investors when considered together with our U.S. GAAP financial measures. We report adjusted net income to portray the results of our major operations, and the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of our products, prior to considering certain income statement elements. We define adjusted net income and adjusted EPS as net income attributable to Zoetis and EPS before the impact of purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs and certain significant items. We recognize that, as an internal measure of performance, the adjusted net income and adjusted EPS measures have limitations, and we do not restrict our performance management process solely to these metrics. A limitation of the adjusted net income and adjusted EPS measures is that they provide a view of our operations without including all events during a period, such as the effects of an acquisition or amortization of purchased intangibles, and do not provide a comparable view of our performance to other companies. The adjusted net income and adjusted EPS measures are not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP reported net income attributable to Zoetis and reported EPS. See the Adjusted Net Income section below for more information. 37 | Analysis of the consolidated statements of income The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated statements of income should be read along with our consolidated financial statements, and the notes thereto. Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Revenue $ 5,825 $ 5,307 $ 4,888 10 9 Costs and expenses: Cost of sales (a) 1,911 1,775 1,666 8 7 % of revenue 33 % 33 % 34 % Selling, general and administrative expenses (a) 1,484 1,334 1,364 11 (2 ) % of revenue 25 % 25 % 28 % Research and development expenses (a) 432 382 376 13 2 % of revenue 7 % 7 % 8 % Amortization of intangible assets (a) 117 91 85 29 7 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs 68 19 5 * * Interest expense, net of capitalized interest 206 175 166 18 5 Other (income)/deductions net (83 ) 6 (2 ) * * Income before provision for taxes on income 1,690 1,525 1,228 11 24 % of revenue 29 % 29 % 25 % Provision for taxes on income 266 663 409 (60 ) 62 Effective tax rate 15.7 % 43.5 % 33.3 % Net income before allocation to noncontrolling interests 1,424 862 819 65 5 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests (4 ) (2 ) (2 ) 100 Net income attributable to Zoetis $ 1,428 $ 864 $ 821 65 5 % of revenue 25 % 16 % 17 % * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Amortization expense related to finite-lived acquired intangible assets that contribute to our ability to sell, manufacture, research, market and distribute products, compounds and intellectual property is included in Amortization of intangible assets as these intangible assets benefit multiple business functions. Amortization expense related to finite-lived acquired intangible assets that are associated with a single function is included in Cost of sales , Selling, general and administrative expenses or Research and development expenses , as appropriate. Revenue Total revenue by operating segment was as follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 U.S. $ 2,877 $ 2,620 $ 2,447 10 7 International 2,890 2,643 2,390 9 11 Total operating segments 5,767 5,263 4,837 10 9 Contract manufacturing & human health diagnostics 58 44 51 32 (14 ) Total Revenue $ 5,825 $ 5,307 $ 4,888 10 9 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. On a global basis, the mix of revenue between livestock and companion animal products was as follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Livestock $ 3,154 $ 3,037 $ 2,881 4 5 Companion animal 2,613 2,226 1,956 17 14 Contract manufacturing & human health diagnostics 58 44 51 32 (14 ) Total Revenue $ 5,825 $ 5,307 $ 4,888 10 9 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 38 | Table of Contents 2018 vs. 2017 Total revenue increased by $518 million , or 10% , in 2018 compared with 2017 reflecting operational revenue growth of $521 million , or 10% . Operational revenue growth (a non-GAAP financial measure) is defined as revenue growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange. Operational revenue growth was primarily due to the following: price growth of approximately 3%; increased volume from in-line products of approximately 3%, including 2% from our key dermatology products; the acquisition of Abaxis which contributed approximately 2%; and volume growth from new products of approximately 2%. 2017 vs. 2016 Total revenue increased by $419 million , or 9% , in 2017 compared with 2016 , reflecting operational revenue growth of $406 million , or 8% . Operational revenue growth was primarily due to the following: increased sales of our dermatology portfolio and new product launches, which contributed approximately 7%; and growth of our in-line products, which contributed approximately 2%, of which volume comprised 1% and price comprised 1%, partially offset by: product rationalizations as part of the operational efficiency initiative, which resulted in a decline of approximately 1%. Foreign exchange reduced our reported revenue growth by approximately 1 %. Costs and Expenses Cost of sales Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Cost of sales $ 1,911 $ 1,775 $ 1,666 8 7 % of revenue 33 % 33 % 34 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2018 vs. 2017 Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue remained flat at 33% in 2018 compared with 2017, primarily as a result of: continued cost improvements and efficiencies in our manufacturing network, offset by: the inclusion of Abaxis, including charges reflecting fair value adjustments to the inventory acquired; and unfavorable foreign exchange. 2017 vs. 2016 Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue decreased from 34% to 33% in 2017 compared with 2016, primarily as a result of: a decrease in inventory obsolescence, scrap and other charges; the nonrecurrence of charges reflecting fair value adjustments to inventory related to the acquisition of Pharmaq; and favorable product mix, partially offset by: an increase in manufacturing and supply costs; and unfavorable foreign exchange. Selling, general and administrative expenses Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Selling, general and administrative expenses $ 1,484 $ 1,334 $ 1,364 11 (2 ) % of revenue 25 % 25 % 28 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2018 vs. 2017 SG&A expenses increased $ 150 million , or 11% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , primarily as a result of: the inclusion of Abaxis; an increase in certain compensation-related expenses; and 39 | Table of Contents higher professional services and consulting charges. 2017 vs. 2016 SG&A expenses decreased $ 30 million , or 2% , in 2017 compared with 2016 , primarily as a result of: the nonrecurrence of additional costs related to becoming an independent public company; a reduction in marketing and general and administrative expense driven by our operational efficiency initiative; and a reduction in consulting charges relating to our operational efficiency initiative, partially offset by: higher advertising and promotional spending associated with new products and Apoquel . Research and development expenses Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Research and development expenses $ 432 $ 382 $ 376 13 2 % of revenue 7 % 7 % 8 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2018 vs. 2017 R&D expenses increased $ 50 million , or 13% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , primarily as a result of: increased spending driven by project investments; an increase in certain compensation-related expenses; the inclusion of Abaxis; and unfavorable foreign exchange. 2017 vs. 2016 R&D expenses increased $ 6 million , or 2% , in 2017 compared with 2016 , primarily as a result of: the inclusion of a veterinary diagnostics business acquired in 2016 and an Irish biologic therapeutics company in 2017, partially offset by: a reduction in spending driven by our operational efficiency initiative. Amortization of intangible assets Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Amortization of intangible assets $ 117 $ 91 $ 85 29 7 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2018 vs. 2017 Amortization of intangible assets increased $26 million , or 29% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , primarily as a result of certain intangible assets acquired in July 2018 as part of the acquisition of Abaxis. 2017 vs. 2016 Amortization of intangible assets increased $6 million , or 7% , in 2017 compared with 2016 , primarily as a result of certain intangible assets, acquired in November 2015 as part of the Pharmaq acquisition, being placed into service during the first quarter of 2017. 40 | Table of Contents Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs $ 68 $ 19 $ 5 * * * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. During 2015, we launched a comprehensive operational efficiency program and a supply network strategy initiative. These initiatives have focused on reducing complexity in our product portfolios, changing our selling approach in certain markets, reducing our presence in certain countries, and planning to sell or exit 10 manufacturing sites over a long term period. As part of these initiatives, we have reduced certain positions through divestitures, normal attrition and involuntary terminations. The comprehensive operational efficiency program is substantially complete and we have exited eight of the ten manufacturing sites as part of the supply network strategy initiative, which we expect to complete over the next several years. Our acquisition-related costs primarily relate to restructuring charges for employees, assets and activities that will not continue in the future, as well as integration costs. The majority of these net restructuring charges are related to termination costs, but we also exited a number of distributor and other contracts and performed certain facility rationalization efforts. Our integration costs are generally comprised of consulting costs related to the integration of systems and processes, as well as product transfer costs. For additional information regarding restructuring charges and acquisition-related costs, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 6. Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives . 2018 vs. 2017 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs increased by $49 million in 2018 compared with 2017 , primarily as a result of: transaction costs, integration costs and employee termination costs incurred as a result of the acquisition of Abaxis in July 2018; and employee termination costs incurred in 2018 as a result of initiatives to better align our organizational structure in Europe. 2017 vs. 2016 Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs increased by $14 million in 2017 compared with 2016 , primarily as a result of: employee termination costs incurred in 2017 as a result of (i) the acquisition of an Irish biologic therapeutics company in the third quarter of 2017, (ii) initiatives to better align our organizational structure in Europe, and (iii) our operational efficiency initiative and supply network strategy initiative; and integration costs incurred in 2017 as a result of (i) the acquisition of an Irish biologic therapeutics company in the third quarter of 2017, and (ii) the acquisition of Pharmaq in 2015. Interest expense, net of capitalized interest Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest $ 206 $ 175 $ 166 18 5 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2018 vs. 2017 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased by $31 million , or 18% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , as a result of the issuance of $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes in August 2018. 2017 vs. 2016 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased by $ 9 million, or 5% , in 2017 compared with 2016 , as a result of the issuance of $1.25 billion of our senior notes in September 2017. Other (income)/deductions net Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Other (income)/deductions net $ (83 ) $ 6 $ (2 ) * * * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 2018 vs. 2017 The change in Other (income)/deductions net from net other income of $83 million in 2018 compared with net other deductions of $6 million in 2017 , is primarily a result of: a gain of $42 million in 2018 on the divestiture of certain agribusiness products within our International segment; higher interest income in 2018 due to higher cash balances; and 41 | Table of Contents a net gain of $18 million in 2018 related to the relocation of a manufacturing site in China. 2017 vs. 2016 The change in Other (income)/deductions net from net other deductions of $6 million in 2017 to net other income of $2 million in 2016 , is primarily a result of: a net loss of $11 million in 2017 related to sales of certain manufacturing sites and products, including the disposal of our manufacturing site in Guarulhos, Brazil, in the fourth quarter of 2017, compared with a net gain of $26 million in 2016 related to sales of certain manufacturing sites and products; and lower royalty income, partially offset by: lower foreign currency losses, primarily driven by costs related to hedging and exposures to certain emerging market currencies; and income of $8 million in 2017 due to an insurance recovery related to commercial settlements in Mexico, as well as a favorable patent infringement settlement, compared with a charge of $14 million in 2016 related to a commercial settlement in Mexico. Provision for taxes on income Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Provision for taxes on income $ 266 $ 663 $ 409 (60 ) 62 Effective tax rate 15.7 % 43.5 % 33.3 % Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. The income tax provision in the consolidated statements of income includes tax costs and benefits, such as uncertain tax positions, repatriation decisions and audit settlements, among others. On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the Tax Act) was enacted, which, among other changes, reduced the U.S. federal corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%, effective January 1, 2018. The Tax Act made broad and complex changes to the U.S. tax code. Based on the information available at that time, for the year ended December 31, 2017, the company calculated a reasonable estimate and recorded an initial provisional net tax expense of $212 million related to the one-time mandatory deemed repatriation tax, payable over eight years, partially offset by the remeasurement of the deferred tax assets and liabilities, due to the reduction in the U.S. federal corporate tax rate. Pursuant to the Staff Accounting Bulletin published by the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 22, 2017, addressing the challenges in accounting for the effects of the Tax Act in the period of enactment, companies reported provisional amounts for those specific income tax effects of the Tax Act for which the accounting was incomplete but a reasonable estimate could be determined. Those provisional amounts were subject to adjustment during a measurement period of up to one year from the enactment date (measurement-period adjustment). Pursuant to this guidance, the estimated impact of the Tax Act was based on a preliminary review of the new tax law, projected future financial results and was subject to revision based upon further analysis, interpretation of the Tax Act and to the extent that actual results differed from projections available at that time. In 2018, we refined our initial reasonable estimate and adjusted the provisional net tax expense of $212 million. On the basis of revised computations that were calculated during the reporting period, we recognized a measurement-period adjustment of $45 million , as a decrease to the one-time mandatory deemed repatriation tax obligation, with a corresponding adjustment to income tax benefit during the period. For more information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 8A. Tax Matters: Taxes on Income . 2018 vs. 2017 The lower effective tax rate in 2018 compared with 2017 is primarily due to the following components: the reduction of the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate, from 35% to 21%, effective January 1, 2018, pursuant to the Tax Act; a $45 million net tax benefit recorded in 2018, associated with a measurement-period adjustment to the one-time mandatory deemed repatriation tax on the company undistributed non-U.S. earnings pursuant to the Tax Act; changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings from operations and repatriation costs. The jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary as a result of repatriation decisions, operating fluctuations in the normal course of business, the impact of non-deductible items, and the extent and location of other income and expense items, such as gains and losses on asset divestitures; a $23 million discrete tax benefit recorded in 2018 related to the favorable impact of certain tax accounting method changes; an additional $6 million discrete tax benefit related to the excess tax benefits for share-based compensation payments; and a $5 million discrete tax benefit recorded in 2018 related to a remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities as a result of a change in non-U.S. statutory tax rates. 2017 vs. 2016 The higher effective tax rate in 2017 compared with 2016 is primarily due to the following components: a $212 million net discrete provisional tax expense recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017, related to the impact of the Tax Act enacted on December 22, 2017, including a one-time mandatory deemed repatriation tax, partially offset by a net tax benefit related to the remeasurement of the deferred tax assets and liabilities, as of the date of enactment, due to the reduction in the U.S. federal corporate tax rate; 42 | Table of Contents changes in valuation allowances and resolution of other tax items; and tax expense related to changes in uncertain tax positions, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 8D. Tax Matters: Tax Contingencies , partially offset by: changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings from operations and repatriation costs. The jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary as a result of repatriation decisions and operating fluctuations in the normal course of business and the impact of non-deductible items; a $15 million discrete tax benefit recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 related to the effective settlement of certain issues with U.S. and non-U.S. tax authorities; an additional $2 million discrete tax benefit related to the excess tax benefits for share-based compensation payments; and a $3 million discrete tax benefit recorded in the first quarter of 2017 related to a remeasurement of deferred tax assets and liabilities as a result of a change in non-U.S. statutory tax rates. 43 | Table of Contents Operating Segment Results We believe that it is important to not only understand overall revenue and earnings growth, but also operational growth. Operational growth is defined as revenue or earnings growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange. In the first quarter of 2018, the company realigned certain management responsibilities. These changes did not impact the determination of our operating segments, however they resulted in the reallocation of certain costs between segments. These changes primarily include the following: i) R&D costs related to our aquaculture business which were previously reported in Other business activities are now reported in the International operating segment results, and ii) certain other miscellaneous costs which were previously reported in Corporate are now reported in the International operating segment results. On a global basis, the mix of revenue between livestock and companion animal products was as follows: % Change 18/17 17/16 Related to Related to Year Ended December 31, Foreign Foreign (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 Total Exchange Operational Total Exchange Operational U.S. Livestock $ 1,269 $ 1,244 $ 1,227 2 2 1 1 Companion animal 1,608 1,376 1,220 17 17 13 13 2,877 2,620 2,447 10 10 7 7 International Livestock 1,885 1,793 1,654 5 (1 ) 6 8 1 7 Companion animal 1,005 850 736 18 1 17 15 (1 ) 16 2,890 2,643 2,390 9 9 11 1 10 Total Livestock 3,154 3,037 2,881 4 4 5 5 Companion animal 2,613 2,226 1,956 17 17 14 14 Contract manufacturing & human health diagnostics 58 44 51 32 1 31 (14 ) 1 (15 ) $ 5,825 $ 5,307 $ 4,888 10 10 9 1 8 Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. Earnings by segment and the operational and foreign exchange changes versus the comparable prior year period were as follows: % Change 18/17 17/16 Related to Related to Year Ended December 31, Foreign Foreign (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 Total Exchange Operational Total Exchange Operational U.S. $ 1,815 $ 1,637 $ 1,508 11 11 9 9 International 1,399 1,240 1,054 13 13 18 1 17 Total reportable segments 3,214 2,877 2,562 12 12 12 12 Other business activities (337 ) (313 ) (309 ) 8 1 Reconciling Items: Corporate (666 ) (625 ) (684 ) 7 (9 ) Purchase accounting adjustments (162 ) (88 ) (99 ) 84 (11 ) Acquisition-related costs (63 ) (10 ) (4 ) * * Certain significant items 43 (25 ) (57 ) * (56 ) Other unallocated (339 ) (291 ) (181 ) 16 61 Income before income taxes $ 1,690 $ 1,525 $ 1,228 11 24 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 44 | Table of Contents 2018 vs. 2017 U.S. operating segment U.S. segment revenue increased by $257 million , or 10% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , of which approximately $25 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $232 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Companion animal revenue growth was driven primarily by increased sales of the key dermatology portfolio, the acquisition of Abaxis as well as new products including Simparica . Growth was tempered by lower sales of certain in-line products due to anticipated competition. Livestock revenue increased primarily due to higher sales across species, with growth in poultry, swine and cattle products. For poultry, growth was driven by increased sales of alternatives to antibiotic medicated feed additive products. Swine growth was primarily due to new product launches and promotional activities. Cattle growth was mainly from our premium products, partially offset by unfavorable market conditions in dairy. U.S. segment earnings increased by $178 million , or 11% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , primarily due to revenue growth and improved gross margin, partially offset by higher operating expenses related to the Abaxis acquisition. International operating segment International segment revenue increased by $247 million , or 9% , in 2018 compared with 2017 . Operational revenue increased $250 million , or 9% , reflecting growth of approximately $107 million in livestock products and growth of approximately $143 million in companion animal products. Companion animal revenue growth resulted primarily from increased sales across multiple international markets of the key dermatology portfolio, in addition to new products, primarily Simparica , and the acquisition of Abaxis. Livestock growth was driven primarily by increased sales of cattle, poultry, swine and fish products. Growth in cattle was due to biological and parasiticide products. Growth in poultry sales was driven by increased sales of vaccines and medicated feed additives. Swine growth was primarily due to new vaccine products. Fish growth was due to increased sales in the vaccines portfolio. International segment earnings increased by $159 million , or 13% , in 2018 compared with 2017 . Operational earnings growth was $165 million , or 13% , primarily due to higher revenue and improved gross margin. 2017 vs. 2016 U.S. operating segment U.S. segment revenue increased by $173 million , or 7 %, in 2017 compared with 2016 , of which approximately $17 million resulted from growth in livestock products and approximately $156 million resulted from growth in companion animal products. Livestock revenue increased primarily due to cattle and poultry products, partly offset by swine products. Cattle experienced growth across our portfolio, while poultry growth was due to increased sales of medicated feed additives. Certain medicated feed additive products for both cattle and swine were negatively impacted by livestock producers implementation of the Veterinary Feed Directive. In addition, swine declined due to vaccine competition. Companion animal revenue growth was driven primarily by our dermatology portfolio, in addition to new products, particularly Simparica . Growth was tempered by the prior year initial sales of certain products into expanded distribution relationships, as well as lower sales due to competition for our pain and anti-infective products. U.S. segment earnings increased by $129 million , or 9 %, in 2017 compared with 2016 , primarily due to revenue growth and improved gross margin, partially offset by higher operating expenses related to promotional activity for new products and Apoquel . International operating segment International segment revenue increased by $253 million , or 11% , in 2017 compared with 2016 . Operational revenue increased $240 million , or 10% , reflecting growth of approximately $125 million in livestock products and growth of approximately $115 million in companion animal products. Livestock growth was driven primarily by increased sales of cattle, swine and fish products. Growth of cattle products was driven by Latin American markets, while swine was driven by new product launches primarily in Europe and Asia, as well as growth in China. Growth of fish products was driven by new products and in-line product growth across various markets. Livestock growth was partially offset by product rationalizations, primarily impacting poultry and swine product sales. Companion animal revenue growth resulted primarily from increased sales of our dermatology portfolio, in addition to new products, primarily Simparica . Sales also benefited from increased demand in China due to field force expansions and increasing medicalization rates. Segment revenue was favorably impacted by foreign exchange, which increased revenue by approximately 1% , primarily driven by the appreciation of the Brazilian real, partly offset by the depreciation of the U.K. pound and Egyptian pound. International segment earnings increased by $186 million , or 18% , in 2017 compared with 2016 . Operational earnings growth was $183 million , or 17% , primarily due to higher revenue and improved gross margin. Other business activities Other business activities includes our CSS contract manufacturing results, our human health diagnostics business and expenses associated with our dedicated veterinary medicine R&D organization, research alliances, U.S. regulatory affairs and other operations focused on the development of our products. Other R&D-related costs associated with non-U.S. market and regulatory activities are generally included in the International segment. 45 | Table of Contents 2018 vs. 2017 Other business activities net loss increased by $24 million , or 8% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , reflecting an increase in R&D project investments, compensation-related costs, the inclusion of Abaxis expenses and unfavorable foreign exchange, partially offset by revenue from the acquired Abaxis human health diagnostics business. 2017 vs. 2016 Other business activities net loss increased by $4 million , or 1% , in 2017 compared with 2016 , reflecting the inclusion of the veterinary diagnostics business acquired in 2016 and the Irish biologic therapeutics company acquired in 2017. Reconciling items Reconciling items include certain costs that are not allocated to our operating segments results, such as costs associated with the following: Corporate, which includes certain costs associated with business technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development and communications, among others. These costs also include certain compensation costs, certain procurement costs, and other miscellaneous operating expenses that are not charged to our operating segments, as well as interest income and expense; Certain transactions and events such as (i) Purchase accounting adjustments , which includes expenses associated with the amortization of fair value adjustments to inventory, intangible assets and property, plant and equipment; (ii) Acquisition-related activities , which includes costs for acquisition and integration; and (iii) Certain significant items , which includes non-acquisition-related restructuring charges, certain asset impairment charges, stand-up costs, certain legal and commercial settlements, and costs associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives; and Other unallocated , which includes (i) certain overhead expenses associated with our global manufacturing operations not charged to our operating segments; (ii) certain costs associated with business technology and finance that specifically support our global manufacturing operations; (iii) certain supply chain and global logistics costs; and (iv) certain procurement costs. 2018 vs. 2017 Corporate expenses increased by $41 million , or 7% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , primarily due to an increase in certain compensation costs not allocated to our operating segments, expenses related to the acquisition of Abaxis and project spending, partially offset by favorable foreign exchange. Other unallocated expenses increased by $48 million , or 16% , in 2018 compared with 2017 , primarily due to the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange and higher global manufacturing and supply costs, partially offset by continued cost improvements and efficiencies in our manufacturing network. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 18. Segment Information for further information. 2017 vs. 2016 Corporate expenses decreased by $59 million , or 9% , in 2017 compared with 2016 , primarily due to the favorable impact of foreign exchange, reduction in expenses driven by our operational efficiency initiative and a decrease in certain compensation costs not allocated to our operating segments, partially offset by higher interest expense, net of capitalized interest associated with the additional debt issued in September 2017. Other unallocated expenses increased by $110 million , or 61% , in 2017 compared with 2016 , primarily due to higher global manufacturing and supply costs and unfavorable foreign exchange, partially offset by a decrease in inventory obsolescence, scrap and other charges. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 18. Segment Information for further information. Adjusted net income General description of adjusted net income (a non-GAAP financial measure) Adjusted net income is an alternative view of performance used by management, and we believe that investors understanding of our performance is enhanced by disclosing this performance measure. The adjusted net income measure is an important internal measurement for us. Additionally, we measure our overall performance on this basis in conjunction with other performance metrics. The following are examples of how the adjusted net income measure is utilized: senior management receives a monthly analysis of our operating results that is prepared on an adjusted net income basis; our annual budgets are prepared on an adjusted net income basis; and other goal setting and performance measurements. 46 | Table of Contents Purchase accounting adjustments Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant purchase accounting impacts that result from business combinations and net asset acquisitions. These impacts, primarily associated with the acquisition of Abaxis (acquired in July 2018), the Pharmaq business (acquired in November 2015), certain assets of Abbott Animal Health (acquired in February 2015), KAH (acquired in 2011), FDAH (acquired in 2009), and Pharmacia Animal Health business (acquired in 2003), include amortization related to the increase in fair value of the acquired finite-lived intangible assets and depreciation related to the increase/decrease to fair value of the acquired fixed assets. Therefore, the adjusted net income measure includes the revenue earned upon the sale of the acquired products without considering the aforementioned significant charges. While certain purchase accounting adjustments can occur through 20 or more years, this presentation provides an alternative view of our performance that is used by management to internally assess business performance. We believe the elimination of amortization attributable to acquired intangible assets provides management and investors an alternative view of our business results by providing a degree of parity to internally developed intangible assets for which R&D costs previously have been expensed. A completely accurate comparison of internally developed intangible assets and acquired intangible assets cannot be achieved through adjusted net income. These components of adjusted net income are derived solely from the impact of the items listed above. We have not factored in the impact of any other differences in experience that might have occurred if we had discovered and developed those intangible assets on our own, and this approach does not intend to be representative of the results that would have occurred in those circumstances. For example, our R&D costs in total, and in the periods presented, may have been different; our speed to commercialization and resulting revenue, if any, may have been different; or our costs to manufacture may have been different. In addition, our marketing efforts may have been received differently by our customers. As such, in total, there can be no assurance that our adjusted net income amounts would have been the same as presented had we discovered and developed the acquired intangible assets. Acquisition-related costs Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering transaction and integration costs associated with significant business combinations or net asset acquisitions because these costs are unique to each transaction and represent costs that were incurred to acquire and integrate certain businesses as a result of the acquisition decision. We have made no adjustments for the resulting synergies. We believe that viewing income prior to considering these charges provides investors with a useful additional perspective because the significant costs incurred in a business combination result primarily from the need to eliminate duplicate assets, activities or employees a natural result of acquiring a fully integrated set of activities. For this reason, we believe that the costs incurred to convert disparate systems, to close duplicative facilities or to eliminate duplicate positions (for example, in the context of a business combination) can be viewed differently from those costs incurred in the ordinary course of business. The integration costs associated with a business combination may occur over several years, with the more significant impacts generally ending within three years of the transaction. Because of the need for certain external approvals for some actions, the span of time needed to achieve certain restructuring and integration activities can be lengthy. For example, due to the regulated nature of the animal health medicines and vaccines business, the closure of excess facilities can take several years, as all manufacturing changes are subject to extensive validation and testing and must be approved by the FDA and/or other regulatory authorities. Certain significant items Adjusted net income is calculated excluding certain significant items. Certain significant items represent substantive, unusual items that are evaluated on an individual basis. Such evaluation considers both the quantitative and the qualitative aspect of their unusual nature. Unusual, in this context, may represent items that are not part of our ongoing business; items that, either as a result of their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis; items that would be nonrecurring; or items that relate to products that we no longer sell. While not all-inclusive, examples of items that could be included as certain significant items would be costs related to becoming an independent public company; a major non-acquisition-related restructuring charge and associated implementation costs for a program that is specific in nature with a defined term, such as those related to our non-acquisition-related cost-reduction and productivity initiatives; amounts related to disposals of products or facilities that do not qualify as discontinued operations as defined by U.S. GAAP; certain intangible asset impairments; adjustments related to the resolution of certain tax positions; significant currency devaluation; the impact of adopting certain significant, event-driven tax legislation; or charges related to legal matters. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 17. Commitments and Contingencies . Our normal, ongoing defense costs or settlements of and accruals on legal matters made in the normal course of our business would not be considered certain significant items. Reconciliation A reconciliation of net income attributable to Zoetis, as reported under U.S. GAAP, to adjusted net income follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 GAAP reported net income attributable to Zoetis $ 1,428 $ 864 $ 821 65 5 Purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 119 51 60 * (15 ) Acquisition-related costs net of tax 50 7 4 * 75 Certain significant items net of tax (72 ) 263 90 * * Non-GAAP adjusted net income (a) $ 1,525 $ 1,185 $ 975 29 22 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. 47 | Table of Contents (a) The effective tax rate on adjusted pretax income is 18.8% , 28.2% and 29.9% for full year 2018 , 2017 and 2016 , respectively. The lower effective tax rate in 2018 compared to 2017 is primarily due to (i) the reduction of the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%, effective January 1, 2018, pursuant to the Tax Act, (ii) changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs, (iii) a $23 million discrete tax benefit recorded in 2018 related to the favorable impact of certain tax accounting method changes, and (iv) an additional $6 million discrete tax benefit related to the excess tax benefits for share-based compensation payments. The lower effective tax rate in 2017 compared to 2016 is primarily due to changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings, which includes the impact of the location of earnings as well as repatriation costs, a $15 million discrete tax benefit recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 related to the effective settlement of certain issues with U.S. and non-U.S. tax authorities, and an additional $2 million discrete tax benefit related to the excess tax benefits for share-based compensation payments. A reconciliation of reported diluted earnings per share (EPS), as reported under U.S. GAAP, to non-GAAP adjusted diluted EPS follows: Year Ended December 31, % Change 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Earnings per share diluted (a)(b) : GAAP reported EPS attributable to Zoetis diluted $ 2.93 $ 1.75 $ 1.65 67 6 Purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 0.24 0.10 0.12 * (17 ) Acquisition-related costs net of tax 0.10 0.01 0.01 * Certain significant items net of tax (0.14 ) 0.54 0.18 * * Non-GAAP adjusted EPS diluted $ 3.13 $ 2.40 $ 1.96 30 22 * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Diluted earnings per share was computed using the weighted-average common shares outstanding during the period plus the common stock equivalents related to stock options, restricted stock units, performance-vesting restricted stock units and deferred stock units. (b) EPS amounts may not add due to rounding. Adjusted net income includes the following charges for each of the periods presented: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 Interest expense, net of capitalized interest $ 206 $ 175 $ 166 Interest income 31 13 8 Income taxes 351 465 415 Depreciation 146 136 133 Amortization 19 18 16 48 | Table of Contents Adjusted net income, as shown above, excludes the following items: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 Purchase accounting adjustments: Amortization and depreciation (a) $ 135 $ 81 $ 76 Cost of sales (b) 27 7 23 Total purchase accounting adjustments pre-tax 162 88 99 Income taxes (c) 43 37 39 Total purchase accounting adjustments net of tax 119 51 60 Acquisition-related costs: Integration costs 21 6 3 Transaction costs 21 Restructuring charges (d) 21 4 Other 1 Total acquisition-related costs pre-tax 63 10 4 Income taxes (c) 13 3 Total acquisition-related costs net of tax 50 7 4 Certain significant items: Operational efficiency initiative (e) (1 ) 5 (9 ) Supply network strategy (e) 10 15 19 Other restructuring charges and cost-reduction/productivity initiatives (f) 7 4 (1 ) Certain asset impairment charges 1 Gain on sale of assets (g) (42 ) Stand-up costs (h) 3 23 Other (i) (17 ) (2 ) 24 Total certain significant items pre-tax (43 ) 25 57 Income taxes (c) 29 (238 ) (33 ) Total certain significant items net of tax (72 ) 263 90 Total purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs, and certain significant items net of tax $ 97 $ 321 $ 154 Certain amounts may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Amortization and depreciation expenses related to Purchase accounting adjustments with respect to identifiable intangible assets and property, plant and equipment . (b) Amortization and depreciation expense, as well as fair value adjustments to acquired inventory . (c) Income taxes include the tax effect of the associated pre-tax amounts, calculated by determining the jurisdictional location of the pre-tax amounts and applying that jurisdiction's applicable tax rate. Income taxes in Purchase accounting adjustments also includes: For 2018, a remeasurement of deferred taxes as a result of a change in non-U.S. statutory tax rates. For 2017, (i) a provisional tax benefit of approximately $17 million related to the remeasurement of the company deferred taxes due to the reduction in the U.S. federal corporate tax rate as provided by the Tax Act enacted on December 22, 2017, (ii) remeasurement of deferred taxes as a result of a change in non-U.S. statutory tax rates, and (iii) a net tax charge related to prior period tax adjustments. For 2016, a tax benefit related to the remeasurement of deferred taxes as a result of a change in tax rates. Income taxes in Acquisition-related costs also includes: For 2018, a tax charge related to the non-deductibility of certain costs associated with the acquisition of Abaxis. For 2016, a tax charge related to the acquisition of certain assets of Abbott Animal Health. Income taxes in Certain significant items also includes: For 2018, a net tax benefit of $45 million related to a measurement-period adjustment to the one-time mandatory deemed repatriation tax on the company's undistributed non-U.S. earnings, pursuant to the Tax Act. For 2017, (i) a provisional net tax charge of approximately $229 million related to the impact of the Tax Act enacted on December 22, 2017, including a one-time mandatory deemed repatriation tax on the company undistributed non-U.S. earnings, partially offset by a net tax benefit related to the remeasurement of the company deferred tax assets and liabilities, as of the date of enactment, due to the reduction in the U.S. federal corporate tax rate, (ii) a net tax charge of approximately $3 million as a result of the implementation of certain operational changes, and (iii) a tax charge of approximately $2 million related to the disposal of certain assets. For 2016, (i) a net tax charge of approximately $20 million recorded in the second half of 2016, as a result of the implementation of certain operational changes, which represents an increase to current income tax expense of approximately $22 million, offset by a $2 million tax benefit related to a remeasurement of the company deferred tax assets and liabilities using the tax rates expected to be in place going forward, and (ii) a net tax charge of approximately $35 million mainly recorded in the first half of 2016, related to the impact of the European Commission negative decision on the excess profits rulings in Belgium which represents the recovery of prior tax benefits for the periods 2013 through 2015, offset by the remeasurement of the company 49 | Table of Contents deferred tax assets and liabilities, using the rates expected to be in place at the time of the reversal and without consideration of implementation of any future operational changes, and does not include any benefits associated with a successful appeal of the decision. (d) R epresents employee termination costs related to the 2018 acquisition of Abaxis and the 2017 acquisition of an Irish biologic therapeutics company. (e) Represents adjustments to inventory reserves and accelerated depreciation, consulting fees and product transfer costs , employee termination costs and exit costs, and net (gains)/losses on sales of certain manufacturing sites and products, related to cost-reduction and productivity initiatives. (f) Represents employee termination costs/(reversals) in Europe as a result of initiatives to better align our organizational structure. (g) For 2018, represents a net gain related to the divestiture of certain agribusiness products within our International segment. (h) Represents certain non-recurring costs related to becoming an independent public company, such as the creation of standalone systems and infrastructure, site separation, new branding (including changes to the manufacturing process for required new packaging), and certain legal registration and patent assignment costs. (i) For 2018, primarily represents a net gain related to the relocation of a manufacturing site in China. For 2017, primarily represents costs associated with changes to our operating model. For 2016, represents costs associated with changes to our operating model and a charge associated with a commercial settlement in Mexico. 50 | Table of Contents The classification of the above items excluded from adjusted net income are as follows: Year Ended December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 Cost of sales: Purchase accounting adjustments $ 27 $ 7 $ 23 Accelerated depreciation 2 6 Inventory write-offs 1 (2 ) 5 Consulting fees 8 6 6 Stand-up costs 3 1 Other (1 ) (2 ) 1 Total Cost of sales 35 14 42 Selling, general & administrative expenses: Purchase accounting adjustments 32 5 5 Accelerated depreciation 1 Consulting fees 2 14 Stand-up costs 22 Other 2 2 10 Total Selling, general & administrative expenses 34 9 52 Research & development expenses: Purchase accounting adjustments 2 2 2 Total Research & development expenses 2 2 2 Amortization of intangible assets: Purchase accounting adjustments 101 74 69 Total Amortization of intangible assets 101 74 69 Restructuring (benefits)/charges and certain acquisition-related costs: Integration costs 21 6 3 Transaction costs 21 Employee termination costs 25 10 (2 ) Exit costs 1 3 4 Total Restructuring (benefits)/charges and certain acquisition-related costs 68 19 5 Other (income)/deductions net: Net (gain)/loss on sale of assets (40 ) 10 (26 ) Acquisition-related costs 1 Asset impairments 1 Other (18 ) (5 ) 14 Total Other (income)/deductions net (58 ) 5 (10 ) Provision for taxes on income 85 (198 ) 6 Total purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs, and certain significant items net of tax $ 97 $ 321 $ 154 Certain amounts may reflect rounding adjustments. Analysis of the consolidated statements of comprehensive income Substantially all changes in other comprehensive income for the periods presented are related to foreign currency translation adjustments. These changes result from the strengthening or weakening of the U.S. dollar as compared to the currencies in the countries in which we do business. The gains and losses associated with these changes are deferred on the balance sheet in Accumulated other comprehensive loss until realized. 51 | Table of Contents Analysis of the consolidated balance sheets December 31, 2018 vs. December 31, 2017 For a discussion about the changes in Cash and cash equivalents and Long-term debt , net of discount and issuance costs , see "Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources" below. Short-term investments increased as a result of short-term investments in debt securities acquired with the acquisition of Abaxis. Inventories decreased primarily due to the impact of foreign exchange, partially offset by the acquisition of Abaxis and a manufacturing business in Ireland. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5. Acquisitions and Divestitures and Note 10. Inventories . Other current assets increased primarily as a result of the timing of income tax payments, and the acquisition of Abaxis. Property, plant and equipment, less accumulated depreciation increased primarily as a result of capital spending and the acquisitions of Abaxis and a manufacturing business in Ireland, partially offset by depreciation expense and the impact of foreign exchange. Goodwill and Identifiable intangible assets, less accumulated amortization increased as a result of the acquisitions of Abaxis and a manufacturing business in Ireland, partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5. Acquisitions and Divestitures and Note 12. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. The net changes in Noncurrent deferred tax assets , Noncurrent deferred tax liabilities, Income taxes payable and Other taxes payable primarily reflect the tax impacts of the acquisitions of Abaxis and a manufacturing business in Ireland, the adjustments to the accrual for the income tax provision, and the impact of the remeasurement of deferred taxes as a result of a change in tax rates. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 8. Tax Matters. Other noncurrent assets increased primarily as a result of the fair value of certain derivative instruments. Accounts payable increased as a result of the timing of payments. Dividends payable increased as a result of an increase in the dividend rate for the first quarter 2019 dividend, which was declared on December 12, 2018. Accrued expenses increased primarily due to an increase in accrued interest expense as a result of the issuance of $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes in August 2018, and higher contract rebate accruals. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 9. Financial Instruments . Other noncurrent liabilities decreased as a result of a reduction in accrued liabilities associated with the relocation of a manufacturing site in China. For an analysis of the changes in Total Equity , see the Consolidated Statements of Equity and Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 15. Stockholders' Equity . Analysis of the consolidated statements of cash flows Year Ended December 31, % Change (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 2016 18/17 17/16 Net cash provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 1,790 $ 1,346 $ 713 33 89 Investing activities (2,259 ) (270 ) (214 ) * 26 Financing activities 533 (251 ) (903 ) * (72 ) Effect of exchange-rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (26 ) 12 (23 ) * * Net increase/(decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 38 $ 837 $ (427 ) (95 ) * * Calculation not meaningful. Certain amounts and percentages may reflect rounding adjustments. Operating activities 2018 vs. 2017 Net cash provided by operating activities was $ 1,790 million in 2018 compared with $ 1,346 million in 2017 . The increase in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to higher income before allocation of noncontrolling interests, the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business, and lower inventory levels. 2017 vs. 2016 Net cash provided by operating activities was $ 1,346 million in 2017 compared with $ 713 million in 2016 . The increase in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to higher income before allocation of noncontrolling interests, lower employee termination payments related to our operational efficiency initiative and supply network strategy initiative, the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business, and lower inventory levels. 52 | Investing activities 2018 vs. 2017 Net cash used in investing activities was $ 2,259 million in 2018 compared with $ 270 million in 2017 . The net cash used in investing activities for 2018 was primarily attributable to the acquisitions of Abaxis and a manufacturing business in Ireland, and purchases of property, plant and equipment. The net cash used in investing activities for 2017 was primarily attributable to capital expenditures and the acquisitions of an Irish biologic therapeutics company and a Norwegian fish vaccination company, partially offset by the proceeds from the sale of a manufacturing site in Guarulhos, Brazil. 2017 vs. 2016 Net cash used in investing activities was $ 270 million in 2017 compared with $ 214 million in 2016 . The net cash used in investing activities for 2017 was primarily attributable to capital expenditures and the acquisitions of an Irish biologic therapeutics company and a Norwegian fish vaccination company, partially offset by the proceeds from the sale of a manufacturing site in Guarulhos, Brazil. The net cash used in investing activities in 2016 was primarily attributable to capital expenditures and the acquisition of a veterinary diagnostics business in Denmark, partially offset by proceeds from the sales of certain manufacturing sites and products as part of the operational efficiency initiative. Financing activities 2018 vs. 2017 Net cash provided by financing activities was $ 533 million in 2018 compared with net cash used in financing activities of $ 251 million in 2017 . The net cash provided by financing activities for 2018 was primarily attributable to the proceeds received from the issuance of senior notes in August 2018, partially offset by the purchase of treasury shares and the payment of dividends. The net cash used in financing activities for 2017 was primarily attributable to the senior note payment in October 2017, the purchase of treasury shares, and the payment of dividends, partially offset by the proceeds received from the issuance of senior notes in September 2017. 2017 vs. 2016 Net cash used in financing activities was $ 251 million in 2017 compared with $ 903 million in 2016 . The net cash used in financing activities for 2017 was primarily attributable to the senior note payment in October 2017, the purchase of treasury shares, and the payment of dividends, partially offset by the proceeds received from the issuance of senior notes in September 2017. The net cash used in financing activities for 2016 was primarily attributable to the senior note payment in February 2016, the purchase of treasury shares and the payment of dividends. Analysis of financial condition, liquidity and capital resources While we believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand, our operating cash flows and our existing financing arrangements will be sufficient to support our future cash needs, this may be subject to the environment in which we operate. Risks to our meeting future funding requirements include global economic conditions described in the following paragraph. Global financial markets may be impacted by macroeconomic, business and financial volatility. As markets change, we will continue to monitor our liquidity position, but there can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or an economic downturn will not impact our liquidity or our ability to obtain future financing. Selected measures of liquidity and capital resources Certain relevant measures of our liquidity and capital resources follow: December 31, December 31, (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 2018 2017 Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,602 $ 1,564 Accounts receivable, net (a) 1,036 998 Long-term debt 6,443 4,953 Working capital 3,176 3,123 Ratio of current assets to current liabilities 3.60:1 3.85:1 (a) Accounts receivable are usually collected over a period of 45 to 75 days . For the year ended December 31, 2018 , compared to the year ended December 31, 2017 , the number of days that accounts receivables are outstanding remained approximately the same. We regularly monitor our accounts receivable for collectability, particularly in markets where economic conditions remain uncertain. We believe that our allowance for doubtful accounts is appropriate. Our assessment is based on such factors as past due aging, historical and expected collection patterns, the financial condition of our customers, the robust nature of our credit and collection practices and the economic environment. For additional information about the sources and uses of our funds, see the Analysis of the consolidated balance sheets and Analysis of the consolidated statements of cash flows sections of this MD&A. Credit facility and other lines of credit In December 2016 , we entered into an amended and restated revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of banks providing for a multi-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the credit facility). In December 2018, the maturity for the amended and restated credit facility was extended through December 2023. Subject to certain conditions, we have the right to increase the credit facility to up to $1.5 billion . The credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us to not exceed a maximum total leverage ratio (the ratio of consolidated net debt as of the end of the 53 | Table of Contents period to consolidated Earnings Before Interest, Income Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA) for such period) of 3.50:1 . Upon entering into a material acquisition, the maximum total leverage ratio increases to 4.00:1 , and extends until the fourth full consecutive fiscal quarter ended immediately following the consummation of a material acquisition. The credit facility also contains a clause which adds back to Adjusted Consolidated EBITDA, any operational efficiency restructuring charge (defined as charges recorded by the company during the period commencing on October 1, 2016 and ending December 31, 2019, related to operational efficiency initiatives), provided that for any twelve month period such charges added back to Adjusted Consolidated EBITDA shall not exceed $100 million in the aggregate. The credit facility also contains a financial covenant requiring that we maintain a minimum interest coverage ratio (the ratio of EBITDA at the end of the period to interest expense for such period) of 3.50:1. In addition, the credit facility contains other customary covenants. We were in compliance with all financial covenants as of December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017 . There were no amounts drawn under the credit facility as of December 31, 2018 or December 31, 2017 . We have additional lines of credit and other credit arrangements with a group of banks and other financial intermediaries for general corporate purposes. We maintain cash and cash equivalent balances in excess of our outstanding short-term borrowings. As of December 31, 2018 , we had access to $77 million of lines of credit which expire at various times through 2019, and are generally renewed annually. We had $9 million of borrowings outstanding related to these facilities as of December 31, 2018 . Domestic and international short-term funds Many of our operations are conducted outside the United States. The amount of funds held in the United States will fluctuate due to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business and due to other reasons, such as business development activities. As part of our ongoing liquidity assessments, we regularly monitor the mix of U.S. and international cash flows (both inflows and outflows). Actual repatriation of overseas funds can result in additional U.S and local income taxes, such as U.S. state income taxes, local withholding taxes, and taxes on currency gains and losses. In addition, the recent changes imposed by the Tax Act resulted in a one-time deemed repatriation tax of previously untaxed accumulated and current earnings and profits of our foreign subsidiaries, which is payable over eight years, with the first installment due in 2019. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 8. Tax Matters . Global economic conditions Challenging economic conditions in recent years have not had, nor do we anticipate that it will have, a significant impact on our liquidity. Due to our operating cash flows, financial assets, access to capital markets and available lines of credit and revolving credit agreements, we continue to believe that we have the ability to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. As markets change, we continue to monitor our liquidity position. There can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or a further economic downturn would not impact our ability to obtain financing in the future. Contractual obligations Payments due under contractual obligations as of December 31, 2018 , are set forth below: 2020- 2022- There- (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) Total 2019 2021 2023 after Long-term debt, including interest obligations (a) $ 9,851 $ 247 $ 1,575 $ 1,751 $ 6,278 Other liabilities reflected on our consolidated balance sheets under U.S. GAAP (b) 98 33 22 12 31 Operating lease commitments 173 38 54 36 45 Purchase obligations (c) 434 179 184 54 17 Benefit plans - continuing service credit obligations (d) 15 4 7 4 Uncertain tax positions (e) Certain amounts may reflect rounding adjustments. (a) Long-term debt consists of senior notes and other notes. Our calculations of expected interest payments incorporate only current period assumptions for interest rates, foreign currency translation rates and Zoetis hedging strategies. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 9A. Financial Instruments: Debt . (b) Includes expected employee termination payments that represent contractual obligations, expected payments related to our unfunded U.S. supplemental (non-qualified) savings plans, deferred compensation and expected payments relating to our future benefit payments net of plan assets (included in the determination of the projected benefit obligation) for pension plans that are dedicated to Zoetis employees and those transferred to us from Pfizer. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5. Acquisitions and Divestitures, Note 6 . Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 13. Benefit Plans. Excludes approximately $94 million of noncurrent liabilities related to legal and environmental accruals, certain employee termination and exit costs, deferred income and other accruals, most of which do not represent contractual obligations. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 6 . Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives and Note 17 . Commitments and Contingencies . (c) Includes agreements to purchase goods and services that are enforceable and legally binding and includes amounts relating to advertising, contract manufacturing, and information technology services. (d) Includes the cost of service credit continuation for certain Zoetis employees in the Pfizer U.S. qualified defined benefit pension and U.S. retiree medical plans, in accordance with the employee matters agreement. See Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 13. Benefit Plans. (e) Except for amounts reflected in Income taxes payable , we are unable to predict the timing of tax settlements, as tax audits can involve complex issues and the resolution of those issues may span multiple years, particularly if subject to negotiation or litigation. The table above excludes amounts for potential milestone payments unless the payments are deemed reasonably likely to occur. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and/or commercialization 54 | Table of Contents milestones, which may span several years and/or which may never occur. Our contractual obligations in the table above are not necessarily indicative of our contractual obligations in the future. Debt On August 20, 2018, we issued $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes (2018 senior notes), with an original issue discount of $4 million . These notes are comprised of $300 million aggregate principal amount of floating rate senior notes due 2021 (the "2018 floating rate senior notes"), and $300 million aggregate principal amount of 3.250% senior notes due 2021, $500 million aggregate principal amount of 3.900% senior notes due 2028 and $400 million aggregate principal amount of 4.450% senior notes due 2048 (collectively, the "2018 fixed rate senior notes"). Net proceeds from this offering were partially used to pay down and terminate a revolving credit agreement and repay outstanding commercial paper, which were borrowed to finance a portion of the cash consideration for the acquisition of Abaxis (see Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements Note 5. Acquisitions and Divestitures ). The remainder of the net proceeds will be used for general corporate purposes. On September 12, 2017, we issued $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes (2017 senior notes), with an original issue discount of $7 million. These notes are comprised of $750 million aggregate principal amount of 3.000% senior notes due 2027 and $500 million aggregate principal amount of 3.950% senior notes due 2047. Net proceeds from this offering were partially used in October 2017 to repay, prior to maturity, the aggregate principal amount of $750 million , and a make-whole amount and accrued interest of $4 million, of our 1.875% senior notes due 2018. The remainder of the net proceeds were used for general corporate purposes. On November 13, 2015, we issued $1.25 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes (2015 senior notes), with an original issue discount of $2 million. On January 28, 2013, we issued $3.65 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes (2013 senior notes) in a private placement, with an original issue discount of $10 million . The 2013, 2015, 2017 and 2018 senior notes are governed by an indenture and supplemental indenture (collectively, the indenture) between us and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee. The indenture contains certain covenants, including limitations on our and certain of our subsidiaries' ability to incur liens or engage in sale lease-back transactions. The indenture also contains restrictions on our ability to consolidate, merge or sell substantially all of our assets. In addition, the indenture contains other customary terms, including certain events of default, upon the occurrence of which (if not cured or waived), the 2013, 2015, 2017 and 2018 senior notes may be declared immediately due and payable. Pursuant to the indenture, we are able to redeem the 2013, 2015 and 2017 senior notes and the 2018 fixed rate senior notes of any series, in whole or in part, at any time by paying a make whole premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption. Pursuant to our tax matters agreement with Pfizer, we will not be permitted to redeem the 2013 senior notes due 2023 pursuant to this optional redemption provision, except under limited circumstances. Upon the occurrence of a change of control of us and a downgrade of the 2013, 2015, 2017 and 2018 senior notes below an investment grade rating by each of Moody's Investors Service, Inc. and Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, we are, in certain circumstances, required to make an offer to repurchase all of the outstanding 2013, 2015, 2017 and 2018 senior notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2013, 2015, 2017 and 2018 senior notes together with accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of repurchase. The components of our long-term debt follow: Description Principal Amount Interest Rate Terms 2015 Senior Notes due 2020 $500 million 3.450% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on November 13, 2020 2018 Floating Rate Senior Notes due 2021 $300 million Three-month USD LIBOR plus 0.44% Interest due quarterly, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on August 20, 2021 2018 Senior Notes due 2021 $300 million 3.250% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on August 20, 2021 2013 Senior Notes due 2023 $1,350 million 3.250% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2023 2015 Senior Notes due 2025 $750 million 4.500% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on November 13, 2025 2017 Senior Notes due 2027 $750 million 3.000% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on September 12, 2027 2018 Senior Notes due 2028 $500 million 3.900% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on August 20, 2028 2013 Senior Notes due 2043 $1,150 million 4.700% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on February 1, 2043 2017 Senior Notes due 2047 $500 million 3.950% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on September 12, 2047 2018 Senior Notes due 2048 $400 million 4.450% Interest due semi annually, not subject to amortization, aggregate principal due on August 20, 2048 Credit ratings Two major corporate debt-rating organizations, Moody's and S&P, assign ratings to our short-term and long-term debt. A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and the rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. 55 | Table of Contents The following table provides the current ratings assigned by these rating agencies to our commercial paper and senior unsecured non-credit-enhanced long-term debt: Commercial Paper Long-term Debt Date of Name of Rating Agency Rating Rating Outlook Last Action Moody P-2 Baa1 Stable August 2017 S&P A-2 BBB Stable December 2016 Pension obligations Our employees ceased to participate in the Pfizer U.S. qualified defined benefit and U.S. retiree medical plans effective December 31, 2012, and liabilities associated with our employees under these plans were retained by Pfizer. As part of the separation from Pfizer, Pfizer is continuing to credit certain employees' service with Zoetis generally through December 31, 2017 (or termination of employment from Zoetis, if earlier), for certain early retirement benefits with respect to Pfizer's U.S. defined benefit pension and retiree medical plans. In connection with the employee matters agreement, Zoetis will be responsible for payment of three-fifths of the total cost of the service credit continuation (approximately $38 million ) for these plans. The amount of the service cost continuation payment to be paid by Zoetis to Pfizer was determined and fixed based on an actuarial assessment of the value of the grow-in benefits and will be paid in equal installments over a period of 10 years. As of December 31, 2018 , the remaining payments due to Pfizer (approximately $15 million in the aggregate) are to be paid over the next four years. As part of the separation from Pfizer, Pfizer transferred to us the net pension obligations associated with certain international defined benefit plans. We expect to contribute a total of approximately $5 million to these plans in 2019 . As of December 31, 2018 , the supplemental savings plan liability was approximately $35 million. For additional information, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 13. Benefit Plans. Share repurchase program In December 2016, the company's Board of Directors authorized a $1.5 billion share repurchase program. As of December 31, 2018, there was approximately $300 million remaining under this authorization. In December 2018, the company's Board of Directors authorized an additional $2.0 billion share repurchase program. Purchases of Zoetis shares may be made at the discretion of management, depending on market conditions and business needs. Share repurchases may be executed through various means, including open market or privately negotiated transactions. During 2018 , approximately 8 million shares were repurchased. Off-balance sheet arrangements In the ordinary course of business and in connection with the sale of assets and businesses, we may indemnify our counterparties against certain liabilities that may arise in connection with a transaction or that are related to activities prior to a transaction. These indemnifications typically pertain to environmental, tax, employee and/or product-related matters, and patent-infringement claims. If the indemnified party were to make a successful claim pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, we would be required to reimburse the loss. These indemnifications are generally subject to threshold amounts, specified claim periods and other restrictions and limitations. Historically, we have not paid significant amounts under these provisions and, as of December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017 , recorded amounts for the estimated fair value of these indemnifications are not significant. New accounting standards For discussion of our new accounting standards, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 3. Significant Accounting Policies New Accounting Standards . Recently Issued Accounting Standards, Not Adopted as of December 31, 2018 In August, 2018, the FASB issued an accounting standards update which expands the scope of costs associated with cloud computing arrangements that must be capitalized. Under the new guidance, costs associated with implementing a cloud computing arrangement that is a service contract must be capitalized and expensed over the term of the hosting arrangement. The provisions of the update are effective beginning January 1, 2020 for interim and annual periods with early adoption permitted for any interim period after issuance of the update. We are currently assessing the timing of our adoption as well as the potential impact that the standard will have on our consolidated financial statements. In February 2018, the FASB issued an accounting standards update which permits companies to reclassify from accumulated other comprehensive income to retained earnings stranded tax effects resulting from the new federal corporate income tax rate. In the period of adoption, a company may choose to either apply the amendments retrospectively to each period in which the effect of the change in federal income tax rate is recognized or to apply the amendments in that reporting period. We will adopt this guidance as of January 1, 2019, the required effective date. Adoption of this standard will not have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. In February 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standards update which requires lessees to recognize most leases on the balance sheet with a corresponding right of use asset. Leases will be classified as financing or operating which will drive the expense recognition pattern. For lessees, the income statement presentation and expense recognition pattern for financing and operating leases is similar to the current model for capital and operating leases, respectively. Companies may elect to exclude short-term leases. The update also requires additional disclosures that will better enable users of financial statements to assess the amount, timing, and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. We plan to adopt this guidance as of January 1, 2019, using the effective date as the date of initial application. As permitted, utilizing an optional transition method, a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings will be recognized in the period of adoption, and financial information and disclosure for 56 | Table of Contents periods prior to the date of initial application will not be updated. We have substantially completed our implementation of a lease accounting system and our evaluation of lease contracts, accounting policy elections and the impact of adoption on our consolidated financial statements. We do not expect the total of right of use assets and corresponding lease liabilities, recorded in conjunction with adoption, to exceed $200 million each. Adoption of the standard will not have a significant impact on our consolidated statements of income. 57 | Table of Contents Forward-looking statements and factors that may affect future results This report contains forward-looking statements. We generally identify forward-looking statements by using words such as anticipate, estimate, could, expect, intend, project, plan, predict, believe, seek, continue, outlook, "objective," "target," may, might, will, should, can have, likely or the negative version of these words or comparable words or by using future dates in connection with any discussion of future performance, actions or events. In particular, forward-looking statements include statements relating to our 2019 financial guidance, future actions, business plans or prospects, prospective products, product approvals or products under development, product supply disruptions, R&D costs, timing and likelihood of success, future operating or financial performance, future results of current and anticipated products and services, strategies, sales efforts, expenses, production efficiencies, production margins, anticipated timing of generic market entries, integration of acquired businesses, interest rates, tax rates, changes in tax regimes and laws, foreign exchange rates, growth in emerging markets, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, plans related to share repurchases and dividends, government regulation and financial results. These statements are not guarantees of future performance, actions or events. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and are based on assumptions that could prove to be inaccurate. Among the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from past results and future plans and projected future results are the following: unanticipated safety, quality or efficacy concerns about our products; issues with any of our top products; failure of our R&D, acquisition and licensing efforts to generate new products and product lifecycle innovations; the possible impact and timing of competing products, including generic alternatives, on our products and our ability to compete against such products; disruptive innovations and advances in medical practices and technologies; consolidation of our customers and distributors; changes in the distribution channel for companion animal products; failure to successfully acquire businesses, license rights or products, integrate businesses, form and manage alliances or divest businesses; restrictions and bans on the use of and consumer preferences regarding antibacterials in food-producing animals; perceived adverse effects on human health linked to the consumption of food derived from animals that utilize our products; adverse global economic conditions; increased regulation or decreased governmental support relating to the raising, processing or consumption of food-producing animals; fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and potential currency controls; changes in tax laws and regulations; legal factors, including product liability claims, antitrust litigation and governmental investigations, including tax disputes, environmental concerns, commercial disputes and patent disputes with branded and generic competitors, any of which could preclude commercialization of products or negatively affect the profitability of existing products; failure to protect our intellectual property rights or to operate our business without infringing the intellectual property rights of others; product launch delays, inventory shortages, recalls or unanticipated costs caused by manufacturing problems and capacity imbalances; an outbreak of infectious disease carried by animals; adverse weather conditions and the availability of natural resources; the economic, political, legal and business environment of the foreign jurisdictions in which we do business; a cyber-attack, information security breach or other misappropriation of our data; quarterly fluctuations in demand and costs; governmental laws and regulations affecting domestic and foreign operations, including without limitation, tax obligations and changes affecting the tax treatment by the United States of income earned outside the United States that may result from pending and possible future proposals; and governmental laws and regulations affecting our interactions with veterinary healthcare providers. However, there may also be other risks that we are unable to predict at this time. These risks or uncertainties may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by a forward-looking statement. You should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law or by the rules and regulations of the SEC. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Form 10-Q and 8-K reports and our other filings with the SEC. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. Consequently, you should not consider the above to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties. 58 | 
