CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2017-11-27


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview We, Varian Medical Systems, Inc., are a Delaware corporation originally incorporated in 1948 as Varian Associates, Inc. We are the world leading manufacturer of medical devices and software for treating cancer and other medical conditions with radiotherapy, stereotactic radiosurgery, stereotactic body radiotherapy, brachytherapy and proton therapy. Our mission is to combine the ingenuity of people with the power of data and technology to achieve new victories against cancer. To meet this challenge, we offer comprehensive solutions for fighting cancer. In fiscal year 2017, our Varian Particle Therapy ("VPT") business met the criteria of a reportable operating segment and subsequent to the spin-off of our former Imaging Components business, our operations are now grouped into two reportable operating segments: Oncology Systems and VPT. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2017, our Ginzton Technology Center business, previously reflected in the "Other" category, was dissolved and absorbed primarily into Oncology Systems. This change did not result in any recast of prior period financial information, because the impact was not material. The operating segments were determined based on how our Chief Executive Officer, who is our Chief Operating Decision Maker ("CODM"), views and evaluates our operations. The CODM allocates resources to and evaluates the financial performance of each operating segment primarily based on operating earnings. Long-term growth and value creation strategy. We are focused on cancer care solutions and well-positioned to positively influence more and more patients globally every day by bringing smarter and simpler solutions to healthcare providers. Our long-term growth and value creation strategy is to transform our company from the global leader in radiation therapy to become the global leader in multidisciplinary, integrated cancer care solutions. We intend to leverage our deep customer relationships, human-centered design, scale and financial strength to selectively broaden our capabilities to capitalize on industry trends. To achieve these long-term objectives, we are focused on driving growth through strengthening our leadership in radiation therapy, extending our global footprint and expanding into other addressable markets. Distribution. On January 28, 2017 (the "Distribution Date"), we completed the separation and distribution (the "Distribution") of Varex Imaging Corporation ("Varex"), our former Imaging Components business segment. On the Distribution Date, each of our stockholders of record as of the close of business on January 20, 2017 (the "Record Date") received 0.4 of a share of Varex common stock for every one share of our common stock held on the Record Date. Varex is now an independent publicly traded company and is listed on The NASDAQ Global Select Market under the ticker symbol "VREX." The historical financial position and results of operations of the Imaging Components business and costs relating to the Distribution are reported in the consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations for all the periods presented. Unless otherwise noted, the financial information herein has been recast to reflect the effect of the Distribution. The Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Earnings, Cash Flows and Statement of Equity have not been recast to reflect the effect of the Distribution. See Note 2, "Discontinued Operations" of the Notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information. On January 25, 2017, we entered into a term facility ("Varex Term Facility"), and on the same day drew down $203.0 million under the facility. In conjunction with the Distribution, we used $200.0 million of those proceeds to repay a portion of our outstanding 2013 Revolving Credit Facility. At the Distribution Date, we contributed $81.3 million in cash and cash equivalents to Varex as part of the distribution and transfer of certain legal entities. In fiscal year 2017, we received $38.7 million from Varex for excess cash and cash equivalents contributed at the Distribution Date. As of September 29, 2017 , the change to our stockholders' equity was primarily due to a $334.1 million reduction recorded in retained earnings as a result of the Distribution of Varex, which included assets and liabilities transferred to Varex on the distribution date, including $203.0 million debt outstanding under the Varex Term Facility. In December 2016, we entered into a master purchase and sale agreement ("MPSA") to acquire the Medical Imaging business of PerkinElmer, Inc. for approximately $276 million. In connection with the Distribution, we assigned the MPSA and any rights and obligations thereunder to Varex. We incurred separation costs of $34.2 million and $16.9 million in fiscal year 2017 and 2016, respectively, relating to the separation of our Imaging Components business. We do not expect to incur any future separation costs. Separation costs include expenses for transaction advisory services, consulting services, restructuring and other expenses. Separation costs are included in discontinued operations for all periods presented. Financial Information. Total revenues increased 2% , gross margin increased 0.8 percentage points, net earnings from continuing operations decreased 21% , and diluted net earnings per share decreased 19% in fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016 . Our effective tax rate decreased to 25.4% in fiscal year 2017 from 26.2% in fiscal year 2016 . We repurchased 3.3 45 million shares of VMS common stock totaling $294.5 million in fiscal year 2017 . Our backlog at the end of fiscal year 2017 was $3.5 billion , or 10% higher , as compared to the end of fiscal year 2016 . We report our revenues by geographical regions. The Americas region includes North America (primarily United States and Canada) and Latin America. The EMEA region includes Europe, Russia, the Middle East, India and Africa. The APAC region primarily includes East and Southeast Asia and Australia. In order to assist with the assessment of how our underlying businesses performed, we compare the percentage change in revenues and gross orders from one period to another, excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations ( i.e. , using constant currency exchange rates). To present this information on a constant currency basis, we convert current period revenues and Oncology gross orders in currencies other than U.S. Dollars into U.S. Dollars using the comparable prior period average exchange rate. Percentage changes in revenue and gross orders are not adjusted for constant currency unless indicated. Currency fluctuations did not have a significant impact on total revenues and gross orders in fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016. Fluctuations of non-U.S. Dollar currencies against the U.S. Dollar may cause variability in our financial performance. In December 2015, President Obama signed into law the Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015 ("PATH Act"), which suspended the 2.3% medical device excise tax implemented as part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the Affordable Care Act ) for a two-year period through December 31, 2017. The suspension of the medical device excise tax had a positive impact on our gross margin in fiscal year 2016 compared to fiscal year 2015. Additionally, the PATH Act permanently extended the research and development ("R&D") tax credit, which had a favorable impact on our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2016 compared to fiscal year 2015. Oncology Systems . Our Oncology Systems business designs, manufactures, sells and services hardware and software products for treating cancer with conventional radiotherapy, and advanced treatments such as fixed field intensity-modulated radiation therapy ("IMRT"), image-guided radiation therapy ("IGRT"), volumetric modulated arc therapy ("VMAT"), stereotactic radiotherapy, stereotactic body radiotherapy and brachytherapy. Our software solutions also include informatics software for information management, clinical knowledge exchange, patient care management, practice management and decision-making support for comprehensive cancer clinics, radiotherapy centers and medical oncology practices. Our primary goal in the Oncology Systems business is to promote the adoption of more advanced and effective cancer treatments. In our view, the fundamental market forces that drive long-term growth in our Oncology Systems business are the rise in cancer cases; technology advances and product developments that are leading to improvements in patient care; customer demand for the more advanced and effective cancer treatments that we enable; competitive conditions among hospitals and clinics to offer such advanced treatments; continued improvement in safety and cost efficiency in delivering radiation therapy; and underserved medical needs outside of the United States. Over the last few years, we have seen a greater percentage of Oncology Systems gross orders and revenues coming from emerging markets within our international region, which typically have lower gross margins and longer installation cycles compared to mature markets. We have also seen an increased portion of gross orders and revenues coming from services and software licenses, both of which have higher gross margin percentages than our hardware products. We have also been investing a higher portion of our Oncology Systems research and development budget in software and software-related products. The radiation oncology market in North America is largely characterized by replacements of older machines, with periodic increases in demand driven by the introduction of new technologies. Reimbursement rates in the United States have generally supported a favorable return on investment for the purchase of new radiotherapy equipment and technologies. While we believe that improved product functionality, greater cost-effectiveness and prospects for better clinical outcomes with new capabilities such as IMRT, IGRT and VMAT tend to drive demand for radiotherapy products, large changes in reimbursement rates or reimbursement structure can affect customer demand and cause market shifts. We do not know the full impact of the Affordable Care Act or its potential repeal, or the possible impact of changes in policy resulting from President Trump's administration, will have on long-term growth or demand for our products and services. We believe, however, that growth of the radiation oncology market in the United States could be impacted as customers decision-making processes are complicated by the uncertainties surrounding Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 and the Affordable Care Act, or its replacement, and reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery, and that this uncertainty will likely continue in future fiscal years. We believe this uncertainty could impact transaction size, timing and purchasing processes, and also contribute to increased quarterly business variability. Given all the dynamic elements affecting this market, as outlined above, we believe the North America market will continue to grow in the low to mid-single digit range. 46 In the radiation oncology markets outside of North America, we expect the EMEA market to grow over the long-term with mixed performance across the region. In APAC, we expect China to lead longer term regional growth, off-setting a slower Japanese market. Latin America is currently experiencing volatility; however, our long-term outlook is cautiously optimistic. Overall, we believe the global radiation oncology market can grow over the long-term, in constant currencies, in the low to mid-single-digit range. In May 2017, we introduced our Halcyon treatment system, our newest device for cancer treatment. We received a CE mark for the Halcyon system in May 2017 and FDA 510(k) clearance in June 2017. Our HyperArc High Definition Radiotherapy, a new type of radiosurgery treatment received a CE mark in August 2017 and FDA 510(k) clearance in September 2017 and is currently available for sale in the United States and other global markets where CE mark is applicable. Oncology Systems total revenues increased 1% in fiscal year 2017 , as compared to fiscal year 2016 . Oncology Systems gross margin percentage increased 1.5 percentage points in fiscal year 2017 from fiscal year 2016 . Oncology Systems gross orders increased 7% in fiscal year 2017 , as compared to fiscal year 2016 , with increases of 6% from North America and 8% from our international regions. Varian Particle Therapy . Our VPT business develops, designs, manufactures, sells and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy, another form of external beam radiotherapy using proton beams, for the treatment of cancer. VPT revenues increased $19.9 million and gross orders increased $124.9 million in fiscal year 2017 , as compared to fiscal year 2016 . In January 2017, we were informed of actions taken by California Proton Treatment Center, LLC ( CPTC ) and the loan agent, including CPTC obtaining shareholder consents for voluntary bankruptcy filing and the loan agent deciding that no additional funding would be available outside of a bankruptcy process. As a result of this information and our analysis that these actions would likely lead to insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings at CPTC, in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017 we recorded a $38.3 million other-than-temporary impairment for our Original CPTC Loans on the Consolidated Statements of Earnings. In addition, we also recorded an allowance for doubtful accounts of $37.8 million from CPTC and another proton center in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017. The expense associated with the allowance for doubtful accounts was recorded in selling, general and administrative expense on the Consolidated Statements of Earnings. In March 2017, CPTC filed for bankruptcy and concurrently entered into a Debtor-in-Possession facility (the "DIP Facility") with ORIX Capital Markets, LLC, J.P. Morgan and the Company for up to $16.0 million of additional financing during the bankruptcy process. Our pro-rata share of the DIP Facility is $7.3 million. At September 29, 2017 , our remaining commitment under the DIP Facility was $2.2 million . In September 2017, ORIX, J.P. Morgan and the Company (collectively the "Lenders") and the Scripps Proton Therapy Center ("Scripps") signed a Transition Agreement to transition the operations of the center from Scripps to a new operator. Based on the terms of the Transition Agreement, a slower projected growth in patient volume, and an increase in additional projected capital needs, we reassessed the value of our Original CPTC Loans and recorded an additional $13.1 million impairment charge in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017. As of September 29, 2017 , we had a total of $171.9 million carrying value of loans outstanding to VPT customers, available-for-sale securities, notes receivable and short-term senior secured debt. See Note 16, "VPT Loans and Securities" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Item 1A, Risk Factors. We discuss our results of operations below. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more 47 fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, impairment of investments and notes receivable, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of loss contingencies, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain, and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, see Item 1A, Risk Factors. Revenue Recognition Our revenues are derived primarily from the sale of hardware and software products, and services from our Oncology Systems and VPT businesses. We recognize revenues net of any value added or sales tax and net of sales discounts. We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. The allocation of consideration in a multiple element arrangement is affected by the determination of whether any software deliverables that function together with other hardware components to deliver the hardware products essential functionality are considered as non-software products for purpose of revenue recognition. The allocation of consideration to each non-software deliverable is based on the assumptions we use to establish its selling price, which are based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of selling price, if it exists, otherwise, third-party evidence of selling price, if it exists, and, if not, on estimated selling prices. In addition, the allocation of consideration to each software deliverable in a multiple element arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether VSOE of its fair value exists in these arrangements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the amounts allocated to each element could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment, readiness of customers facilities for installation, installation requirements, and availability of products or customer acceptance terms. If shipments or installations are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. Service revenues include revenues from hardware service contracts, software service agreements, bundled support arrangements, paid services and trainings, and parts that are sold by the service department. Revenues allocated to service contracts are generally recognized ratably over the period of the related contracts. In addition, revenues related to proton therapy systems and proton therapy system commissioning contracts are recognized in accordance with contract accounting. We recognize contract revenues under the percentage-of-completion method which are based on contract costs incurred to date compared with total estimated contract costs. Changes in estimates of total contract revenue, total contract cost or the extent of progress towards completion are recognized in the period in which the changes in estimates are identified. Estimated losses on contracts are recognized in the period in which the loss is identified. In circumstances in which the final outcome of a contract cannot be precisely estimated but a loss on the contract is not expected, we recognize revenues under the percentage-of-completion method based on a zero profit margin until more precise estimates can be made. If and when we can make more precise estimates, revenues and costs of revenues are adjusted in the same period. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. Share-based Compensation Expense We grant restricted stock units, deferred stock units, performance units, and stock options to employees and permit employees to purchase shares under the VMS employee stock purchase plan. We value our stock options granted and the option component of the shares of VMS common stock purchased under the employee stock purchase plan using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We value our performance units, which contain a market condition, using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant under both the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other 48 subjective assumptions, including the expected terms of share-based awards and the expected price volatilities of shares of VMS common stock and peer companies that are used to assess certain performance targets over the expected term of the awards, and the expected dividend yield of shares of VMS common stock. The expected term of our stock options is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We use a blended volatility in deriving the expected volatility assumption for our stock options. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility is derived based on traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the term of the exchange-traded options to the expected terms of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options on VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we could not rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected terms of the stock options we grant. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected terms of the stock options we grant and the implied volatility of exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock. In determining the grant date fair value of our performance units, historical volatilities of shares of VMS common stock, as well as the shares of common stock of peer companies, were used to assess certain performance targets. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock awards. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate, as well as the probability that certain performance conditions that affect the vesting of performance units will be achieved, and recognize expense only for those awards expected to vest. If the actual forfeiture rate and/or the actual number of performance units that vest based on achievement of performance conditions are materially different from our estimates, the share-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Except for government tenders, group purchases and orders with letters of credit in Oncology Systems, our payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Impairment of Investments and Notes Receivable We recognize an impairment charge when the declines in the fair values of our available-for-sale investments below their cost basis are determined to be other than temporary impairments ( OTTI ). Our available-for-sale investments consists of loans and securities for the funding, development and construction of various proton therapy centers. We monitor our available-for-sale investments for possible OTTI on an ongoing basis. When there has been a decline in fair value of a debt security below the amortized cost basis, we recognize OTTI if: (i) we have the intention to sell the security; (ii) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the entire amortized cost basis; or (iii) we do not expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We assess the fair value of the our available-for-sale securities, which are classified in the level 3 fair value hierarchy based on the income approach by using the discounted cash flow model with key assumptions that include discount rates corresponding to the terms and risks associated with the loans, as well as underlying cash flow assumptions. In January 2017, we were informed of actions taken by CPTC and the loan agent, including CPTC obtaining shareholder consents for voluntary bankruptcy filing and the loan agent deciding that no additional funding would be available outside of a bankruptcy process. As a result of this information and our analysis that these actions would likely lead to insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings at CPTC, we determined that the Original CPTC Loans with a carrying value of $98.1 million were other-than-temporarily impaired relating to credit losses as of December 30, 2016. As a result of this determination, the investment was written down to its estimated fair value of $60.0 million, resulting in an 49 impairment charge of $38.3 million, which includes $0.2 million of other loan related charges, recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings. In September 2017, the Lenders and Scripps signed a Transition Agreement to transition the operations of the center from Scripps to a new operator. Based on the terms of the Transition Agreement, a slower growth in patient volume, an increase in additional capital needs and our analysis we determined that the Original CPTC Loans were other-than-temporarily impaired and recorded an additional $13.1 million impairment charge related to the Original CPTC Loans. As of September 29, 2017 , the fair value our Original CPTC Loans was $47.4 million . See Note 4, "Fair Value" and Note 16, "VPT Loans and Securities" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We also have investments in privately-held companies, some of which are in the startup or development stages. We monitor these investments for events or circumstances indicative of potential impairment, and we make appropriate reductions in carrying values if we determine that an impairment charge is required, based primarily on the financial condition, near-term prospects and recent financing activities of the investee. These investments are inherently risky because the markets for the technologies or products these companies are developing are typically in the early stages and may never materialize. At times, we advance notes to third parties, including our customers. We regularly assess these notes for collectability by considering internal factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the note balances as well as external factors such as economic conditions that may affect the note holder's ability to pay. Our ongoing consideration of all the factors described above could result in impairment charges in the future, which could adversely affect our operating results. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and on order and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Impairment Assessment Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. The determination of the value of the intangible assets acquired involves certain judgments and estimates. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future and the appropriate weighted-average cost of capital ("WACC"). Each period we evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of purchased intangible assets and whether events or changes in circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization. Goodwill is allocated to reporting units expected to benefit from the business combination. We evaluate our reporting units when changes in our operating structure occur, and if necessary, reassign goodwill using a relative fair value allocation approach. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate its carrying value may not be recoverable. We can opt to perform a qualitative assessment to test a reporting unit goodwill for impairment or we can directly perform the two-step impairment test. Various factors are considered in the qualitative assessment, including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, financial performance and other relevant events affecting the reporting unit. Based on our qualitative assessment, if we determine that the fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50 percent) to be less than its carrying amount, the two-step impairment test will be performed. In the first step, we compare the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a combination of income and market valuation approaches. The income approach is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows that the reporting unit is expected to generate and the market approach is based on a market multiple calculated for each reporting unit based on market data of other companies engaged in similar business. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill against the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates, operating margins and working capital needs to calculate projected future cash flows, WACC, future economic and market conditions, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our business and 50 determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are inherently uncertain. Actual future results related to assumed variables could differ from these estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each reporting unit. We have two reporting units: (i) Oncology Systems and (ii) VPT, with $170.2 million and $52.4 million in goodwill, respectively, as of September 29, 2017 . Based upon the most recent annual goodwill analysis that we performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017, we opted to evaluate Oncology Systems by using qualitative factors and VPT by using the step one approach, and determined no further goodwill impairment analysis was required. VPT's fair value was 21% in excess of its carrying value, and we believe each of the assumptions used to calculate VPT fair value to be reasonable. However, VPT could be at risk for goodwill impairment because adjustments to revenue growth rates, operating margins, WACC and/or our working capital used in the fair value calculation could lead to an impairment. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually 12 months from installation, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Loss Contingencies From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations or other legal matters, both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties, outcomes are not predictable with assurance, and actual liabilities could significantly exceed our estimates of potential liabilities. In addition, we are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations. In connection with our past and present operations and facilities, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts. Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review these accrued balances quarterly. If we were required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. Defined Benefit Pension Plans We sponsor five defined benefit pension plans in Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expenses and liabilities related to the aforementioned plans. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, and rate of future compensation increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expenses and liabilities. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension plan expenses we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans are primarily based on the current effective yield of long-term corporate bonds that are of high quality with satisfactory liquidity and credit rating with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. A change in the discount rate may cause the present value of benefit obligations to change significantly. The net liabilities recognized for defined benefit pension plans decreased by $23.4 51 million in fiscal year 2017 to $15.6 million at September 29, 2017 , primarily due to an increase in the discount rate partially offset by changes in exchange rates. See Note 10, "Retirement Plans" in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency rate fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on net monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 4, "Fair Value" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts is calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services. One year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which mature in 13 months or less, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty credit default swap rates (for net assets) or our borrowing rate (for net liabilities). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact on the valuation of our derivative instruments. There were no transfers of assets or liabilities between fair value measurement levels during fiscal years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 . Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. We account for uncertainty in income taxes following a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. Generally, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in the applicable tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. Our foreign earnings are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our foreign subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from foreign countries, or a change in the mix of foreign countries among particular tax jurisdictions could increase or decrease our effective tax rate. Our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be remitted or deemed to be remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2017 was the 52 -week period ended September 29, 2017 , fiscal year 2016 was the 52 -week period ended September 30, 2016 , and fiscal year 2015 was the 53 -week period ended on October 2, 2015 . Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 . 52 Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 Product $ 1,555.5 (2 )% $ 1,583.9 6 % $ 1,497.1 Service 1,112.7 7 % 1,037.2 4 % 993.6 Total Revenues $ 2,668.2 2 % $ 2,621.1 5 % $ 2,490.7 Product as a percentage of total revenues 58 % 60 % 60 % Service as a percentage of total revenues 42 % 40 % 40 % Total product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 due to a decrease in revenues from Oncology Systems, partially offset by an increase in revenues from VPT. Total product revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from VPT. Total service revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , and fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 , mostly due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change Constant Currency (1) 2016 Percent Change Constant Currency 2015 Americas $ 1,363.8 6 % 6 % $ 1,285.4 (3 )% (3 )% $ 1,329.4 EMEA 771.6 (6 )% (5 )% 824.7 13 % 18 % 730.5 APAC 532.8 4 % 3 % 511.0 19 % 17 % 430.8 Total Revenues $ 2,668.2 2 % 2 % $ 2,621.1 5 % 7 % $ 2,490.7 North America $ 1,283.0 7 % 7 % $ 1,201.2 (4 )% (4 )% $ 1,248.3 International (2) 1,385.2 (2 )% (2 )% 1,419.9 14 % 17 % 1,242.4 Total Revenues $ 2,668.2 2 % 2 % $ 2,621.1 5 % 7 % $ 2,490.7 North America as a percentage of total revenues 48 % 47 % 51 % International as a percentage of total revenues 52 % 53 % 49 % (1) Constant currency is the percent change excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations against the U.S. Dollar. (2) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. The Americas revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 due to increases in revenues from Oncology Systems and VPT. The Americas revenues decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to a decrease in revenues from VPT, partially offset by an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems. EMEA revenues decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from Oncology Systems and, to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from VPT. EMEA revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to increases in revenues from VPT and Oncology Systems. APAC revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to an increase in revenues in Oncology Systems and, to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from VPT. APAC revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems and, to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from VPT. 53 Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change Constant Currency 2016 Percent Change Constant Currency 2015 Product $ 1,383.0 (3 )% (3 )% $ 1,430.3 5 % 6 % $ 1,359.2 Service 1,102.7 7 % 7 % 1,027.7 4 % 5 % 987.6 Total Oncology Systems Revenues $ 2,485.7 1 % 1 % $ 2,458.0 5 % 6 % $ 2,346.8 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 56 % 58 % 58 % Service as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 44 % 42 % 42 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 93 % 94 % 94 % Oncology systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to a decrease in revenues from hardware products resulting from a lengthening backlog conversion cycle due to a greater portion of the backlog being from emerging markets, and customer readiness delays in several countries. Oncology Systems product revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to increases in revenues from hardware products, which resulted from an improved product mix, and software licenses. Oncology Systems service revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 and in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 , primarily due to increased customer adoption of service contracts as the warranty period on our TrueBeam systems expire and an increased number of service contracts as the installed base of our products continues to grow. The extra week of operations in fiscal year 2015 contributed approximately an additional $7 million in Oncology Systems service revenues. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change Constant Currency 2016 Percent Change Constant Currency 2015 Americas $ 1,276.0 4 % 4 % $ 1,229.8 1 % 2 % $ 1,212.1 EMEA 703.5 (5 )% (3 )% 739.3 5 % 9 % 703.9 APAC 506.2 4 % 3 % 488.9 13 % 12 % 430.8 Total Oncology System Revenues $ 2,485.7 1 % 1 % $ 2,458.0 5 % 6 % $ 2,346.8 North America $ 1,195.2 4 % 4 % $ 1,145.6 1 % 1 % $ 1,131.0 International 1,290.5 (2 )% (1 )% 1,312.4 8 % 10 % 1,215.8 Total Oncology System Revenues $ 2,485.7 1 % 1 % $ 2,458.0 5 % 6 % $ 2,346.8 North America as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues 49 % 47 % 49 % International as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues 51 % 53 % 51 % The Americas Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to an increase in revenues from services in North America and, to a lesser extent, increases in revenues from hardware products and software licenses in North America, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from software licenses in Latin America. The Americas Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to increases in revenues from services, primarily in North America, and software licenses, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from hardware products. 54 EMEA Oncology Systems revenues decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 due to a decrease in revenues from hardware products and, to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from software licenses, partially offset by an increase in revenues from services. EMEA Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to an increase in revenues from hardware products, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from services and software licenses. APAC Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from services and, to lesser extent, an increase in revenues from software licenses, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from hardware products. APAC Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products and, to a lesser extent, increases in revenues from software licenses and services. Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the North American and international regions are impacted by regional influences, which recently have included government stimulus programs, economic and political instability in some countries, uncertainty created by health care reform (such as the excise tax on the sale of most medical devices, Medicare reimbursement rates and consolidation of free standing clinics in the United States), and different technology adoption cycles that are consistent with the gross order patterns. See further discussion of orders under Gross Orders. Varian Particle Therapy Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 Product $ 172.5 13 % $ 153.1 11 % $ 137.9 Service 10.0 4 % 9.5 70 % 5.6 Total VPT revenues $ 182.5 12 % $ 162.6 13 % $ 143.5 VPT revenues as a percentage of total revenues 7 % 6 % 6 % VPT revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 and in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 , primarily due to the continued production and installation of VPT projects. The increase in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 was primarily due to the completion and financing of the Georgia Proton Treatment Center in fiscal year 2017, which resulted in $56.0 million of revenue recorded for that project. Other Revenues from the "Other" category in fiscal year 2016 and 2015 were $0.5 million and $0.4 million , respectively. Revenues from the "Other" category represent revenues from our former Ginzton Technology Center business, which was dissolved in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017 and is no longer a separate business. Gross Margin Fiscal Years Dollars by segment 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 (Dollars in millions) Oncology Systems $ 1,139.6 5 % $ 1,087.7 9 % $ 998.9 Varian Particle Therapy 16.0 (36 )% 25.2 (24 )% 33.2 Gross margin $ 1,155.6 4 % $ 1,112.9 8 % $ 1,032.1 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 45.8 % 44.3 % 42.6 % Varian Particle Therapy 8.8 % 15.4 % 23.1 % Total Company 43.3 % 42.5 % 41.4 % 55 Total product gross margin percentage was 34.1% in fiscal year 2017 , compared to 32.4% in fiscal year 2016 and 30.9% in fiscal year 2015 . Total service gross margin percentage was 56.2% in fiscal year 2017 , compared to 57.9% in fiscal year 2016 and 57.4% in fiscal year 2015 . Oncology Systems product gross margin percentage was 37.3% in fiscal year 2017 , compared to 34.2% in fiscal year 2016 and 31.5% in fiscal year 2015 . The increase in product gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 was primarily due to a favorable product mix and supply chain efficiencies. The increase in product gross margin in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 was due to the suspension of the medical device excise tax in fiscal year 2016, an increase in software license revenue which has a higher gross margin percentage, and the impact of cost reduction programs. Oncology Systems service gross margin percentage was 56.5% in fiscal year 2017 , compared to 58.2% in fiscal year 2016 and 57.8% in fiscal year 2015 . The decrease in service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016 was primarily due to higher personnel-related costs and materials associated with operating system upgrades for our installed customer base. The increase in service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 was primarily due to cost containment and an increase in service revenues. VPT gross margin percentage decreased in fiscal year 2017 , compared to fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to lower service revenues and the revision of profitability estimates caused by the weakening of the British Pound for projects in the United Kingdom during the second quarter of fiscal year 2017, partially offset by higher margins of new project revenue recognized in fiscal year 2017. VPT gross margin percentage decreased in fiscal year 2016 , compared to fiscal year 2015 , primarily due to more revenue generated in fiscal year 2016 from projects with lower product gross margins. Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 Research and development $ 210.0 5 % $ 200.4 3 % $ 195.4 As a percentage of total revenues 8 % 8 % 8 % Research and development expenses increased $9.6 million in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to increased headcount in Oncology Systems and an increase in consulting services to support new product development projects and enhancement of existing products in both Oncology Systems and VPT. Research and development expenses increased $5.0 million in fiscal year 2016 , over fiscal year 2015 was primarily due to increase in new development projects and employee related costs in VPT. Selling, General and Administrative and Impairment Charges Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 Selling, general and administrative $ 552.3 16 % $ 475.3 8 % $ 441.0 Impairment charges $ 51.4 n/m $ 2.2 n/m $ Selling, general and administrative as a percentage of total revenues 21 % 18 % 18 % Impairment charges as a percentage of total revenues 2 % % % n/m = not meaningful Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $77.0 million in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to a $39.6 million increase in the allowance for doubtful accounts that was mostly for CPTC and another proton center in fiscal year 2017, a $24.4 million increase in employee-related costs largely due to an increase in headcount, a $9.1 million increase in restructuring charges, a $3.5 million increase in consulting expenses and a $3.4 million increase in trade show and marketing expenses, partially offset by an $8.3 million decrease in litigation expenses primarily as a result of the settlement with Elekta in April 2017 and a $4.4 million decrease in international commissions paid to third-party distributors who sell our products. 56 Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $34.3 million in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a $21.1 million increase in legal expenses primarily related to legal proceedings, a $19.1 million increase in employee-related costs largely due to an increase in headcount, primarily in Oncology Systems, and accrued bonuses, a $6.9 million increase in international commissions paid to third-party distributors who sell our products, and a $3.8 million increase in trade show expense. These increases were partially offset by a $7.9 million decrease in restructuring charges and a $7.6 million favorable impact when foreign-currency denominated expenses were translated into U.S. dollars. In fiscal year 2017 , we recorded $51.4 million in impairment charges related to our Original CPTC Loans. In fiscal year 2016, we recorded a $2.2 million impairment related to the sale of the New York Proton Center Senior First Lien loan. See Note 16, "VPT Loans" in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 Interest income, net $ 2.9 (49 )% $ 5.6 % $ 5.6 Interest income, net of interest expense, decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to a decrease in interest income generated from our loans to CPTC, partially offset by an increase in interest expense associated with the borrowing from our credit facility. Interest income, net of interest expense, in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 , was flat primarily due to an increase in interest expense associated with increased borrowings from our credit facility being mostly offset by an increase in interest income generated from our loans to finance proton treatment centers. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 Effective tax rate 25.4 % (0.8 )% 26.2 % 3.8 % 22.4 % Our effective tax rate decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to a favorable shift in the geographic mix of earnings. Our effective tax rate increased in fiscal year 2016 from fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an unfavorable shift in the geographic mix of earnings, including an increase in the amount of loss from our VPT business in Germany, a jurisdiction for which we have a full valuation allowance. This increase was partially offset by a larger benefit of the federal research and development credit. Because of the timing of the lapses and retroactive reinstatements of the federal research and development credit, we were eligible for seven quarters of benefit in fiscal year 2016 and four quarters of benefit in fiscal year 2015. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. See Note 14, "Taxes on Earnings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. 57 Discontinued Operations The following table summarizes the key components of net (loss) earnings from discontinued operations: Fiscal Years (in millions) 2017 (1) 2016 2015 Revenues $ 194.0 $ 596.7 $ 608.4 Cost of revenues 117.3 348.3 357.9 Gross margin 76.7 248.4 250.5 Operating expenses (2) 76.1 132.6 97.2 Operating earnings 0.6 115.8 153.3 Taxes on earnings 7.4 38.4 52.7 Net earnings (loss) from discontinued operations (6.8 ) 77.4 100.6 Less: Net earnings from discontinued operations attributable to noncontrolling interests 0.1 0.5 0.7 Net earnings (loss) from discontinued operations attributable to Varian $ (6.9 ) $ 76.9 $ 99.9 (1) Fiscal year 2017 net earnings (loss) from discontinued operations represents activity through the date of the Distribution. (2) Operating expenses from discontinued operations included separation costs of $34.2 million and $16.9 million during fiscal years 2017 and 2016, respectively. Separation costs include expenses for transaction advisory services, consulting services, restructuring and other expenses. Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 Net earnings per diluted share - continuing operations $ 2.75 (19 )% $ 3.39 9 % $ 3.10 Net earnings per diluted share - discontinued operations (0.07 ) (109 )% 0.80 (19 )% 0.99 Total net earnings per diluted share $ 2.68 (36 )% $ 4.19 2 % $ 4.09 Net earnings per diluted share from continuing operations decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to$51.4 million in impairment charges related to our Original CPTC Loans and a $37.8 million allowance for doubtful accounts from CPTC and another proton center in fiscal year 2017, partially offset by a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to share repurchases. Net earnings per diluted share from continuing operations increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to share repurchases, partially offset by an increase in the effective tax rate. Net earnings per diluted share from continuing operations in fiscal year 2016 was negatively impacted by $24.8 million in legal expenses. Gross Orders Total Gross Orders (by segment) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change 2016 Percent Change 2015 Oncology Systems $ 2,905.8 7 % $ 2,724.5 1 % $ 2,699.7 Varian Particle Therapy 229.2 120 % 104.3 (67 )% 316.9 Other (100 )% 0.4 7 % 0.3 Total Gross Orders $ 3,135.0 11 % $ 2,829.2 (6 )% $ 3,016.9 58 Gross orders are defined as new orders recorded during the period adjusted for any revisions to existing orders during the period. New orders are recorded for the total contractual amount, excluding certain pass-through items, once a written agreement for the delivery of goods or provision of services is in place and, other than VPT, when shipment of the product is expected to occur within two years, so long as any contingencies are deemed perfunctory. For our VPT business, we record orders when construction of the related proton therapy treatment center is reasonably expected to start within two years, but only if any contingencies are deemed perfunctory. We will not record VPT orders if there are major financing contingencies, if a substantial portion of the financing for the project is not reasonably assured or if customer board approval contingencies are pending. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders remain valid. If an order is no longer expected to ultimately convert to revenue, we record a backlog adjustment, which reduces backlog but does not impact gross orders for the period. Gross orders in any period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedules and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as orders for software or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance than hardware or older products. Because an order for a proton therapy system can be relatively large, an order in one fiscal period will cause gross orders in our VPT business to vary significantly, making comparisons between fiscal periods more difficult. Furthermore, bid awards, primarily in our VPT business, may be subject to challenge by third parties, which can make these orders more unpredictable than other products. Oncology Systems Gross Orders Gross Orders by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2017 Percent Change Constant Currency 2016 Percent Change Constant Currency 2015 Americas $ 1,479.0 3 % 3 % $ 1,438.4 4 % 4 % $ 1,384.1 EMEA 878.2 14 % 14 % 772.9 (6 )% (4 )% 826.0 APAC 548.6 7 % 7 % 513.2 5 % 3 % 489.6 Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders $ 2,905.8 7 % 7 % $ 2,724.5 1 % 1 % $ 2,699.7 North America $ 1,386.2 6 % 5 % $ 1,313.8 4 % 4 % $ 1,258.2 International 1,519.6 8 % 8 % 1,410.7 (2 )% (1 )% 1,441.5 Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders $ 2,905.8 7 % 7 % $ 2,724.5 1 % 1 % $ 2,699.7 The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to an increase in gross orders for services and, to a lesser extent, software licenses in North America, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders for hardware products in Latin America. The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an increase in gross orders for hardware products in North America and, to a lesser extent, an increase in gross orders for services in North America, primarily offset by a decrease in gross orders for software licenses in North America. EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 due to increases in gross orders for hardware products and, to a lesser extent, an increase in gross orders for services. EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders for hardware products, and to a lesser extent, decreases in gross orders for software licenses and services. APAC Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to increases in gross orders for hardware products and services. APAC Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to increases in gross orders for services and hardware products. The extra week of operations in fiscal year 2015 approximately contributed an additional $7 million in Oncology Systems service gross orders in fiscal year 2015. 59 The trailing 12 months' growth in gross orders for Oncology Systems at the end of September 29, 2017 , and at the end of the three previous fiscal quarters were: Trailing 12 months ended September 29, 2017 June 30, 2017 March 31, 2017 December 30, 2016 Americas 3% 4% 5% 4% EMEA 14% (3)% (4)% (2)% APAC 7% 13% 15% 13% North America 6% 2% 5% 6% International 8% 5% 3% 3% Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders 7% 3% 4% 4% Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems gross orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations. In recent years before 2017, the percentage of domestic gross orders has increased, but we expect in the long-term international gross orders, specifically from emerging markets, will grow as a percentage of overall orders. Oncology Systems gross orders are affected by foreign currency fluctuations, which could impact the demand for our products. In addition, government programs that stimulate the purchase of healthcare products could affect the demand for our products from period to period, and could therefore make it difficult to compare our financial results. Varian Particle Therapy Gross Orders VPT gross orders increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to recording six proton therapy gross orders in fiscal year 2017 compared to two proton therapy gross orders in fiscal year 2016. VPT gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to recording two proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2016 , compared to six proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2015 . Backlog Backlog is the accumulation of all gross orders for which revenues have not been recognized but are still considered valid. Backlog also includes a small portion of billed service contracts that are included in deferred revenue. Backlog is stated at historical foreign currency exchange rates and revenue is released from backlog at current exchange rates, with any difference recorded as a backlog adjustment. Backlog at September 29, 2017 was $3.5 billion , including approximately $323 million in VPT backlog, which was an increase of 10% over the backlog at September 30, 2016 . Our Oncology Systems backlog at September 29, 2017 was 9% higher than the backlog at September 30, 2016 , which reflected a 9% increase for both our North America and international regions. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders in the backlog remain valid. Aged orders that are not expected to ultimately convert to revenues are deemed dormant and are reflected as a reduction in the backlog amounts in the period identified. Backlog adjustments are comprised of dormancies, cancellations, foreign currency exchange rate adjustments, backlog acquired from our acquisitions, and other adjustments. Gross orders do not include backlog adjustments. In fiscal years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , our backlog adjustments were a reduction of $154.5 million , $189.8 million and $179.8 million , respectively. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses or make other investments or loans, repurchase shares of VMS common stock, and fund continuing operations and capital expenditures. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. On January 25, 2017, we drew down $203.0 million under the Varex Term Facility. In conjunction with the Distribution, we used $200.0 million of those proceeds to repay a portion of our outstanding 2013 Revolving Credit Facility. At the Distribution Date, we contributed $81.3 million in cash and cash equivalents to Varex as part of the distribution and transfer of certain legal 60 entities. In fiscal year 2017, we received $38.7 million from Varex for excess cash and cash equivalents contributed at the Distribution Date. Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: September 29, September 30, (In millions) 2017 2016 Increase (Decrease) Cash and cash equivalents in continuing operations $ 716.2 $ 811.4 $ (95.2 ) Cash and cash equivalents in discontinued operations 32.1 (32.1 ) Total cash and cash equivalents. $ 716.2 $ 843.5 $ (127.3 ) The decrease in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016 was due to $314.5 million in net debt repayments under our credit facility agreements, $294.5 million of cash used for the repurchase of shares of VMS common stock, $59.1 million used for purchases of property, plant and equipment, $42.6 million in net cash and cash equivalents contributed to Varex, $24.5 million used for the purchase of senior secured debt and $18.2 million used for the issuance of notes receivable. These decreases were mostly offset by $399.1 million in cash provided by operating activities, $200.0 million in cash received from the Varex Term Facility and $72.1 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. We earn a significant amount of our operating income outside of the United States, which is deemed to be indefinitely reinvested in foreign jurisdictions. At September 29, 2017 , we had approximately $32.8 million , or 5% , of cash and cash equivalents in the United States. At September 29, 2017 , approximately $683.4 million , or 95% , of cash and cash equivalents were held abroad and a portion of this amount could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. We currently do not intend to repatriate these funds. As of September 29, 2017 , most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. Dollars and were primarily held as bank deposits. In addition to cash flows generated from operations, a significant portion of which are generated in the United States, we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, VMS share repurchases, acquisitions, and other corporate purposes. Should we require more capital in the United States than is generated by our operations domestically, we could elect to repatriate future earnings from foreign jurisdictions or raise capital in the United States through debt or equity issuance. These actions could result in higher effective tax rates, increased interest expense, or dilution of our earnings. We have borrowed funds domestically and continue to believe we have the ability to do so at a reasonable interest rates. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2017 2016 2015 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 399.1 $ 356.3 $ 469.6 Investing activities (130.1 ) (109.2 ) (210.9 ) Financing activities (392.4 ) (245.8 ) (276.7 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (3.9 ) (3.3 ) 14.2 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents $ (127.3 ) $ (2.0 ) $ (3.8 ) Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 , were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $399.1 million in fiscal year 2017 , compared to $356.3 million in fiscal year 2016 . The $42.8 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016 was driven primarily by an increase of $105.3 million in the net change from operating assets and liabilities, an increase of $89.9 million in non-cash items, partially offset by a decrease of $152.4 million in net earnings. 61 The major contributors to the net change in operating assets and liabilities in fiscal year 2017 were as follows: Accounts receivable increased $52.6 million primarily due to an increase in unbilled receivables associated with additional projects booked in VPT. Prepaid and other assets increased $46.7 million mainly due to an increase in prepaid income taxes. Accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities increased $11.7 million primarily due to an increase in accrued compensation and benefit costs, partially offset by a decrease in accruals for income taxes. Deferred revenues increased $30.0 million primarily due to an increase in service revenues and advances from customers in Oncology Systems. The $113.3 million decrease in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2016 compared to fiscal year 2015 was driven primarily by a decrease of $92.4 million in net change from operating assets and liabilities, a decrease of $11.6 million in non-cash items, and a decrease of $9.3 million in net earnings. The major contributors to the net change in operating assets and liabilities in fiscal year 2016 were as follows: Accounts receivable increased $168.3 million primarily due to higher revenues and timing of collections in Oncology Systems and an increase in unbilled receivables in VPT. Inventories increased $27.7 million due to increases in inventories in Imaging Components and VPT in anticipation of future demand, partially offset by a decrease in inventories in Oncology Systems due to increased sales activity. Accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities increased $61.0 million primarily due to timing of payments processed for employee compensation, an increase in our long-term pension liability and timing of income tax payments. Deferred revenues decreased $40.2 million primarily due to timing of revenue recognition in Oncology Systems and timing of customer payments in VPT. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, collection of accounts receivable, inventory management, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. See Item 1A, Risk Factors. Investing activities used $130.1 million , $109.2 million and $210.9 million of net cash in fiscal years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment was $59.1 million , $80.4 million and $91.4 million in fiscal years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. During fiscal year 2017, we also used $24.5 million for the purchase of a senior secured debt, $18.2 million for the issuance of notes receivable and $13.4 million for the investment in available-for-sale securities. During fiscal year 2016, we also used $21.7 million for the issuance of notes receivable and $21.1 million of net cash primarily for asset and business acquisitions. During fiscal year 2015, we also used $95.3 million of net cash for acquisitions of businesses and $23.7 million for issuance of notes receivable. Financing activities used $392.4 million , $245.8 million and $276.7 million of net cash in fiscal years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. We used $294.5 million , $461.3 million and $422.0 million of net cash for the repurchase of VMS common stock in fiscal years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases were $72.1 million , $60.6 million and $91.0 million in fiscal years 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Under our credit facility agreements, we had $314.5 million of net debt repayments in fiscal year 2017, $167.1 million of net borrowings in fiscal year 2016 and $58.6 million of net borrowings in fiscal year 2015 . In fiscal year 2017, we also received $200 million from the Varex Term Facility in conjunction with the Distribution, and contributed $42.6 million in cash and cash equivalents to Varex. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 2% of revenues in fiscal year 2018 . 62 The following table summarizes our short-term and long-term debt: September 29, 2017 September 30, 2016 (In millions, except for percentages) Amount Weighted-Average Interest Rate Amount Weighted-Average Interest Rate 2017 Revolving Credit Facility $ 350.0 2.36 % $ % Current portion of 2013 Term Loan Facility % 50.0 1.65 % 2013 Revolving Credit Facility % 300.0 1.91 % Sumitomo Credit Facility % 29.6 0.53 % Debt issuance costs (0.6 ) Total short-term debt $ 350.0 $ 379.0 2013 Term Loan Facility $ % $ 287.5 1.65 % Debt issuance costs (0.6 ) Total long-term debt $ $ 286.9 In September 2017, we terminated our existing credit facility ("2013 Credit Facility") and entered into a new credit facility ("2017 Credit Facility"). The 2017 Credit Facility provides a five-year revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $600.0 million. We may increase the aggregate commitments under the new credit facility by up to $100 million , plus an amount based on our consolidated leverage ratio on a pro forma basis, subject to certain conditions being met, including lender approval. The 2013 Credit Facility was terminated and paid down by the initial drawdowns from the 2017 Credit Facility. See Note 7, "Borrowings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion regarding our Credit Facility and the Sumitomo Credit Facility. The following table provides additional information regarding our short-term borrowings (excluding current maturities of long-term debt): Fourth Quarter of Fiscal Year 2017 Fiscal Years (In millions except for percentages) 2017 2016 2015 Amount outstanding (at end of period) $ 350.0 $ 350.0 $ 329.6 $ 108.4 Weighted average interest rate (at end of period) 2.36 % 2.36 % 1.78 % 1.41 % Average amount outstanding (during period) $ 146.0 $ 192.6 $ 320.8 $ 104.5 Weighted average interest rate (during period) 2.30 % 1.90 % 1.68 % 1.48 % Maximum month-end amount outstanding during period $ 350.0 $ 350.0 $ 431.6 $ 140.0 Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for the next twelve months and into the foreseeable future. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes, repurchase VMS common stock and fund loan commitments and other strategic investments. Total debt as a percentage of total capital decreased to 18.9% at September 29, 2017 from 27.6% at September 30, 2016 primarily due to a decrease in borrowings. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities decreased to 1.41 to 1 at September 29, 2017 from 1.62 to 1 at September 30, 2016 . Days Sales Outstanding Our Oncology Systems trade accounts receivable days sales outstanding ( DSO ) was 90 days at both September 29, 2017 and September 30, 2016 . Our accounts receivable and DSO are impacted by a number of factors, primarily including the timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, collections performance, payment terms, the mix of revenues 63 from different regions and the effects of economic instability. VPT's DSO is not meaningful because it is highly variable. As of September 29, 2017 , approximately 2% of our net accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with remaining terms of more than one year. Share Repurchase Program We repurchased shares of VMS common stock under various authorizations during the periods presented as follows: Fiscal Years (In millions, except per share amounts) 2017 2016 2015 Number of shares 3.3 5.7 4.8 Average repurchase price per share $ 90.63 $ 81.61 $ 87.47 Total cost $ 294.5 $ 461.3 $ 422.0 In November 2016, the VMS Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional 8.0 million shares of VMS common stock commencing on January 1, 2017. As of September 29, 2017 , approximately 5.2 million shares of VMS common stock remained available for repurchase under the November 2016 authorization. We repurchased approximately 0.5 million shares of VMS common stock in the three months ended December 30, 2016, under the November 2015 authorization, which expired on December 31, 2016. Stock repurchases may be made in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchase programs), or under Rule 10b5-1 share repurchase plans, and also may be made from time to time or in one or more larger blocks. All shares that were repurchased under our share repurchase programs have been retired. For more details see Note 11, "Stockholders' Equity and Noncontrolling Interests" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of September 29, 2017 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period Fiscal Year Fiscal Years Fiscal Years (In millions) 2018 2019-2020 2021-2022 Beyond Total Operating leases (1) $ 24.9 $ 37.3 $ 25.6 $ 19.1 $ 106.9 Purchase obligations (2 ) 31.0 39.7 3.6 74.3 Defined benefit pension plans (3) 8.7 8.7 Total (4) $ 64.6 $ 77.0 $ 29.2 $ 19.1 $ 189.9 (1) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our non-cancellable operating leases as of September 29, 2017 . (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, are legally binding and non-cancellable. Purchase obligations do not include agreements that are cancellable without penalty. (3) As further described in Note 10, "Retirement Plans" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, our post-retirement benefit plan is not presented in the table above as it is not material. As of September 29, 2017 , the remaining defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $15.6 million . Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and other economic and demographic assumptions, the potential for changes in legislation in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions necessary to fund our defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (4) The following items are not included in the table above: Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of September 29, 2017 , our total liability for uncertain tax 64 positions was $48.6 million , of which we do not anticipate a payment in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of the remainder of future payments related to uncertain tax positions. See a detailed discussion in Note 14, "Taxes on Earnings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As further described in Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 29, 2017 , we had accrued $6.0 million for environmental remediation liabilities. The amount accrued represents estimates of anticipated future costs and the timing and amount of actual future environmental remediation costs may vary as the scope of our obligations becomes more clearly defined. As further described in Note 16, "VPT Loans, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 29, 2017 , our outstanding commitments for the GPTC securities was $11.8 million and $2.2 million for the CPTC DIP loan, both of which are expected to be drawn down over the next 12 months. Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Other Matters From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. See Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies Other Matters of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The terms of these indemnification arrangements are generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is unlimited. As of September 29, 2017 , we have not incurred any significant costs since the Spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Recent Accounting Standards or Updates Not Yet Effective See Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and the estimated effects on our consolidated financial statements. 
