CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2014-11-25


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview During the second quarter of fiscal year 2014, we changed our organizational structure, resulting in a change in operating and reportable segments. Our operations are currently grouped into two reportable operating segments: Oncology Systems and Imaging Components. The Imaging Components segment includes our X-ray imaging tubes and flat panel products (previously reported as X-Ray Products segment), as well as our security and inspection products (previously reported as Security and Inspection Products under the Other category). Our Ginzton Technology Center ( GTC ) and Varian Particle Therapy ( VPT ) businesses are reflected in the Other category because these operating segments do not meet the criteria of a reportable operating segment. The operating segments were determined based on how our Chief Executive Officer, who is our Chief Operating Decision Maker ( CODM ), views and evaluates our operations. The CODM allocates resources to and evaluates the financial performance of each operating segment primarily based on operating earnings. Prior years amounts have been recast to conform to the current year presentation. Total revenues increased 4%, net earnings decreased 8% and net earnings per diluted share decreased 4% during fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013. During fiscal year 2014, operating expenses included a $25.1 million charge for a litigation settlement and a $7.7 million charge relating to the impairment of a portion of our privately-held equity investment in Augmenix, Inc. ( Augmenix ). Fiscal year 2014 was a year of investment and our selling, general and administrative expenses (including the litigation settlement charge) and research and development expenses increased during fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013. Our effective tax rate increased to 29.7% during fiscal year 2014, as compared to 28.4% during fiscal year 2013. During fiscal year 2014, we repurchased approximately 7.8 million shares of VMS common stock at an average price of $80.52 per share. Gross orders increased 5% in Oncology Systems and 8% in Imaging Components during fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013. We recorded gross orders of $120.4 million in the Other category in fiscal year 2014, as compared to $2.5 million in fiscal year 2013. Our backlog at the end of fiscal year 2014 was 10% higher than at the end of fiscal year 2013. In order to assist with the assessment of how our underlying businesses performed, we compare the percentage change in revenues and gross orders from one period to another, excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations ( i.e. , using constant currency exchange rates). To present this information on a constant currency basis, we convert current period revenues and gross orders in currencies other than U.S. Dollars into U.S. Dollars using the comparable prior period average exchange rate. For fiscal year 2014, however, the U.S. Dollar was weaker against the Euro and stronger against the Japanese Yen, as compared to fiscal year 2013, such that the differences in exchange rates largely offset each other and did not have a significant impact on our revenues and gross orders. Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufactures, sells and services hardware and software products for treating cancer with conventional radiotherapy, (including IMRT, IGRT, and volumetric modulated arc therapy), stereotactic body radiotherapy, stereotactic radiotherapy, stereotactic radiosurgery and brachytherapy. Our primary goal in the Oncology Systems business is to promote the adoption of more advanced and effective cancer treatments. In our view, the fundamental market forces that drive long-term growth in our Oncology Systems business are the rise in cancer cases; technology advances and product developments that are leading to improvements in patient care; customer demand for the more advanced and effective cancer treatments that we enable; competitive conditions among hospitals and clinics to offer such advanced treatments; continued improvement in safety and cost efficiency in delivering radiation therapy; and underserved medical needs outside of the United States. Over the last few years, we have seen a greater percentage of Oncology Systems gross orders and revenues coming from emerging markets within our international region, which typically demand lower-priced products compared to developed markets. Reimbursement rates in the United States have generally supported a favorable return on investment for the purchase of new radiotherapy equipment. While we believe that improved product functionality, greater cost-effectiveness and prospects for better clinical outcomes with new capabilities such as IMRT, IGRT and volumetric modulated arc therapy tend to drive demand for radiotherapy products, large changes in reimbursement rates or reimbursement structure can affect customer demand and cause market shifts. We believe that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the Affordable Care Act ), Accountable Care Organizations and bundled payment arrangements are causing healthcare providers to re-evaluate their business models and we are seeing increased consolidation of hospitals and clinics and more integration of systems and equipment across multi-site healthcare networks, which is impacting transaction size, timing and purchasing processes, and also contributing to the increased business variability. 47 In fiscal year 2014, we saw a strong growth in orders in Brazil and India. Within Asia, we experienced a sharp decline in orders from Japan, which was partially offset by continued growth in orders in China and other countries in Asia, in fiscal year 2014 compared to the year-ago period. In the radiation oncology markets outside of North America, we expect the market growth of our EMEA region, which includes Europe, Russia, the Middle East, India and Africa will be mixed, with stronger market growth in Eastern Europe, India, and Africa, offset by lower market growth in Southern Europe which is facing severe economic challenges. Our outlook for Asia and the Rest of World remains healthy. Overall, we believe the longer-term global radiation oncology market can grow, on average, in the mid-single-digit range. Oncology Systems total revenues increased 4% in fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013. Oncology Systems gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2014 increased 0.3 percentage points from fiscal year 2013. Oncology Systems gross orders increased 5% in fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013, with increases of 7% in North America and 4% in our international region. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014, we acquired certain assets and liabilities of Transpire, Inc. ( Transpire ), a privately-held developer of software solutions for accurately and rapidly predicting the macroscopic behavior of radiation for a purchase consideration of $19.3 million. Transpire assets were integrated into our Oncology Systems and security and inspection businesses. In the third quarter of fiscal year 2014, we acquired certain assets and liabilities of Velocity Medical Solutions, LLC ( Velocity ), a privately-held Atlanta-based developer of specialized software for cancer clinics, for a purchase consideration of $19.9 million. Velocity assets were integrated into our Oncology Systems business. See Note 15 Business Combinations of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Imaging Components . Our Imaging Components business segment designs, manufactures, sells and services medical imaging components for use in a range of applications, including radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, and computed tomography. It also designs, manufactures, sells and services security and inspection products, which include Linatron x-ray accelerators, imaging processing software and image detection products, for cargo screening at ports and borders and for non-destructive examination and testing in a variety of industrial applications . We continue to view the long-term fundamental growth driver for this business to be the ongoing success of key X-ray imaging original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ) that incorporate our products into their medical diagnostic, dental, veterinary, security and industrial imaging systems. Our success in Imaging Components depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. In addition, changes in access to diagnostic radiology or the reimbursement rates associated with diagnostic radiology as a result of the Affordable Care Act and similar state proposals, or otherwise, could affect demand for our products in our Imaging Components business. In fiscal year 2014, Imaging Components revenues increased 3% and gross orders increased 8% over fiscal year 2013. Imaging Components gross margin percentage for fiscal year 2014 increased 0.4 percentage points over fiscal year 2013. Other . The Other category is comprised of VPT and the operations of GTC. VPT develops, designs, manufactures, sells and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy, another form of external beam radiotherapy using proton beams, for the treatment of cancer. GTC is our scientific research facility. Revenues in the Other category decreased 6% during fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013. During fiscal year 2014, we recorded gross orders in the Other category of $120.4 million, compared to $2.5 million in fiscal year 2013. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Item 1A, Risk Factors. We discuss our results of operations below. 48 Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of loss contingencies, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain, and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, see Item 1A, Risk Factors. Revenue Recognition Our revenues are derived primarily from the sale of hardware and software products, and services. We recognize revenues net of any value added or sales tax and net of sales discounts. We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. The allocation of consideration in a multiple element arrangement is affected by the determination of whether any software deliverables that function together with other hardware components to deliver the hardware products essential functionality are considered as non-software products for purpose of revenue recognition. The allocation of consideration to each non-software deliverable is based on the assumptions we use to establish its selling price, which are based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of selling price, if it exists, otherwise, third-party evidence of selling price, if it exists, and, if not, on estimated selling prices. In addition, the allocation of consideration to each software deliverable in a multiple element arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether VSOE of its fair value exists in these arrangements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the amounts allocated to each element could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment, the readiness of customers facilities for installation or customer acceptance terms. If shipments or installations are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. Service revenues include revenues from hardware service contracts, software service agreements, bundled support arrangements, paid services and trainings, and parts that are sold by the service department. In addition, revenues related to certain highly customized image detection systems, proton therapy systems and proton therapy system commissioning contracts are recognized in accordance with contract accounting. We recognize contract revenues under the percentage-of-completion method which are based on contract costs incurred to date compared with total estimated contract costs. Changes in estimates of total contract revenue, total contract cost or the extent of progress towards completion are recognized in the period in which the changes in estimates are identified. Estimated losses on contracts are recognized in the period in which the loss is identified. In circumstances in which the final outcome of a contract cannot be precisely estimated but a loss on the contract is not expected, we recognize revenues under the percentage-of-completion method based on a zero profit margin until more precise estimates can be made. If and when we can make more precise estimates, revenues and costs of revenues are adjusted in the same period. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. 49 Share-based Compensation Expense We grant restricted stock units, deferred stock units, performance units, and stock options to employees and permit employees to purchase shares under the VMS employee stock purchase plan. We value our stock options granted and the option component of the shares of VMS common stock purchased under the employee stock purchase plan using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We value our performance units using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant under both the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected terms of share-based awards and the expected price volatility of shares of VMS common stock and peer companies that are used to assess certain performance targets over the expected term of the awards, and the expected dividend yield of VMS. The expected term of our stock options is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We determine the expected term of stock options based on the demographic grouping of employees and retirement eligibility. We use a combination of historical and implied volatility, or blended volatility, in deriving the expected volatility assumption for our stock options. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility is derived based on traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the term of the exchange-traded options to the expected terms of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options on VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we could not rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected terms of the stock options we grant. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected terms of the stock options we grant and the implied volatility of exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock. In determining the grant date fair value of our performance units, historical volatilities of shares of VMS common stock, as well as the shares of common stock of peer companies, were used to assess certain performance targets. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock awards. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate, as well as the probability that certain performance conditions that affect the vesting of performance units will be achieved, and recognize expense only for those awards expected to vest. If the actual forfeiture rate and/or the actual number of performance units that vest based on achievement of performance conditions are materially different from our estimates, the share-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Except for government tenders, group purchases and orders with letters of credit in Oncology Systems and for security and inspection products, our payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and on order and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. 50 Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The majority of businesses that we have acquired have not had significant identified tangible assets and, as a result, we have typically allocated a significant portion of the purchase price to intangible assets and goodwill. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to these intangibles or to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. The allocation of the purchase price from business acquisitions to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. In addition, the allocation of the purchase price of the acquired businesses to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for those cash flows. Should conditions differ from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. If we determine that a quantitative analysis is necessary, the impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a combination of income and market approaches. The income approach is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units and the market approach is based on a market multiple calculated for each business unit based on market data of other companies engaged in similar business. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill against the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. Based on the most recent annual goodwill impairment testing that we performed as of the end of the third quarter of fiscal year 2014 for each of our four reporting units with goodwill, (i) Oncology Systems, (ii) X-ray tubes and flat panel products (formerly X-Ray Products ), (iii) Security and inspection products, and (iv) VPT, the fair value of each such reporting unit was substantially in excess of its carrying value. However, significant changes in our projections about our operating results or other factors could cause us to make interim assessments of impairments in any quarter that could result in some or all of the goodwill being impaired. For our VPT reporting unit in particular, which had $56.3 million in goodwill as of September 26, 2014, our estimates as to future operating results include certain assumptions about factors that cannot be predicted with certainty, including future market conditions, revenue growth rates, and operating margins. We will continue to make assessments of impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually 12 months from installation, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Loss Contingencies From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations or other legal matters, both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties, outcomes are not predictable with assurance, and actual liabilities could significantly exceed our estimates of potential liabilities. For example, in the University of Pittsburgh patent infringement case, we had previously accrued an aggregate of approximately $5.0 million for the low end of the range of the probable settlement value, but in fiscal year 2014 we entered into a settlement agreement and ultimately paid approximately $35.6 million in full settlement of the lawsuit. 51 In addition, we are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations. In connection with our past and present operations and facilities, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts. Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review these accrued balances quarterly. If we were required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. Defined Benefit Pension and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans We sponsor five defined benefit pension plans in Germany (where we have two defined benefit pension plans), Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. Although we do not have any defined benefit pension plans in the United States, we sponsor a post-retirement benefit plan that provides healthcare benefits to certain eligible retirees. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expenses and liabilities related to those plans for which the benefits are actuarially determined, such as our defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of future compensation increases and rate of healthcare cost increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expenses and liabilities. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plan expenses we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans are primarily based on the current effective yield of long-term corporate bonds that are of high quality with satisfactory liquidity and credit rating with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. A change in the discount rate may cause the present value of benefit obligations to change significantly. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency rate fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 3, Fair Value of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Each level of input has different levels of subjectivity and difficulty involved in determining fair value. The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts are calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services. One year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which mature in 13 months or less, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty credit default swap rates (for net assets) or our borrowing rate (for net liabilities). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact on the valuation of our derivative instruments, as well as on our result of operations. There were no transfers of assets or liabilities between fair value measurement levels during fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012. Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. 52 The accounting for uncertainty in income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognizing, derecognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition, derecognition and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. A tax benefit should be recognized in the first period in which it meets the more likely than not recognition threshold, and conversely, a tax benefit previously recognized should be derecognized in the first period in which new information results in a change in judgment in which the position fails to meet the recognition threshold. A benefit not previously recognized would be recognized when the tax position is effectively settled through examination, negotiation or litigation with tax authorities, or when the statute of limitations for the relevant taxing authority to examine and challenge the position has expired. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for taxes on earnings. Generally, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in the applicable tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. Our foreign earnings are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our foreign subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our foreign countries, or a change in the mix of foreign countries among particular tax jurisdictions could increase or decrease our effective tax rate. Our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2014 was the 52-week period ended September 26, 2014, fiscal year 2013 was the 52-week period ended on September 27, 2013 and fiscal year 2012 was the 52-week period ended on September 28, 2012. Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012. Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2014, 2013 and 2012 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Product $ 2,083.8 1 % $ 2,055.7 3 % $ 2,004.0 Service 966.0 9 % 887.2 10 % 803.0 Total Revenues $ 3,049.8 4 % $ 2,942.9 5 % $ 2,807.0 Product as a percentage of total revenues 68 % 70 % 71 % Service as a percentage of total revenues 32 % 30 % 29 % Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to increases in Oncology Systems and Imaging Components. Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, primarily due to increases in Oncology Systems and Imaging Components, and to a lesser extent an increase in the Other category. Product revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to increases in Oncology Systems and Imaging Components, partially offset by a decrease in the Other category. Product revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, primarily due to an increase in Imaging Components and to a lesser extent an increase in the Other category, partially offset by a decrease in Oncology Systems. 53 Service revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due an increase in Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, increases in the Other category and Imaging Components. Service revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, primarily due to an increase in Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, an increase in Imaging Components, partially offset by a slight decrease in the Other category. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 North America $ 1,306.7 3 % $ 1,263.1 3 % $ 1,223.1 EMEA 905.3 3 % 877.2 4 % 842.2 Asia 705.1 4 % 677.9 13 % 602.3 Rest of World 132.7 6 % 124.7 (11 %) 139.4 Total International (1) 1,743.1 4 % 1,679.8 6 % 1,583.9 Total Revenues $ 3,049.8 4 % $ 2,942.9 5 % $ 2,807.0 North America as a percentage of total revenues 43 % 43 % 44 % International as a percentage of total revenues 57 % 57 % 56 % ( 1 ) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. North American revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to increases in revenues from Oncology Systems, Imaging Components and the Other category. North American revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 due to an increase from Oncology Systems and to lesser extent an increase from Imaging Components, partially offset by a decrease from the Other category. International revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, due to increases across all regions. International revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems and to a lesser extent an increase in revenues from Imaging Components, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from the Other category. The U.S. Dollar was weaker against the Euro and stronger against the Japanese Yen in fiscal year 2014, compared to fiscal year 2013, such that the differences in exchange rates largely offset each other and did not have a significant impact on the revenues. International revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 due to increases in revenues from Asia and EMEA, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from the Rest of World region. International revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 due to an increase in revenues from Imaging Components and to a lesser extent increases in revenues from the Other category and Oncology Systems. The U.S. Dollar was stronger against the Japanese Yen and slightly weakened against the Euro in fiscal year 2013 compared to fiscal year 2012 such that the differences in exchange rates overall had a negative impact on revenues. Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Product $ 1,406.0 1 % $ 1,388.9 (1 %) $ 1,408.4 Service 938.2 9 % 863.8 11 % 781.1 Total Oncology Systems revenues $ 2,344.2 4 % $ 2,252.7 3 % $ 2,189.5 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 60 % 62 % 64 % Service as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 40 % 38 % 36 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 77 % 77 % 78 % Oncology Systems product revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products. Oncology Systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from our software licenses, partially offset by an increase in revenues from hardware products. Revenues from TrueBeam as a percentage of revenues from hardware products increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 and in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012. 54 Oncology Systems service revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 and in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 due to increased customer adoption of service contracts as the warranty period on our TrueBeam systems expire and by an increased number of customers as the installed base of our products continues to grow. Service revenues grew faster than product revenues in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 and in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012. Service revenues increased as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues in each fiscal year. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 North America $ 1,088.2 3 % $ 1,058.0 5 % $ 1,004.8 EMEA 701.1 6 % 662.7 (4 %) 690.4 Asia 428.7 4 % 412.4 15 % 359.6 Rest of world 126.2 6 % 119.6 (11 %) 134.7 Total International 1,256.0 5 % 1,194.7 1 % 1,184.7 Total Oncology Systems revenues $ 2,344.2 4 % $ 2,252.7 3 % $ 2,189.5 North America as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 46 % 47 % 46 % International as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 54 % 53 % 54 % North American Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, due to an increase in service revenues, partially offset by a slight decrease in product revenues. North American Oncology Systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to a decrease in hardware product revenues, mostly offset by an increase in revenues from software licenses. North American Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 due to an increase in service revenues, and to a lesser extent an increase in product revenues. The increase in North American product revenues was primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from software licenses. International Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, due to increases in services and product revenues. International Oncology Systems product revenues increased from hardware products in all international regions, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from software licenses in all international regions. The U.S. Dollar was weaker against the Euro and stronger against the Japanese Yen in fiscal year 2014, compared to fiscal year 2013 such that the differences in exchange rates largely offset each other and did not have a significant impact on revenues. International Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 due to an increase in revenues from services, partially offset by a decrease in product revenues. International Oncology Systems service revenues increased in all international regions in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012. International Oncology Systems product revenues decreased due to decreases in revenues from both hardware products and software licenses in EMEA and the Rest of World region, partially offset by increases in revenues from both hardware products and software licenses in Asia. The U.S. Dollar was stronger against the Japanese Yen and slightly weakened against the Euro in fiscal year 2013 compared to fiscal year 2012 such that the differences in exchange rates overall had a negative impact on our Oncology Systems international revenues when measured in U.S. Dollars. Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the North American and international regions are impacted by regional influences, which recently have included government economic stimulus programs, the recession and the pace of economic recovery, political instability in some countries, the European sovereign debt crisis, uncertainty created by healthcare reform (such as the excise tax on the sale of most medical devices, Medicare reimbursement rates and consolidation of free standing clinics in the United States), and different technology adoption cycles that are consistent with the gross order patterns. See further discussion of orders under Gross Orders. Imaging Components Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Product $ 637.1 3 % $ 619.9 10 % $ 562.6 Service 23.1 5 % 22.0 23 % 17.8 Total Imaging Components revenues $ 660.2 3 % $ 641.9 11 % $ 580.4 Product as a percentage of Imaging Components revenues 97 % 97 % 97 % Service as a percentage of Imaging Components revenues 3 % 3 % 3 % Imaging Components revenues as a percentage of total revenues 22 % 22 % 21 % 55 Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to an increase in product revenues, and to a lesser extent an increase in service revenues. Product revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to an increase in revenues from X-ray flat panel products, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from X-ray tube products, as customers delayed purchases due to longer tube life resulting from improvements in our X-ray tubes, and a decrease in revenues from security and inspection products. Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 primarily due to an increase in product revenues, and to a lesser extent an increase in service revenues. Product revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, primarily due increases in revenues from X-ray flat panel and tube products, and to a lesser extent an increase in revenues from security and inspection products. All service revenues in fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012 were related to our security and inspection products. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 North America $ 197.5 4 % $ 189.1 2 % $ 184.6 EMEA 184.8 1 % 182.3 23 % 148.3 Asia 271.4 2 % 265.4 9 % 242.7 Rest of World 6.5 27 % 5.1 7 % 4.8 Total International 462.7 2 % 452.8 14 % 395.8 Total Imaging Components revenues $ 660.2 3 % $ 641.9 11 % $ 580.4 North America as a percentage of Imaging Components revenues 30 % 29 % 32 % International as a percentage of Imaging Components revenues 70 % 71 % 68 % North American Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to an increase in X-ray flat panel products, and to a lesser extent an increase in X-ray tube products. North American Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 due to an increase in X-ray flat panel products, and to a lesser extent an increase in X-ray tube products, mostly offset by a decrease in security and inspection products. International Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in X-ray flat panel products in Asia and EMEA and X-ray tubes in EMEA, partially offset by decrease in X-ray tube products in Asia and a decrease in security and inspection products in EMEA. International Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 primarily due to increases in revenues from our security and inspection products and X-ray tube products from all international regions and an increase in revenues from X-ray flat panel products in Asia partially offset by decreases in revenues from X-ray flat panel products in EMEA and the Rest of World region. Additionally, revenues from sales of new products and revenues from sales of image processing tools, which we added to our product line with the acquisition of InfiMed during the third quarter of fiscal year 2012, also contributed to an increase in Imaging Components revenues during fiscal year 2013 compared to fiscal year 2012. The differences in currency exchange rates between the U.S. Dollar and foreign currencies between fiscal year 2014 and fiscal year 2013, as well as between fiscal year 2013 and fiscal year 2012, did not have a material impact on Imaging Components international revenue growth because sales transactions in the Imaging Components business are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Product $ 40.7 (13 %) $ 46.9 42 % $ 33.0 Service 4.7 236 % 1.4 (66 %) 4.1 Total Other revenues $ 45.4 (6 %) $ 48.3 30 % $ 37.1 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 1 % 1 % 1 % 56 Revenues from the Other category decreased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to a decrease in VPT product revenues. Revenues from the Other category increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 primarily due to an increase in VPT product revenues, partially offset by a decrease in VPT service revenues. Gross Margin Fiscal Years Dollars by segment 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 (Dollars in millions) Oncology Systems $ 1,021.1 5 % $ 976.2 2 % $ 956.9 Imaging Components 278.6 4 % 268.1 11 % 242.4 Other 2.0 (63 %) 5.4 n/m (3.0 ) Gross margin $ 1,301.7 $ 1,249.7 $ 1,196.3 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 43.6 % 43.3 % 43.7 % Imaging Components 42.2 % 41.8 % 41.8 % Total Company 42.7 % 42.5 % 42.6 % n/m = not meaningful The total Company gross margin percentage increased slightly in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013. The increase in gross margin percentages in Oncology Systems and Imaging Components was mostly offset by a decrease in the gross margin percentage in the Other category. The total Company gross margin percentage decreased marginally in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012. The decrease in Oncology Systems gross margin percentage was almost offset by an increase in gross margin percentage in the Other category. Total product gross margin percentage was 36.9% in fiscal year 2014, compared to 37.0% in fiscal year 2013 and 37.8% in fiscal year 2012. Total service gross margin percentage was 55.1% in fiscal year 2014, compared to 55.2% in fiscal year 2013 and 54.7% in fiscal year 2012. Oncology Systems gross margin percentage increased by 0.3 percentage points in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in service revenues, which generally have a higher margins. Oncology Systems product gross margin percentage decreased to 35.6% in fiscal year 2014 from 35.7% from fiscal year 2013 primarily due to targeted price decreases, partially offset by a favorable hardware product mix. Oncology Systems gross margin percentage decreased 0.4 percentage points in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 primarily due to a decrease in the product gross margin. Oncology Systems product gross margin percentage decreased to 35.7% in fiscal year 2013 from 37.1% in fiscal year 2012 due to the new excise tax on medical devices and a significant geographic shift of product revenues away from developed markets to emerging markets, which typically demand lower-priced products compared to developed markets. Our Oncology Systems product gross margin was further impacted by pricing pressure in our international region. Improved installation and warranty as well as product cost reductions in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 partially offset these decreases. The gross margin for Oncology Systems includes the impact of the medical device excise tax of approximately $9.3 million and $7.2 million during fiscal year 2014 and 2013, respectively, and is included in the cost of revenues. Oncology Systems service gross margin percentage decreased to 55.5% in fiscal year 2014 from 55.7% in fiscal year 2013, primarily due to an unfavorable product mix partly offset by higher service contract volume (which lowered the costs per contract) and cost control measures in fiscal year 2014. Oncology Systems service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2013 remained consistent with fiscal year 2012. Increases in service gross margin percentage were due to higher service contract volume (which lowered the costs per contract) and cost control measures in fiscal year 2013, mostly offset by unfavorable product mix and higher service freight charges. 57 The U.S. Dollar was weaker against the Euro and stronger against the Japanese Yen in fiscal year 2014, as compared to fiscal year 2013. The exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and other currencies did not have a significant impact on the Oncology Systems gross margin. We believe the shift of Oncology Systems revenues towards emerging markets, which typically have purchased less complex, lower-priced products compared to developed markets, will generally continue and may negatively impact Oncology Systems gross margin. Imaging Components gross margin percentage increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, due to a higher mix of flat panel sales which generally have higher margins, plus an increase in gross margin percentage in X-ray tube products, partially offset by decreases in gross margin percentages from X-ray flat panel products, security and inspection products, and services. The increase in gross margin percentage in X-ray tube products during the fiscal year 2014 compared to fiscal year 2013 was primarily due to improved quality costs. The decrease in gross margin percentage in X-ray flat panel products during the fiscal year 2014 compared to fiscal year 2013 was primarily due to increased pricing pressures. The decrease in gross margin percentage in our security and inspection products during the fiscal year 2014, compared to fiscal year 2013 was due to customer pricing pressures and an unfavorable product mix. Imaging Components gross margin percentage remained consistent in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, due to favorable product mix in our security and inspection products offset by pricing pressures and unfavorable product mix in our X-ray flat panel products. Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Research and development $ 234.8 13 % $ 208.2 12 % $ 185.7 As a percentage of total revenues 8 % 7 % 7 % The $26.6 million increase in research and development expenses in fiscal year 2014, over fiscal year 2013, was due to an increase in expenses of $21.1 million in Oncology Systems, $4.1 million in Imaging Components, and $1.4 million in the Other category. The $21.1 million increase in expenses in Oncology Systems was due to expenses relating to new product development projects and enhancement of existing products, and an unfavorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated research and development expenses for Oncology Systems were translated into U.S. Dollars. The $4.1 million increase in expenses in Imaging Components was due to new product development projects and enhancement of existing X-ray tube and flat panel products, partially offset by a decrease in expenses relating to security and inspection products. The $1.4 million increase in the Other category was due to expenses relating to new product development projects, a net increase in costs associated with increased headcount to support our growing engineering activities in VPT, and an unfavorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated research and development expenses for VPT were translated into U.S. Dollars, partially offset by a decrease in expenses due to completion of certain existing research and development projects. The $22.5 million increase in research and development expenses in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 was primarily due to increases in expenses of $14.2 million in Oncology Systems, $9.9 million in the Other category partially offset by a decrease in expense of $0.7 million in Imaging Components. The $14.2 million increase in Oncology Systems was primarily due to expenses relating to new product development projects, including fixed fees accrued as part of the strategic arrangement with Siemens. The $9.9 million increase in expenses in the Other category was primarily due to expenses relating to new product development projects and a net increase in costs associated with increased headcount to support our growing research activities in VPT. The $0.7 million decrease in research and development expenses in Imaging Components was mainly due to cost control measures. Selling, General and Administrative Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Selling, general and administrative $ 470.6 9 % $ 432.6 4 % $ 416.5 Litigation settlement $ 25.1 - $ - - $ - Selling, general and administrative as a percentage of total revenues 15 % 15 % 15 % Litigation settlement as a percentage of total revenues 1 % - - 58 The $38.0 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 was primarily attributable to: a $35.8 million net increase in employee-related costs (excluding share-based compensation) due to an increase in headcount to support our growing business activities; a $7.7 million impairment charge of a portion of our equity investment in privately-held Augmenix (including a $1.4 million write-off of the option to purchase the remaining equity interest of Augmenix, upon its expiry); a $3.7 million unfavorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated selling, general and administrative expenses were translated into U.S. Dollars; a $3.3 million decrease in income recognized on our equity method investment in dpiX Holding LLC; and a $2.9 million increase in software and hardware maintenance expense. These increases were partially offset by a $9.3 million decrease in legal expenses; a $6.7 million decrease due to no restructuring charges incurred in fiscal year 2014; and a $3.6 million decrease in share-based compensation expense due to timing of grants. In addition to the above, the change in fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities decreased our selling, general and administrative expenses by $0.7 million in fiscal year 2014 and by $5.2 million in fiscal year 2013, respectively. The $16.1 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 was primarily attributable to: a $13.0 million net increase in employee-related costs, in part for increased headcount to support our growing business activities; a $6.4 million increase in legal expenses relating to litigation matters; a $4 million increase in restructuring charges; a $4.0 million increase in depreciation expense; and a $2.3 million increase in risk insurance expense. These increases were partially offset by a $5.2 million decrease due to change in fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities; a $4.4 million decrease in bad debt expense; and a $2.2 million increase in income from our equity method investment in dpiX Holding LLC. In the second quarter of fiscal year 2014, we recorded a litigation settlement charge of $25.1 million as a result of settlement of patent litigation with University of Pittsburgh (see Note 9 Commitments and Contingencies in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information). Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Interest income, net $ 3.3 5 % $ 3.2 73 % $ 1.9 The increase in interest income, net of interest expense, in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 was primarily due to an increase in interest income from our loans to CPTC mostly offset by an increase in interest expense due to an increase in borrowings. The increase in interest income, net of interest expense in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, was primarily due to an increase in interest income generated from our loan to CPTC, partially offset by an increase in interest expense associated with increased borrowing from our credit facilities. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Effective tax rate 29.7 % 1.3 % 28.4 % 0.1 % 28.3 % The increase in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2014 from fiscal year 2013 was primarily due to a decrease in the benefit from the foreign rate differential. The decrease in the benefit from the foreign tax rate differential was primarily due to a fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates and our inability to recognize a tax benefit for losses in certain jurisdictions. In addition, our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2014 reflected only one quarter benefit of the federal research and development credit, while the effective tax rate in fiscal year 2013 reflected the full year federal research and development credit for fiscal year 2013 in addition to the three quarters retroactive reinstatement of the credit. The slight increase in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2013 from fiscal year 2012 was primarily due to a shift in the geographic mix of earnings. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. See Note 14, Taxes on Earnings of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 59 Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Net earnings per diluted share $ 3.83 (4 %) $ 3.98 6 % $ 3.76 The decrease in net earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 was due to an increase in operating expenses which included a litigation settlement expense of $25.1 million and an impairment charge of $7.7 million of a portion of our investment in privately-held Augmenix, and an increase in our effective tax rate, partially offset by increases in revenues, gross margin, and a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to stock repurchases. The increase in net earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 resulted from an increase in total revenues and a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to stock repurchases. These positive impacts on net earnings per diluted share were partially offset by an excise tax of $7.2 million on sales of medical devices and restructuring charges of $6.7 million during fiscal year 2013. Gross Orders Total Gross Orders (by segment and region) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Oncology Systems: North America $ 1,214.4 7 % $ 1,135.3 (3 %) $ 1,167.1 Total International 1,470.0 4 % 1,418.8 6 % 1,333.3 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,684.4 5 % $ 2,554.1 2 % $ 2,500.4 Imaging Components: North America $ 187.9 7 % $ 176.1 (4 %) $ 182.6 Total International 534.6 9 % 492.1 19 % 413.7 Total Imaging Components $ 722.5 8 % $ 668.2 12 % $ 596.3 Other: $ 120.4 n/m $ 2.5 (98 %) $ 126.3 Total Gross Orders: $ 3,527.3 9 % $ 3,224.8 0 % $ 3,223.0 n/m = not meaningful Gross orders are defined as the sum of new orders recorded during the period adjusted for any revisions to existing orders during the period. New orders are recorded for the total contractual amount, excluding certain pass-through items, once a written agreement for the delivery of goods or provision of services is in place and, for businesses other than VPT, when shipment of the product (or in the case of certain highly customized products in our Imaging Components business, construction of the product) is expected to occur within two years, so long as any contingencies are deemed perfunctory. However, we will not record security and inspection products orders from governmental agencies with bid protest provisions until the expiration of the bid protest period. For our VPT business, we record orders when construction of the related proton therapy treatment center is reasonably expected to start within two years, but only if any contingencies are either deemed perfunctory or if the existence and nature of material contingencies is disclosed. However, we will not record VPT orders if there are major financing contingencies, if a substantial portion of the financing for the project is not reasonably assured or if customer board approval contingencies are pending. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders remain valid. Oncology Systems gross orders grew 5% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 compared to 2% in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012. North American Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, due to increases in gross orders from services, and software licenses, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products. International gross orders increased due to increases in gross orders from EMEA and the Rest of World region, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders from Asia. Gross orders from EMEA increased due to increases in gross orders from services, and software licenses, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products. Gross orders from the Rest of World region increased due to increases in gross orders from hardware products, services, and software licenses. Gross orders from Asia decreased due to decreases in gross orders from hardware products and software licenses, partially offset by an increase in gross orders from services. 60 Oncology Systems gross orders in Asia and Rest of World regions were negatively impacted, and gross orders from EMEA were positively impacted by currency exchange rates such that there was no significant overall impact of currency exchange rates on gross orders in fiscal year 2014, over fiscal year 2013. North American Oncology Systems gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2013 compared to fiscal year 2012, due to decreases in gross orders of high-energy linear accelerators and software licenses partially offset by an increase in gross orders from services. International Oncology Systems gross orders increased primarily due to growth in gross orders from services in EMEA and Asia, as well as increased gross orders from high-energy linear accelerators (including TrueBeam) in all international regions. When measured in constant currency, international Oncology Systems gross orders grew 9% in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012. The trailing 12 month percentage change in gross orders for Oncology Systems at September 26, 2014, and for the three immediately prior fiscal quarters were: Total North America International September 26, 2014 5% 7% 4% June 27, 2014 3% 1% 5% March 28, 2014 5% 1% 9% December 27, 2013 3% 0% 5% Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems gross orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations, with an overall shift of gross orders towards international regions and emerging markets. In addition, the availability of government programs that stimulate the purchase of healthcare products could affect the demand for our products from period to period, and could therefore make it difficult to compare our financial results. Imaging Components gross orders grew 8% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 compared to 12% in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012. North American Imaging Components gross orders increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to an increase in gross orders from X-ray flat panel products and to a lesser extent increases in gross orders from security and inspections and X-ray tube products. International Imaging Components gross orders increased during fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, due to increases in gross orders from X-ray flat panel, and security and inspection products, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders from X-ray tube products. Within the international region, for fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, gross orders from X-ray flat panel products increased from Asia and EMEA; gross orders from X-ray tube products decreased primarily from Asia and to a lesser extent a decrease from EMEA, partially offset by an increase from the Rest of World region; and gross orders from security and inspection products increased primarily from EMEA, partially offset by slight decreases in gross orders from Asia and the Rest of World region. North American Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from our security and inspection products partially offset by increases in gross orders from X-ray flat panel and tube products. International Imaging Components gross orders increased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, due to increases in gross orders from X-ray flat panel and tube products and security and inspection products. Within the international region, for fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012, gross orders from X-ray flat panel products increased from Asia, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders from EMEA; gross orders from X-ray tube products increased in all regions, with strongest growth in Asia; and gross orders increased from security inspection products in all regions, with the strongest growth from EMEA, and to a lesser extent from Asia. Gross orders in the Other category increased primarily due to VPT recording three proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2014, compared to no proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2013. Gross orders in the Other category decreased in fiscal year 2013 over fiscal year 2012 primarily due to VPT recording two proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2012, compared to no proton therapy product gross orders recorded in fiscal year 2013. 61 Gross orders in any period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedules and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as orders for software or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance than hardware or older products. Gross orders and revenues for our security and inspection products in our Imaging Components segment have been and may continue to be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with us or with our OEM customers over a short period of time and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. Because an order for a proton therapy system can be relatively large, an order in one fiscal period will cause gross orders in our VPT business to vary significantly, making comparisons between fiscal periods more difficult. Furthermore, bid awards, primarily in our VPT business, may be subject to challenge by third parties, which can make these orders more unpredictable than other products. Net Orders In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2013, we changed our primary presentation of orders to gross orders. The below table for net orders is provided for comparison purposes. Net orders are defined as gross orders less backlog adjustments. Backlog adjustments are comprised of dormancies, cancellations, foreign currency exchange rate and other adjustments. Aged orders that are not expected to be converted to revenues are deemed dormant and are reflected as a reduction in the backlog amounts and net orders in the period identified. Total Net Orders (by segment and region) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2014 Percent Change 2013 Percent Change 2012 Oncology Systems: North America $ 1,109.5 18 % $ 938.9 (14 %) $ 1,091.4 Total International 1,411.3 4 % 1,360.1 4 % 1,308.7 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,520.8 10 % $ 2,299.0 (4 %) $ 2,400.1 Imaging Components: North America $ 186.7 6 % $ 176.0 (4 %) $ 182.6 Total International 524.0 7 % 489.9 19 % 412.9 Total Imaging Components $ 710.7 7 % $ 665.9 12 % $ 595.5 Other: $ 119.5 n/m $ 2.6 (98 %) $ 126.3 Total Net Orders: $ 3,351.0 13 % $ 2,967.5 (5 %) $ 3,121.9 n/m = not meaningful Backlog Backlog is the accumulation of all gross orders for which revenues have not been recognized and are still considered valid. Backlog also includes a small portion of billed service contracts that are included in deferred revenue. Backlog at September 26, 2014 was $3.2 billion, which was an increase of 10% over the backlog at September 27, 2013. Our Oncology Systems backlog at September 26, 2014 was 7% higher than the backlog at September 27, 2013, which reflected a 12% increase for the international region and a 2% increase for North America. In fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, our backlog adjustments were $176.3 million, $257.3 million and $101.1 million, respectively. During fiscal year 2013, as a result of ongoing uncertainty in the U.S. healthcare environment and higher cancellations, particularly from small freestanding center developers, we re-evaluated similar transactions and removed orders that were not expected to be converted into revenues from our backlog, which resulted in an increase in the backlog adjustments in fiscal year 2013 as compared to fiscal year 2012. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses or make other investments or loans, repurchase shares of VMS common stock, and fund continuing operations and capital expenditures. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases and interest income. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. 62 Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: September 26, September 27, (In millions) 2014 2013 Increase (Decrease) Cash and cash equivalents $ 849.3 $ 1,117.9 $ (268.6 ) The decrease in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2014 compared to fiscal year 2013, was due to $627.7 million of cash used for the repurchase of shares of VMS common stock, $89.6 million used for purchases of property, plant and equipment, $68.8 million used for repayments under our term loan facility and other bank borrowings, $45.2 million used to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC for financing the construction and initial operation period of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center, $31.5 million used for business acquisitions and $5.5 million used to fund notes receivable. These decreases were partially offset by $449.0 million of cash provided by operating activities, $99.7 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases and $38.1 million received from the sale of a portion of our loan to CPTC. In addition, foreign currency exchange rate changes in fiscal year 2014 increased cash and cash equivalents by $11.0 million. At September 26, 2014, we had approximately $24.5 million, or 3%, of total cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $824.8 million, or 97%, of total cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and a portion of this amount could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of September 26, 2014, most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. dollars and were primarily held as bank deposits. In addition to cash flows generated from operations, a significant portion of which are generated in the United States, we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, permitted VMS common stock repurchases, acquisitions, and other lawful corporate purposes. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2014 2013 2012 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 449.0 $ 455.2 $ 492.8 Investing activities (133.1 ) (96.3 ) (122.3 ) Financing activities (595.5 ) 51.6 (234.7 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 11.0 2.8 4.3 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ (268.6 ) $ 413.3 $ 140.1 63 Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012 were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $449.0 million in fiscal year 2014, compared to $455.2 million in fiscal year 2013 and $492.8 million in fiscal year 2012. The $6.2 million decrease in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2014 compared to fiscal year 2013 was driven primarily by a decrease of $34.5 million in net earnings and a decrease of $2.3 million in net change from operating assets and liabilities (working capital items), partially offset by an increase of $30.6 million in non-cash items. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2014 were accounts receivable, inventories, deferred revenues and advance payments from customers as follows: Accounts receivable increased $74.5 million due to higher revenues and longer payment cycles. Inventories increased by $43.3 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2015 mainly in VPT. Deferred revenue and advance payments from customers increased by $31.9 million due to receipts of down payments for VPT and Oncology Systems orders for which revenues have not been recognized. The $37.6 million decrease in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2013 compared to fiscal year 2012 was driven primarily by a net change of $34.7 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and a decrease in non-cash items of $14.1 million, partially offset by an increase of $11.2 million in net earnings. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2013 were inventories, deferred revenues and advance payments from customers, accounts receivable, and accrued expenses and other liabilities as follows: Inventories increased $76.4 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2014, mainly in Oncology Systems and X-Ray Products. Deferred revenue and advance payments from customers increased $74.6 million due to receipts of down payments for orders for which revenues have not been recognized during fiscal year 2013 and due to nature of contracts and timing of customer acceptances. Accounts receivable increased $43.3 million due to higher revenues and timing of collections. Accrued expenses and other liabilities decreased $32.7 million due to the timing of payments processed and specifically due to the timing of tax payments both in the United States and internationally. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. See Item 1A, Risk Factors. Investing activities used $133.1 million of net cash in fiscal year 2014, compared to $96.3 million of net cash in fiscal year 2013 and $122.3 million of net cash in fiscal year 2012. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment increased to $89.6 million in fiscal year 2014, compared to $76.3 million in fiscal year 2013, and $61.1 million in fiscal year 2012, representing our continued investment to expand our global infrastructure. During fiscal year 2014, we used $45.2 million to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC, $31.5 million for acquisitions of businesses and $5.5 million to fund notes receivable, partially offset by $38.1 million received from the sale of a portion of our loan to CPTC. During fiscal year 2013, we used $10.0 million to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC and used $10.0 million to fund a note receivable. In fiscal year 2012, we used $30.5 million to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC and used $28.2 million for acquisitions of businesses, and we received $8.8 million of cash from dpiX LLC for the repayment of a note receivable. Financing activities used net cash of $595.5 million in fiscal year 2014, compared to $51.6 million of net cash provided in fiscal year 2013, and $234.7 million of net cash used in fiscal year 2012. In fiscal year 2014, we used $627.7 million of net cash for the repurchases of VMS common stock compared to $419.9 million in fiscal year 2013 and $257.4 million in fiscal year 2012. In fiscal year 2014, we repaid $68.8 million of our term loan and other bank borrowings as compared to no repayments in fiscal year 2013 and $9.9 million in fiscal year 2012. In fiscal year 2014, there were no repayments to our credit facility compared to net payments of $155.0 million in fiscal year 2013 and $26.4 million in fiscal year 2012. Cash used for financing activities in fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012 also included $8.8 million, $9.6 million, and $10.1 million (the value of withheld shares), respectively, for tendered VMS common stock to satisfy employee tax withholding requirements upon vesting of restricted common stock and restricted stock units. Cash provided by financing activities included cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $99.7 million, $129.6 million, and $60.3 million in fiscal years 2014, 2013, and 2012, respectively, as well as excess tax benefits from share-based compensation of $10.9 million in fiscal year 2014, $9.6 million in fiscal year 2013, and $8.9 million in fiscal year 2012. We borrowed $500.0 million under a term loan facility in fiscal year 2013. 64 We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 3.1% of revenues in fiscal year 2015. As further described under Contractual Obligations, we have loaned $75.6 million (including accrued interest) to CPTC as of September 26, 2014, and we expect CPTC to continue to draw down on the loans. As of September 26, 2014, our remaining outstanding loan commitment to CPTC is up to $4.7 million to fund the construction and initial operations of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center. We had a $300 million credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. ( BofA ) during fiscal years 2013 and 2012 (the 2012 Credit Facility ). On August 27, 2013, we repaid all outstanding amounts and terminated the 2012 Credit Facility and entered into a five-year credit agreement (the Credit Agreement ) with certain lenders and BofA as administrative agent that provides for (i) a five-year term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $500 million (the 2013 Term Loan Facility ) and (ii) a five-year revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $300 million (the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility and collectively with 2013 Term Loan Facility, the 2013 Credit Facility ). The 2013 Revolving Credit Facility also includes a $50 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and permits swing line loans of up to $25 million. Under the Credit Agreement, we have the right to make (i) up to two requests to increase the aggregate commitments under the 2013 Term Loan Facility by an aggregate amount for all such requests of up to $100 million and (ii) up to three requests to increase the aggregate commitments under the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility by an aggregate amount for all such requests of up to $200 million, provided that, in each case, the Lenders are willing to provide such new or increased commitments and certain other conditions are met. We may prepay, reduce or terminate the commitments without penalty. The 2013 Credit Facility contains provisions that limit our ability to pay cash dividends. The proceeds of the 2013 Credit Facility may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, permitted Company share repurchases, permitted acquisitions and other lawful corporate purposes. At September 26, 2014, borrowings under the 2013 Term Loan Facility totaled $437.5 million with a weighted average interest rate of 1.28%. At September 27, 2013, borrowings under the 2013 Term Loan Facility totaled $500 million with a weighted average interest rate of 1.31%. At September 26, 2014 and September 27, 2013, there were no amounts outstanding under the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility. We were in compliance with all covenants under the above mentioned Credit Agreements for all the periods presented within these consolidated financial statements for which they were in existence. In addition, our Japanese subsidiary ( VMS KK ) has an unsecured uncommitted credit agreement with Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation that enables VMS KK to borrow and have outstanding at any given time a maximum of 3 billion Japanese yen (the Sumitomo Credit Facility ). In March 2014, the Sumitomo Credit Facility was extended to March 2015. VMS KK borrowed $29.5 million against the Sumitomo Credit Facility in the second fiscal quarter of 2014 and repaid the entire balance in the third fiscal quarter of 2014. As of September 26, 2014 and September 27, 2013, there were no outstanding balances under the Sumitomo Credit Facility. See Note 7, Borrowings to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion regarding the 2013 Credit Facility and the Sumitomo Credit Facility. In April 2014, we paid the outstanding balance of $6.3 million for the principal amount and accrued interest of our unsecured term loan. Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for the next 12 months and into the foreseeable future. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes, repurchase VMS common stock and fund our loan commitment to CPTC and other strategic investments. Total debt as a percentage of total capital decreased to 21.3% at September 26, 2014 from 22.8% at September 27, 2013 primarily due to repayment of some of our borrowings under our 2013 Credit Facility. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities decreased to 2.08 to 1 at September 26, 2014 from 2.33 to 1 at September 27, 2013. 65 Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable days sales outstanding ( DSO ) was 85 days at September 26, 2014 and September 27, 2013. Excluding VPT, DSO was 80 days at September 26, 2014 compared to 77 days at September 27, 2013. Our accounts receivable and DSO are impacted by a number of factors, primarily including the timing of product shipments, collections performance, payment terms, the mix of revenues from different regions and the effect of continued economic instability. As of September 26, 2014, approximately 4% of our accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with remaining terms of more than one year. Stock Repurchase Program During fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012, we repurchased 7,750,000 shares, 6,000,000 shares and 4,433,718 shares, respectively, of VMS common stock under various authorizations by VMS Board of Directors. The repurchased shares include shares of VMS common stock repurchased under various accelerated share repurchase agreements. Aggregate amount of repurchases in connection with the various accelerated share repurchase agreements and for shares repurchased in the open market totaled $624.0 million, $423.7 million and $257.4 million in fiscal years 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. All shares that were repurchased have been retired. In February 2011, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of 12,000,000 shares of VMS common stock through the end of fiscal year 2012. As of September 28, 2012, the remaining 3,000,000 shares available for repurchase under the February 2011 authorization expired. In August 2012, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of 8,000,000 shares of VMS common stock from September 29, 2012 through December 31, 2013. On August 25, 2011, we entered into an accelerated share repurchase agreement with BofA. The repurchase period ended in February 2012 and we received 375,449 shares of VMS common stock in fiscal year 2012 upon settlement. The market value of the shares received of $25.0 million was included in Capital in excess of par value. In November 2013, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of 6,000,000 shares of our common stock from December 30, 2013 through December 31, 2014. Of the 7,750,000 shares repurchased during fiscal year 2014, 5,750,000 shares were repurchased under the November 2013 authorization and remaining 2,000,000 shares were repurchased under the August 2012 authorization. As of September 26, 2014, 250,000 shares of our common stock remained available for repurchase under the November 2013 authorization. All share repurchase programs authorized prior to November 2013 have been completed. In August 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of additional 6,000,000 shares of VMS common stock from August 15, 2014 through December 31, 2015. As of September 26, 2014, no shares of VMS common stock have been repurchased under the August 2014 authorization. Stock repurchases may be made in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions including accelerated share repurchase programs, or in Rule 10b5-1 share repurchase plans, and also may be made from time to time or in one or more larger blocks. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of September 26, 2014 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period Fiscal Year Fiscal Years Fiscal Years (In millions) 2015 2016-2017 2018-2019 Beyond Total Long term debt (1) (including current maturities of long-term debt) $ 50.0 $ 100.0 $ 287.5 $ - $ 437.5 Interest obligation on long term debt (including current maturities of long-term debt) (2) 5.3 8.8 3.2 - 17.3 Operating leases (3) 20.5 28.9 13.7 10.0 73.1 Purchase obligations (4) 20.4 6.6 3.3 0.4 30.7 Defined benefit pension plans (5) 7.3 - - - 7.3 Post-retirement benefit plan (6) 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.4 1.3 Total (7) $ 103.8 $ 144.7 $ 307.9 $ 10.8 $ 567.2 (1) For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 7, Borrowings of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Interest on the term loan facility has been calculated based on the interest rate applicable as of September 26, 2014. ( 3 ) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases as of September 26, 2014. 66 (4) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, are legally binding and non-cancellable. Purchase obligations do not include agreements that are cancellable without penalty. (5 ) As further described in Note 10, Retirement Plans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 26, 2014, our defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $19.0 million. Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and other economic and demographic assumptions the potential for changes in legislation in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund its defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (6 ) As further described in Note 10, Retirement Plans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 26, 2014, our post-retirement benefit plan had an estimated total benefit obligation of $1.4 million. Due to changes in mortality rates of plan participants, the potential for us to change the type of healthcare plans offered or the level of contributions from plan participants, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund our post-retirement benefit plan beyond fiscal year 2024. (7 ) The following items are not included in the table above: Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of September 26, 2014, our total liability for uncertain tax positions was $55.2 million, of which we do not anticipate a payment in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of the remainder of future payments related to uncertain tax positions; therefore, the liability for uncertain tax positions has been excluded from the table above. See a detailed discussion in Note 14, Taxes on Earnings of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As further described in Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 26, 2014, we accrued $9.8 million for environmental remediation liabilities. The amount accrued represents estimates of anticipated future costs and the timing and amount of actual future environmental remediation costs may vary as the scope of our obligations become more clearly defined. In connection with the acquisition of businesses in current and prior years, we entered into agreements which include provisions to make additional consideration payments upon the achievement of certain milestones by the acquired businesses. As of September 26, 2014, the accrual for potential contingent considerations under these agreements was $7.5 million. In April 2012, we entered into a strategic global partnership with Siemens through which, among other things, we and Siemens will collaborate to develop interfaces that will enable our ARIA oncology information system software to connect with Siemens linear accelerators and imaging systems. Under the agreement establishing this collaboration, we committed to make certain payments, including up to $10 million in fixed fees and $20 million in license fees, in the event that certain product development milestones are achieved. We will also pay for additional licenses beyond the minimum quantities set forth in the agreement. We expect that these interfaces will be commercialized as part of our ARIA oncology information system offering to customers. As of September 26, 2014, the outstanding fixed fees and license fees commitment for the Siemens agreement was $6.0 million and $18.9 million, respectively. As further described in Note 16, CPTC Loans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we participated, through our Swiss subsidiary, in a $165.3 million of the Tranche A loan facility to CPTC, under which we committed to loan up to $115.3 million, to finance the construction and initial operations of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center. On June 10, 2014, we entered into a series of agreements pursuant to which JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. assumed $45.0 million of our original maximum commitment and reducing our commitment under the Tranche A loan facility to $70.3 million. Through these agreements, our Swiss subsidiary also increased its individual loan commitment by another $10.0 million which is referred to as the Tranche B loan. As of September 26, 2014, our outstanding commitment under the Tranche A and Tranche B loans was $4.1 million and $0.6 million, respectively. As further described in Note 6, Related Party Transactions of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 26, 2014, the Company had an estimated fixed cost commitment of $4.3 million related to dpiX amended agreement, for the first quarter of fiscal year 2015. The fixed cost commitment for future years will be determined and approved by the dpiX board of directors at the beginning of each calendar year. As part of our plan to enhance operational performance through productivity initiatives, the Company offered an enhanced retirement program to its qualifying employees across all reporting segments during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014. The program required the participating employees to submit their applications by October 10, 2014. The restructuring charges relating to this program will be incurred in fiscal year 2015. 67 Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Other Matters From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. See Note 9 , Commitments and Contingencies Other Matters of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The terms of these indemnification arrangements are generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is unlimited. As of September 26, 2014, we have not incurred any significant costs since the Spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Recent Accounting Pronouncements a) New accounting updates recently adopted In December 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) amended Accounting Standards Codification ( ASC ) 210, Balance Sheet, enhancing disclosure requirements about the nature of an entity right to offset and related arrangements associated with its financial instruments and derivative instruments. The guidance requires the disclosure of the gross amounts subject to rights of set-off, the amounts offset in accordance with the accounting standards followed, and the related net exposure. In January 2013, the FASB clarified the scope of the guidance. The guidance became effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2014. As a result of the application of this accounting standard update, we have provided additional disclosures in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. The adoption of this amendment did not have an impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. In February 2013, the FASB issued an accounting standard update to require reclassification adjustments from other comprehensive income to be presented either in the financial statements or in the notes to the financial statements. We adopted this guidance beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2014. As a result of the application of this accounting standard update, we have provided additional disclosures in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. The adoption of this amendment did not have an impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. b) Recent accounting standards or updates not yet effective In May 2014, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to revenue recognition. The amendment sets forth a single, comprehensive revenue recognition model for all contracts with customers to improve comparability. The amendment requires revenue recognition to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The new guidance will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2018. Early application is not permitted. The amendment can be applied either retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented or retrospectively with the cumulative effect of initially applying the update recognized at the date of the initial application along with additional disclosures. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this guidance to our consolidated financial statements. 68 In June 2014, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to stock-based compensation. The amendment requires that a performance target that could be achieved after the requisite service period be treated as a performance condition that affects vesting, rather than a condition that affects the grant-date fair value. The new guidance will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017. Early adoption is permitted. The amendment can be applied on a prospective basis to all share-based payments granted or modified on or after the effective date. Entities will also be provided an option to apply the guidance on a modified retrospective basis to existing awards. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this guidance to our consolidated financial statements. 
