CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-11-24


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview In fiscal year 2008, total revenues from continuing operations grew 18% and net orders from continuing operations rose 15% over fiscal year 2007 results. Both of our business segments contributed to the increases in revenues and net orders. Compared to the prior fiscal year, Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2008 increased 16% and net orders increased 14%. The significant growth in the flat panel detector product line drove X-ray Products revenues and net orders to increase 19% and 24%, respectively, over the prior fiscal year. Revenues in our Other businesses rose 62% in fiscal year 2008 over the year-ago period, while net orders declined 7%. Backlog at the end of fiscal year 2008 rose 14% from the end of fiscal year 2007 to $1.9 billion. Net earnings from continuing operations per diluted share increased 24% to $2.31 in fiscal year 2008 from $1.86 in fiscal year 2007, with net earnings from continuing operations increasing 22% to $295 million in fiscal year 2008 from $243 million in fiscal year 2007. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, we approved a plan to sell Research Instruments in order to focus exclusively on the development of our ACCEL Proton Therapy business. Accordingly, Research Instruments is classified as a discontinued operation for all periods presented and we have segregated the net assets and operating results of Research Instruments from continuing operations on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and in our Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Unless otherwise stated, the discussion herein pertains to our continuing operations. Research Instruments was previously included in the Other category. The Research Instruments business reduced total net earnings per diluted share by $0.12 for fiscal year 2008 to $2.19. Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufacturers, sells and services hardware and software products for radiation treatment of cancer with conventional radiation therapy, IMRT, IGRT, stereotactic radiotherapy and stereotactic radiosurgery, brachytherapy and VMAT. Oncology Systems net orders grew in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 primarily driven by demand for our new RapidArc radiotherapy products since their introduction in the second quarter of fiscal year 2008. We also experienced growth in demand in both the North American and the international regions for our high energy linear accelerators and our service contracts. Growth in demand for our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI) primarily in the international region also contributed. A weaker U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 also contributed to the international net order growth between the fiscal years. In fiscal year 2008, we experienced strong demand for our new RapidArc products, with more than 300 orders booked in the year. We believe RapidArc will contribute to the growth in our Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2009. Most of the orders for RapidArc came from North America, where early adopters are typically concentrated. We believe RapidArc represents a significant advancement in IMRT cancer treatment and can help drive longer term demand for our linear accelerators and our IMRT-related accessory products. Customers are also recognizing IGRT and stereotactic radiosurgery as significant enhancements in curative radiation therapy. We believe treatments using IGRT technology are becoming widely accepted in radiation therapy and radiosurgery, with North America ahead of international regions in the timing of IGRT adoption. About 80% of worldwide orders taken for our high energy linear accelerators during fiscal year 2008 included our OBI. Through September 26, 2008, we had shipped more than 1,000 units of OBI for our high-energy linear accelerators. We believe regional fluctuations in demand are consistent with an observed historical pattern where the international regions follow North America in the adoption of new technology. We are also experiencing faster early adoption rates for our RapidArc products and IGRT products than historical adoption rates for our other products, which may lead to more compressed growth cycles. As was the case in fiscal year 56 Table of Contents 2008, we believe that growth in our net orders, revenues and gross margin may also be influenced by the fluctuation of exchange rates of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. The weakening U.S. dollar that we have experienced over the last several years has made our pricing more competitive with our foreign competitors, which has been a contributor to our international order and revenue growth. The strengthening of the U.S. dollar against other foreign currencies may make our pricing less competitive and result in slower growth in our international orders and revenues, which then could negatively affect our overall financial performance and results. Additionally, we have seen the purchasing cycle lengthen for some customers, which we believe results from a more complex decision-making process associated with larger dollar value transactions for more sophisticated IGRT and surgical equipment and other technical advances. Revenues are also influenced by the timing of product shipments which are tied to planned customer-requested delivery dates. These factors may result in greater fluctuation in our Oncology Systems net orders and revenues. Our success in Oncology Systems largely depends upon our ability to retain leadership in technological innovation, the reliability and cost effectiveness of our products, the efficacy of our treatment technology and external economic influences. Factors affecting the adoption rate of new technologies such as IGRT and VMAT could include their more-widely demonstrated efficacy and acceptance of these technologies and our internal efficiency in design, documentation and testing, and deployment and installation of our new technologies and products. Additional factors could include customer training on the use of our new technologies or related products and our ability to educate customers about the cost effectiveness of our new technologies and clinical outcome advantages. External economic influences could include financial strength of our customers, the availability of credit to our customers, consolidation among our customers, currency exchange rates, significant changes to Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and brachytherapy procedures and radiosurgery in the United States, government budgeting and tendering cycles and governmental healthcare policies. The general worldwide economic downturn we have seen in 2008 may make it difficult for our customers, our vendors and us to accurately forecast and plan future business activities. A customer decision-making process may be further complicated as the current worldwide economic turmoil causes hospitals, clinics and research institutions to more closely scrutinize and prioritize their capital spending budgets. We cannot predict the timing or duration of any economic slowdown or the timing or strength of a subsequent economic recovery, in general or specifically in the healthcare industry. If the healthcare market significantly deteriorates due to these macroeconomic effects, our business, financial condition and results of operations will likely be materially and adversely affected. X-Ray Products . Our X-ray Products business segment manufactures and sells (i) x-ray tubes for use in a range of applications including computed tomography, or CT, scanning, radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, special procedures and industrial applications and (ii) flat panel digital image detectors for filmless x-ray imaging (commonly referred to as flat panel detectors or digital image detectors), which are an alternative to image intensifier tubes for fluoroscopy and x-ray film and computed radiography, or CR, systems for radiography. X-ray Products growth in net orders and revenues in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to strong growth in our flat panel detector product line which we believe will continue to contribute to our growth as flat panel detectors, which enable filmless x-ray, replace traditional film and image-intensifier x-ray products in many medical applications. Rising costs of raw materials due to increased worldwide demand, which we have seen over the last two years, continued to affect the X-ray Products business through most of fiscal year 2008, though we have recently seen decreases in some commodity prices for our materials as the economic downturn has become more worldwide and global demand for such commodities have lessened. In December 2007, we acquired Pan-Pacific, an independent distributor of medical x-ray tubes and other imaging components in China, for approximately $2.0 million, plus an additional contingent earn out payment of up to $3.5 million. Pan-Pacific enhances the sales channel for x-ray tubes and flat panel products in China. 57 Table of Contents Our success in our X-ray Products business depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. Factors affecting the success of our X-ray Products business include our ability to develop products with lower cost, better quality and superior technology and performance, and to maintain strong relationships with our OEM customers. The general worldwide economic downturn we have seen in 2008 may make it difficult for our OEM customers, our vendors and us to accurately forecast and plan future business activities. If the markets for our customers significantly deteriorate due to these macroeconomic effects, our business and results of operations may be adversely affected. Other . The Other category is comprised of Security and Inspection Products, or SIP (including Bio-Imaging Research, Inc., or BIR, which we acquired in the third quarter of fiscal year 2007), the ACCEL Proton Therapy business, and the operations of the Ginzton Technology Center, or GTC. SIP designs, manufactures, sells and services Linatron x-ray accelerators, imaging processing software and image detection products for security and inspection purposes, such as cargo screening at ports and borders and nondestructive examination for a variety of applications. We are now seeing wider deployment of our Linatron x-ray accelerators for cargo screening and border protection as customers are placing orders for multiple units. While we are optimistic about SIP long-term potential and encouraged by the increased interest in our SIP products, use of this technology in security cargo screening and border protection is still in its early stages. Orders and revenues for our SIP products may be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with our OEM customers in a short time period and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. In April 2008, we added a new manufacturing facility for the production of SIP products in Las Vegas. Our ACCEL Proton Therapy business develops, designs, manufactures and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy, another form of external beam radiation therapy using proton beams for the treatment of cancer. Proton therapy, as a clinical treatment modality, is still not wide-spread and the technology is still developing. We are investing substantial resources to commercialize ACCEL advanced proton technology and to build this new business. Proton therapy facilities, nevertheless, are large scale construction projects that can take three years or more to complete. With the cost of a multiple-gantry system in excess of $60 million and the total cost for a center approaching $100 million, significant customer investment and perhaps complex project financing will be required. Consequently, the customers decision-making cycle is very long and orders for proton therapy systems generally involve many contingencies. Since we currently will not book these orders until contingencies are eliminated, we do not expect to book any orders for proton therapy systems in the short term and do not expect to start generating significant proton therapy systems revenues until fiscal year 2010 at the earliest. Given the heavy reliance of customers of this business on credit and large-scale project financing, this business may be the most vulnerable to general economic turmoil and contraction in the credit markets. GTC, our scientific research facility, continues to invest in developing technologies that enhance our current businesses or may lead to new business areas, including next generation digital x-ray imaging technology, volumetric and functional imaging, and improved x-ray sources and technology for security and cargo screening applications. In addition, GTC is developing technologies and products that are designed to improve disease management by more precise targeting of radiation, as well as by employing targeted energy and molecular agents to enhance the effectiveness and broaden the application of radiation therapy. Compared to fiscal year 2007, net orders in the Other category were down 7% in fiscal year 2008 due primarily to a reduction in the proton therapy service business. Revenue grew by 62% in fiscal year 2008 over the year-ago period due to growth in SIP product revenues. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Risk Factors contained in Item 1A. We discuss our results of operations below. 58 Table of Contents Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP, requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies and estimates and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include share-based compensation expense, revenue recognition, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of environmental remediation liabilities, valuation of defined benefit and post-retirement benefit plans and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies are impacted significantly by judgments, assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements, and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, also refer to the Risk Factors in Item 1A. Share-based Compensation Expense Effective October 1, 2005, we adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, or SFAS, No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment, or SFAS 123(R), using the modified prospective transition method. We have valued our share-based payment awards granted beginning in fiscal year 2006 using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected term of stock awards and the expected price volatility of VMS stock over the expected term of the awards. The expected term is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. Upon the adoption of SFAS 123(R), we determined the expected term of stock options based on the demographic grouping of employees and retirement eligibility. Upon the adoption of SFAS 123(R), we used a combination of historical and implied volatility, or blended volatility, in deriving the expected volatility assumption. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility was derived based on six-month traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the six-month term of the exchange-traded options to the expected lives of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options in VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we cannot rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS six-month exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected lives of the stock options we granted. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected lives of the stock options granted by us and the implied volatility of six-month exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock going forward. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock options. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of dividend payouts. If factors change 59 Table of Contents and we employ different assumptions in the application of SFAS 123(R) in future periods, the compensation expense that we record under SFAS 123(R) may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Revenue Recognition We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of the proceeds received from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, the determination of whether any undelivered elements are essential to the functionality of the delivered elements and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical in respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. In addition, the amount of product revenues recognized is affected by our judgments as to whether objective and reliable evidence of fair value exists for hardware products and vendor-specific objective evidence of the fair value for software products in arrangements with multiple elements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the ability to establish objective and reliable evidence of fair value or vendor-specific objective evidence of the fair value for those elements could affect the timing of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment and is subject to customer acceptance and the readiness of customers facilities. If shipments are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. In addition, revenues related to certain highly customized scientific research instrument products and proton therapy commissioning service contracts, as well as highly customized image detection systems, are recognized under the percentage of completion method. Under the percentage-of-completion method of accounting, sales and gross profit are recognized as work is performed based on the relationship between actual costs incurred and total estimated costs at the completion of the contract. If a loss is expected on a contract, the estimated loss would be charged to cost of sales in the period the loss is identified. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the amounts to accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts Credit evaluations are undertaken for all major sale transactions before shipment is authorized. Normal payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due upon signing of the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect the future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively impacted. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are specialized in nature or subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. 60 Table of Contents Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The majority of companies that we have acquired have not had significant identified tangible assets and, as a result, a significant portion of the purchase price has been typically allocated to intangible assets and goodwill. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. As a result of business acquisitions, the allocation of the purchase price to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. The allocation of the purchase price of the acquired companies to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for these cash flows. Should conditions differ from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. We annually evaluate goodwill and purchased assets with indefinite lives for impairment in accordance with SFAS 142 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets . The impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units. If the carrying amount is in excess of the fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill with the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. We will continue to make assessments of impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of our fiscal years or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually twelve months, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would negatively impact our operating results. Environmental Matters We are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world regulating the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances that do or may create increased costs for some of our operations. Environmental remediation liabilities are recorded when environmental assessments and/or remediation efforts are probable and the costs of these assessments or remediation efforts can be reasonably estimated, in accordance with SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Statement of Position 96-1, Environmental Remediation Liabilities. The accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate as to the total costs of remediation and the time period over which these costs will be incurred. On a quarterly basis, we review 61 Table of Contents these accrued balances. If we were required to accrue additional environmental remediation costs in the future, it would negatively impact our operating results. Defined Benefit and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans We sponsor six defined benefit pension plans in Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom covering the employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements. In July 2007, we made changes to the defined benefit plan in the United Kingdom by terminating the accrual of additional benefits for existing participants and suspending the enrollment of new participants. We also sponsor a post-retirement benefit plan that provides healthcare benefits to certain eligible retirees in the United States. We do not have any defined benefit pension plans in the United States. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expense and liability related to those plans for which the benefit is actuarially determined. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of future compensation increases and healthcare cost increases, which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use subjective factors, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expense and liability. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of pension expense we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return of those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans in all countries are primarily based on the yields of a universe of high of quality corporate bonds in each country or the spot rate on high quality AA-rated corporate bonds, with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. In countries where the corporate bond market is not sufficiently representative at longer durations, the discount rate also takes into account the yield of long-term government bonds corresponding to the duration of the benefit obligations and the difference between the yield curve on high quality corporate fixed-income investments and government fixed-income investment. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations. See Note 9 Retirement Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of our defined benefit and post-retirement benefit plans. Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. Effective as of the beginning of fiscal year 2008, we adopted the provisions of FASB Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 , or FIN 48. FIN 48 contains a two-step approach to recognizing, derecognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions accounted for in accordance with SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes . The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition, derecognition, and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. A tax benefit should be recognized in the first period in which it meets the more likely than not recognition threshold, and conversely, a tax benefit previously recognized should be derecognized in the first period in which new information results in a change in judgment in which the position fails to meet the recognition threshold. A benefit not previously recognized would be recognized when the tax position is effectively settled through examination, negotiation or litigation with tax authorities, or when the statute 62 Table of Contents of limitations for the relevant taxing authority to examine and challenge the position has expired. Our policy to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for taxes on earnings did not change as a result of the adoption of FIN 48. In addition, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in certain tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. Earnings derived from our international regions are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our international subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our international regions, or a change in the mix of international regions among particular tax jurisdictions, could increase our effective tax rate. Also, our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2008 comprised the 52-week period ended on September 26, 2008. Fiscal year 2007 comprised the 52-week period ended on September 28, 2007 and fiscal year 2006 was the 52-week period ended on September 29, 2006. Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006. As indicated above, the operating results of Research Instruments have been segregated and presented as a discontinued operation for all periods. Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2008, 2007 and 2006 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Product $ 1,690 17 % $ 1,448 8 % $ 1,342 Service Contracts and Other 380 24 % 307 20 % 256 Total Revenues $ 2,070 18 % $ 1,755 10 % $ 1,598 Product as a percentage of total revenues 82 % 82 % 84 % Service Contracts and Other as a percentage of total revenues 18 % 18 % 16 % Revenues by region North America $ 1,003 16 % $ 865 7 % $ 807 Europe 619 17 % 529 18 % 450 Asia 349 24 % 281 10 % 255 Rest of world 99 24 % 80 (7 %) 86 Total International(1) 1,067 20 % 890 13 % 791 Total $ 2,070 18 % $ 1,755 10 % $ 1,598 North America as a percentage of total revenues 48 % 49 % 51 % International as a percentage of total revenues 52 % 51 % 49 % (1) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. 63 Table of Contents Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 and increased in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 primarily due to increases in Oncology Systems revenues in each year, as well as contributions from the X-ray Products business segment and the Other category. The foregoing increase in total revenues in each year was also primarily due to the growth in product revenues, and to a lesser extent, an increase in service contracts and other revenues. Growth in product revenues in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 and in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was due to contributions from Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and SIP. Product revenues grew at a higher rate in fiscal year 2008 than in fiscal year 2007 over year-ago periods primarily due to higher growth in Oncology Systems product revenues. The rate of growth in total service contracts and other revenues was higher in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 than the growth rate in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 primarily due to growth in Oncology Systems service contracts revenues in each of those fiscal years. International revenue growth exceeded the North American revenue growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 and in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 due in part to the weaker U.S. dollar against foreign currencies. Since fiscal year 2007, international revenues have represented more than half of our worldwide revenues. In fiscal year 2008, both business segments and SIP contributed to the revenue growth over fiscal year 2007 in all geographic regions. In fiscal year 2007, both business segments and our businesses in the Other category contributed to the revenue growth over the prior fiscal year in all geographic regions, except for the rest of the world region where Oncology Systems revenues declined. Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Product $ 1,302 14 % $ 1,145 5 % $ 1,088 Service Contracts(1) 370 26 % 295 19 % 248 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,672 16 % $ 1,440 8 % $ 1,336 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 78 % 80 % 81 % Service Contracts as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 22 % 20 % 19 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 81 % 82 % 84 % (1) Revenues from service contracts represent revenues from fixed-term service contracts and labor cost services. This excludes revenues from spare parts sold by our service department. The increases in Oncology Systems product revenues for fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 were primarily driven by increased revenues from sales of our high energy linear accelerators, our treatment planning and information management software products and our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI). However, these revenue increases in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 were partially offset by a decline in revenues from sales of IMRT-upgrades, reflecting the continued slowdown in demand for IMRT-upgrade products after several years of rapid adoption of IMRT technology. The U.S. dollar weakness against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2008 compared to that of fiscal year 2007 also contributed to the increase in Oncology Systems revenues. In fiscal year 2007, the increase in Oncology Systems product revenues over fiscal year 2006 was driven by higher sales volume of accessory products that enable IGRT; partially offset by lower sales volume of our high-energy linear accelerators and other non-IGRT products such as IMRT upgrades, simulators and brachytherapy products. The higher rate of product revenue growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 compared to fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was due primarily to the weak first half net orders in fiscal year 2007. Because a portion of our orders for products are shipped within one year of the placement of such order from the 64 Table of Contents customer, our fiscal year 2007 product revenues were adversely impacted since there were less product orders to ship within the fiscal year. During fiscal year 2007, Oncology Systems revenues were also negatively impacted by the timing of product shipments in accordance with planned customer-requested delivery dates. The increase in service contract revenues in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 and in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was primarily driven by increased customer adoption of service contracts as the sophistication of our products and installed base of software products increased and was also favorably impacted by the U.S. dollar weakness against foreign currencies. Since service contract revenues grew faster than product revenues from fiscal year 2006 to fiscal year 2007 and from fiscal year 2007 to fiscal year 2008, service contract revenues also increased as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues in the same time periods. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 North America $ 866 15 % $ 754 7 % $ 705 Europe 517 14 % 454 12 % 404 Asia 200 25 % 160 8 % 148 Rest of world 89 24 % 72 (9 %) 79 Total International 806 18 % 686 9 % 631 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,672 16 % $ 1,440 8 % $ 1,336 North America as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 52 % 52 % 53 % International as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 48 % 48 % 47 % All of our geographic regions contributed to the Oncology Systems revenues growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. The higher revenue growth rate in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 in both the North American and international regions, as compared with the growth rate in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006, was primarily due to the weak net orders growth in the first half of fiscal year 2007 which resulted in lower shipment volumes and revenues in the second half of fiscal year 2007. For fiscal year 2008, the growth in international revenues over fiscal year 2007 was due to increases in product revenues in all international regions from sales of our high energy linear accelerators, our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI) and our treatment planning and information management software products, as well as an increase in service contracts revenues. The U.S. dollar weakness against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2008 compared to most of fiscal year 2007 also contributed to the increase in Oncology Systems international revenues. These increases in international revenues were partially offset by decreases in product revenues from sales of IMRT-upgrades, primarily in Europe, reflecting the continued slowdown in demand for IMRT-upgrade products after several years of rapid adoption of IMRT technology. North American revenues grew in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 primarily due to increases in product revenues from sales of our high energy linear accelerators, our treatment planning and information management software products and our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI), as well as an increase in service contracts revenues. A decrease in product revenues from IMRT-upgrades partially offset these increases in North American revenues. All of our geographic regions, except the rest of the world region, contributed to the Oncology Systems revenues growth in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006. The growth in North American revenues in fiscal year 2007 over the year-ago period was primarily due to the higher sales volume of our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI), as well as increase in service contracts revenues, partially offset by lower sales volume of our high-energy linear accelerators. The increase in international revenues in fiscal year 2007 over the prior year was primarily due to the increase in international service contract revenues and the increase in sales volume of our accessory products that 65 Table of Contents enable IGRT and our high-energy linear accelerators in Europe and Asia, which was partially offset by lower sales volume of other non-IGRT products such as, simulators and brachytherapy products in Europe, and the decrease in sales volume of our high-energy linear accelerators in the rest of world region. Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the international and North American regions is a historical pattern reflecting different technology adoption cycles and demand cycles that is consistent with the net order patterns discussed more fully under Net Orders. Oncology Systems revenues also continued to be influenced by the timing of product shipments in accordance with planned customer-requested delivery dates. X-ray Products Revenues Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 North America $ 107 12 % $ 96 9 % $ 88 Europe 45 28 % 35 24 % 28 Asia 143 21 % 119 13 % 105 Rest of world 10 21 % 8 11 % 7 Total International 198 22 % 162 15 % 140 Total X-ray Products $ 305 19 % $ 258 13 % $ 228 North America as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 35 % 37 % 38 % International as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 65 % 63 % 62 % X-ray Products revenues as a percentage of total revenues 15 % 15 % 14 % X-ray Products higher revenue growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 as compared to the growth in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was the result of significant revenue growth in our flat panel detector product line in fiscal year 2008. All of our geographic regions contributed to the increase in X-ray Products revenues for fiscal years 2008 and 2007. The growth in X-ray Products revenues in both the international and in North American regions in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 similarly reflects increased revenues from sales of our flat panel detectors and, to a lesser extent, increased revenues from sales of our x-ray tubes in international regions. The growth in X-ray Products revenues in North America in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was primarily driven by increased revenues from sales of our flat panel detectors, whereas the growth in international revenues in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was primarily driven by increased revenues from sales of our high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes and our flat panel detectors. We believe the flat panel detector product line will continue to contribute to our growth in X-ray Products revenues as flat panel detectors, which enable filmless x-ray, replace traditional film and image-intensifier x-ray products in many medical applications. Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Product $ 83 84 % $ 45 76 % $ 26 Service Contracts and Other 10 (21 %) 12 53 % 8 Total Other $ 93 62 % $ 57 71 % $ 34 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 4 % 3 % 2 % 66 Table of Contents For our Other category, which includes SIP, ACCEL Proton Therapy and GTC, revenues in fiscal year 2008 increased over the prior fiscal year primarily due to growth in product revenues in our SIP business. The higher product revenues from SIP were attributable to increased sales of our Linatron x-ray accelerators and image detection products to OEM customers for cargo screening and border protection. Revenues in the Other category in fiscal year 2007 increased over fiscal year 2006 primarily due to the higher sales volume of our Linatron x-ray accelerators to our OEM customers for cargo screening and border protection. Gross Margin Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Dollar by segment Oncology Systems $ 723 19 % $ 609 6 % $ 573 X-ray Products 120 16 % 104 30 % 80 Other 35 71 % 20 97 % 10 Gross margin $ 878 20 % $ 733 10 % $ 663 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 43.2 % 42.3 % 42.9 % X-ray Products 39.3 % 40.2 % 34.9 % Total Company 42.4 % 41.8 % 41.5 % In fiscal year 2008, total gross margin improved by 0.6 percentage points compared with fiscal year 2007, primarily due to the increase in gross margin for Oncology Systems and SIP, partially offset by the decline in gross margin for X-ray Products. In fiscal year 2007, total gross margin increased by 0.3 percentage points from fiscal year 2006 primarily due to significant improvement in gross margin of X-ray Products and SIP, which was partially offset by a decrease in Oncology Systems gross margin. Product gross margin was 41.7% in fiscal year 2008, compared to 41.1% and 41.2% in fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively. Service contracts and other gross margin was 45.5% in fiscal year 2008, compared to 44.9% and 43.4% in fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively. Improvements in both product and service contracts gross margins contributed to the higher gross margin achieved in Oncology Systems in fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007. Product gross margin in Oncology Systems increased from 41.4% in fiscal year 2007 to 42.4% in fiscal year 2008 primarily due to higher sales volume and product mix shift toward higher margin products. Service contracts gross margin in Oncology Systems increased from 45.7% in fiscal year 2007 to 46.1% in fiscal year 2008 primarily due to higher contract volumes and growth in higher margin software maintenance contracts. Oncology Systems gross margin decreased 0.6 percentage points in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006. In fiscal year 2007, Oncology Systems gross margin benefited from increases in service contracts gross margin but was unfavorably impacted by decreases in product gross margins over the prior year, which more than offset the service contract gross margin increase. Service gross margin increased from 44.1% in fiscal year 2006 to 45.7% in fiscal year 2007 due primarily to higher volume and the continued growth in higher margin software maintenance contracts. The 0.6 percentage points decrease in Oncology Systems product gross margin in fiscal year 2007 from the prior year was primarily due to the effect of hedging foreign currency denominated sales contracts when the orders were booked. While the weakening of the U.S. dollar positively affected our revenues in fiscal year 2007, it had a negative impact on our Oncology Systems gross margin percentage. The X-ray Products gross margin decrease of 0.9 percentage points in fiscal year 2008 from fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to increased raw material costs and quality costs for x-ray tube products and increased raw material costs for flat panel products, although these increases were partially offset by the 67 Table of Contents product mix shift toward a greater proportion of flat panel detectors which generally carry higher margin than x-ray tube products. X-ray Products gross margin in fiscal year 2007 increased by 5.3 percentage points from the fiscal year 2006 as a result of (i) product mix shift towards sales of higher margin high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes and flat panel detectors, (ii) cost reduction efforts and (iii) leverage from higher sales volume. X-ray Products gross margin will continue to be impacted by factors such as sales mix between and among flat panel detectors and x-ray tube products, product pricing, timing of new product introduction, cost reduction efforts and material costs. Rising costs of raw materials due to increased worldwide demand, which we have seen over the last two years, continued through most of fiscal year 2008 and primarily affected our X-ray Products business. With the recent worldwide economic downturn, global demand for such commodities has lessened and we have seen decreases in some commodity prices for our materials. Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Research and development $ 136 16 % $ 117 17 % $ 100 As a percentage of total revenues 7 % 7 % 6 % The $19 million increase in research and development expense for fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was driven by a $14 million increase in Oncology Systems and a $5 million increase in the Other category. The $14 million increase in research and development expenses in Oncology Systems for fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 was attributable primarily to a $15 million increase in employee headcount, materials costs and consulting expenses for development of our next generation linear accelerator products, as well as a $5 million unfavorable currency impact as the research and development expenses in our foreign operations are translated into U.S. dollars. A reduction in $5 million in expenses related to other product development projects partially offset these effects. The $5 million increase in the Other category primarily reflected a $3 million increase in research and development expenses for x-ray accelerator products in SIP. The $17 million increase in research and development expenses in fiscal year 2007 resulted from increased spending of $10 million in Oncology Systems, $5 million in X-ray Products and $2 million in the Other category. The $10 million increase in research and development expenses in Oncology Systems in fiscal year 2007 compared to the year-ago period was attributable primarily to: (a) a $5 million increase in employee headcount, materials costs and consulting expenses for development of our next generation linear accelerator products, (b) a $2 million increase in expenses for development of software products, (c) a $2 million unfavorable foreign currency impact resulting from the relatively weak U.S. dollar as the research and development expenses incurred by our foreign operations was translated into U.S. dollars and (d) an increase in development expenses for radiosurgery products of $1 million. The $5 million increase in X-ray Products was primarily due to increased expenses for development projects related to flat panel detectors and X-ray tube products. The $2 million increase in the Other category was primarily due to an increase of $1 million associated with research and development at ACCEL, which was acquired in the second quarter of fiscal year 2007 and an increase of $1 million associated with the expenses incurred by BIR, which was acquired by us in the third quarter of fiscal year 2007. Selling, General and Administrative Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Selling, general and administrative $ 323 16 % $ 277 9 % $ 254 As a percentage of total revenues 16 % 16 % 16 % 68 Table of Contents Our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues has remained flat from fiscal year 2006 to fiscal year 2008. The $46 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2008 compared to the same period in fiscal year 2007 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $16 million increase in expenses resulting from an increase in employee-related costs and headcount to support our growing business activities; (b) a $7 million unfavorable foreign currency impact as the selling, general and administrative expenses of our foreign operations are translated into U.S. dollars; (c) a $7 million increase in fees for certain commission arrangements and product promotions which were tied to growth in Oncology Systems revenues; (d) a $7 million increase in expenses primarily related to accruals for contingent legal liabilities and (e) a $6 million increase in operating expenses associated with ACCEL Proton Therapy, BIR and Pan-Pacific and (f) a loss of $1 million for hedging balance sheet exposures from our various foreign subsidiaries and business units compared to a gain of $4 million in fiscal year 2007. These increases were partially offset by the receipt of a $5 million payment related to resolution of a gain contingency. The $23 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2007 compared to fiscal year 2006 was primarily attributable to: (a) operating expenses of $8 million associated with ACCEL Proton Therapy and BIR, (b) a $5 million increase in employee-related and other operating expenses associated with required corporate, regulatory and information technology infrastructure improvements to support our growing businesses, (c) a $4 million increase in fees related to certain commission arrangements, (d) a $3 million unfavorable foreign currency translation impact resulting from the relatively weak U.S. dollar for our foreign operations as the selling, general and administrative expenses are translated into U.S. dollars, (e) a $3 million increase in employee-related and other operating expenses related to the expansion of our operations into China and (f) a $2 million decrease in income on equity investment in dpiX Holding LLC, or dpiX Holding, from the year-ago period (see Note 4 Related Party Transactions in Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). These increases were partially offset by $1.0 million in additional gains recognized for hedging balance sheet exposures from our various foreign subsidiaries and business units. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Interest income, net $ 6.6 (10 %) $ 7.4 (21 %) $ 9.3 The decrease in interest income, net, in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was attributable to increased borrowings in fiscal year 2008 and lower average interest rate earned on our cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2008. The decrease in interest income, net in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was due to lower balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and increased borrowings in fiscal year 2007. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2008 Change 2007 Change 2006 Effective tax rate 31 % 1 % 30 % 6 % 24 % The increase in the effective tax rate in fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 primarily because the earlier period included a greater tax benefit realized from the federal research and development credit. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2007 included the benefit of the federal research and development credit for the full year plus the benefit of a retroactive reinstatement of the credit, which had previously expired on December 31, 2005. By comparison, the federal research and development credit was in effect for only one quarter during fiscal year 2008. 69 Table of Contents The increase in the effective tax rates in fiscal year 2007 from fiscal year 2006 was primarily due to tax benefits recorded in the prior fiscal year related to (i) the repatriation of foreign earnings under the American Jobs Creation of 2004, or the Job Creation Act, which resulted in a decrease in our effective tax rate of approximately four percentage points in fiscal year 2006, (ii) a deferred tax asset adjustment for certain prior years state and federal temporary differences, which resulted a decrease in our effective tax rate of approximately two percentage points in fiscal year 2006. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. Our future effective tax rate could be adversely affected by having lower earnings than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory rates and higher earnings than anticipated in countries where we have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, and by changes in tax laws or interpretations of those laws. We also expect that our effective tax rate may experience increased fluctuation from period to period under the provisions of FIN 48. Please refer to further discussion of the adoption of FIN 48 in Note 12 Income Taxes of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Net earnings per diluted share $ 2.31 24 % $ 1.86 3 % $ 1.80 The increase in earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 resulted from the increase in total revenues, the improvement in our gross margin, the leverage in our operating expenses, as well as the reduction in outstanding shares of common stock due to stock repurchases. The increase in net earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 can be attributed to the increase in total revenues and the reduction in outstanding shares of common stock due to stock repurchases, partially offset by the increase in effective tax rate and the decline in profitability due to our planned investments in growth initiatives, including our ACCEL acquisition, research and development, and our expansion into China. Net Orders Total Net Orders (by segment and region) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Oncology Systems: North America $ 1,020 13 % $ 905 5 % $ 861 Total International 851 16 % 731 9 % 674 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,871 14 % $ 1,636 7 % $ 1,535 X-ray Products: North America $ 131 28 % $ 102 (8 %) $ 111 Total International 206 21 % 171 30 % 131 Total X-ray Products $ 337 24 % $ 273 13 % $ 242 Other: $ 94 (7 %) $ 101 139 % $ 43 Total Net Orders $ 2,302 15 % $ 2,010 10 % $ 1,820 Our total net orders grew in fiscal year 2008 from fiscal year 2007 primarily due to the net order growth in Oncology Systems and, to a lesser extent, net order growth in X-ray Products and SIP, partially offset by a decline in ACCEL Proton Therapy net orders. For fiscal year 2007, all of our businesses contributed to the net order growth over fiscal year 2006. 70 Table of Contents Oncology Systems net orders for fiscal year 2008 grew 14% over fiscal year 2007, compared to 7% growth in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006. The single digit net order growth in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was the result of a weak net order growth in the first half of the fiscal year, which impacted both the North American and the international regions. North American Oncology Systems net orders grew 13% in fiscal year 2008 from fiscal year 2007, compared to 5% in fiscal year 2007 from fiscal year 2006. The growth in Oncology Systems North American net orders in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was primarily driven by demand for our new RapidArc products and growth in demand for our high energy linear accelerators, as well as growth in demand for our service contracts. The growth in North American net orders in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 reflect continued growth in demand for our products that enable IGRT (including our OBI), our high energy linear accelerators and service contracts, partially offset by declines in demand for non-IGRT products including IMRT upgrades and brachytherapy products. International net orders for Oncology Systems grew 16% in fiscal year 2008 over the prior year compared to 9% in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006. All international regions contributed to the international net order growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. The increase in international net orders in fiscal year 2008 over the prior fiscal year was primarily due to demand for our new RapidArc products and growth in demand for our high energy linear accelerators, as well as growth in demand for our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI). Growth in demand for our service contracts also contributed to Oncology Systems net order growth in the international region. In addition, international Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2008 were favorably impacted by the U.S. dollar weakness against foreign currencies compared to most of fiscal year 2007. When measured in constant currency, the international Oncology Systems growth rate for fiscal year 2008 was 8%, with increases in all regions. In fiscal year 2007, all geographic regions contributed to the increase in international orders. The growth in international net orders also reflects increased demand for our products that enable IGRT (including our OBI), our high energy linear accelerators and service contracts, partially offset by decrease in demand for other product lines, including IMRT upgrades and brachytherapy products. When measured in constant currency, fiscal year 2007 international Oncology Systems net orders grew 4% with increases in all regions but Europe. Oncology Systems trailing twelve months net order growth for the last three fiscal quarters were: as of June 27, 2008, 13% total increase, with an 8% increase for North America and an 18% increase for international regions; as of March 28, 2008, 12% total increase, with a 9% increase for North America and a 16% increase for international regions; and as of December 28, 2007, 10% total increase, with a 3% increase for North America and a 19% increase for international regions. Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems net orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations. The increase in X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to increased demand for our flat panel detectors and, to a lesser extent, increased demand for our x-ray tube products. The increase in X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was due to increased demand for our high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes and, to a lesser extent, increased demand for our flat panel detectors. The flat panel detector product line has become a significant contributor to our X-ray Products business segment, and we believe this product line will continue to contribute to our growth as flat panel detectors replace traditional film and image-intensifier x-ray products in many medical, dental and veterinary applications. Net orders in the Other category, comprised of SIP, ACCEL Proton Therapy business and GTC, decreased 7% in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007, primarily due to a decrease in net orders for ACCEL proton therapy services partially offset by an increase in SIP net orders. The 139% growth in net orders in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 in the Other category was driven by (i) the strong growth in net orders for our SIP Linatron x-ray accelerators for cargo screening and border protection 71 Table of Contents and for replacements of older products for industrial inspection and non-destructive testing and (ii) new orders received for ACCEL proton therapy services. We are now seeing wider deployment of our Linatron x-ray accelerators for cargo screening and border protection and are optimistic about the long-term potential of our SIP business. However, orders for our SIP products may be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with our OEM customers in a short period and then may not place any orders for a long time thereafter. Also, while we believe there is a promising market for proton therapy systems, the market for proton therapy treatment is still developing, and we expect great variability in the demand for these products due to the large scale of the related construction projects, the complexity of project financing and the resulting longer customer decision cycles when compared with our Oncology Systems business. Since we currently will not book these orders until contingencies are eliminated, we do not expect to book an order for a proton therapy system in the short term. Given the heavy reliance of customers of this business on credit and large-scale project financing, this business may be the most vulnerable to general economic turmoil and contraction in credit markets. In any given period, orders growth in either North America or international regions, or both, could fluctuate because of the high dollar amount of individual orders. The timing of sales and revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedules and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products although the sales and revenue recognition cycles are usually shorter for some types of orders, such as upgrades ( i.e., the addition of new features or accessories to existing equipment). Thus, orders in any quarter or period may not be directly correlated to the level of sales or revenues in any particular future quarter or period. Moreover, as the overall mix of net orders includes a greater proportion of software products and newly introduced Oncology Systems products, which typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance, the average time period within which orders convert into sales could lengthen and our revenue in a specific period could be lower as a result. Discontinued Operations In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, we approved a plan to sell Research Instruments to focus exclusively on the development of our ACCEL Proton Therapy business. In accordance with the provisions of SFAS 144, Research Instruments became an asset group held for sale in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008. Accordingly, we have segregated the net assets and operating results of Research Instrument from continuing operations on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and in our Consolidated Statement of Earnings for all periods presented. Research Instruments was previously included in the Other category. Revenues from Research Instruments were $35 million and $22 million for fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively. Net loss from Research Instruments increased from $3 million in fiscal year 2007 to $16 million in fiscal years 2008, which included a charge of $3 million for the impairment of long-lived assets and goodwill impairment. See Note 15 Discontinued Operations and Assets Held for Sale to the Consolidated Financial Statements for detailed discussion. Backlog At September 26, 2008, we had a backlog of $1.9 billion, an increase of 14% compared to September 28, 2007. Our Oncology Systems backlog at September 26, 2008 increased by 13% from September 28, 2007, including a 16% increase for North America and a 9% increase for international regions. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses and fund continuing operations. Our sources of cash include operations, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases, borrowings and interest 72 Table of Contents income. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. Because the Research Instruments business cash flows were not material for any period presented, we have not segregated them from continuing operations on our statements of cash flows and the discussion herein. Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: (In millions) September 26, 2008 September 28, 2007 Increase Cash and cash equivalents $ 397 $ 263 $ 134 Our cash and cash equivalents increased $134 million from $263 million at September 28, 2007 to $397 million at September 26, 2008. The increase in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to $372 million of cash generated from operating activities, $129 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases, and $42 million of cash provided by the excess tax benefits from share-based compensation. These increases were partially offset by cash used for the repurchase of VMS common stock of $262 million, capital expenditures of $81 million, net repayments under line of credit agreements of $41 million and the repayment of bank borrowings of $9 million. In addition, the effects of exchange rate changes in fiscal year 2008 resulted in a decrease in cash and cash equivalents of $8 million. At September 26, 2008, we had approximately $24 million or 6% of total cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $373 million or 94% of total cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of September 26, 2008, most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. dollars. Because our cash levels in the United States are relatively low, we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other corporate purposes. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2008 2007 2006 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 372 $ 300 $ 202 Investing activities (88 ) (56 ) (12 ) Financing activities (142 ) (240 ) (156 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (8 ) (13 ) (5 ) Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 134 $ (9 ) $ 29 Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006 were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $372 million in fiscal year 2008, compared to $300 million and $202 million in fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively. The $72 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 was primarily driven by an increase of $40 million in net earnings, a net change of $22 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and an increase in non-cash items of $10 million. 73 Table of Contents The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2008 were deferred revenues, advance payments from customers, accounts receivable, inventories and prepaid expenses and other current assets as follows: Deferred revenues increased by $40 million primarily due to timing of revenue recognized based on customer acceptance of our Oncology Systems products and the increase in Oncology Systems product revenues. Advance payments from customers increased $23 million due to increased orders. Accounts receivables decreased by $22 million due to strong collection performance in fiscal year 2008. Inventories increased by $56 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2009 in all of our businesses. Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased by $37 million primarily due to estimated tax payments made during fiscal year 2008 and the overall growth of our business operations. The $98 million increase in net cash from operating activities in fiscal year 2007 from fiscal year 2006 was driven by a net change of $35 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and a net increase in non-cash items of $68 million and non-cash net earnings from discontinued operations in fiscal year 2006 of $1 million, partially offset by a decrease in net earnings of $6 million. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2007 were inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, deferred revenues and advance payments from customers. Inventories increased by $30 million primarily due to higher productions to meet anticipated customer demands for products in all of our businesses. Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased by $13 million due to overall growth of our business operations. Deferred revenues decreased by $16 million due to higher amount of revenues recognized based on customer acceptance of our Oncology Systems products and the recognition of a portion of revenues associated with certain products that enable IGRT upon shipment beginning in the second quarter of fiscal year 2007, rather than deferring 100% of the revenues until customer acceptance. Advance payments from customers increased by $35 million due to increased orders and lower revenue growth in Oncology Systems. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments and customer acceptance, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax and other payments. For additional discussion, please refer to Risk Factors in Item 1A. Investing activities used $88 million of net cash in fiscal year 2008, $56 million in fiscal year 2007 and $12 million in fiscal year 2006. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment was $81 million in fiscal year 2008, compared to $64 million and $41 million in fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively. In fiscal year 2008, we also invested $8 million in a privately held company. In fiscal year 2007, we used cash of $27 million to acquire ACCEL and $21 million to acquire BIR. We also made a $4 million earn-out payment to Mitsubishi Electric Co., or MELCO, in fiscal year 2007. In fiscal years 2007 and 2006, we invested $25 million and $12 million, respectively, in dpiX Holding for the construction of a manufacturing facility in Colorado. Our net proceeds from maturities of marketable securities were $94 million and $45 million during fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively. We did not hold any marketable securities in fiscal year 2008. 74 Table of Contents Financing activities used net cash of $142 million in fiscal year 2008 compared to $240 million and $156 million in fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively. In fiscal year 2008, we used $262 million for the repurchases of common stock, compared to $319 million in fiscal year 2007 and $271 million in fiscal year 2006. We used $41 million to repay borrowings under our credit facilities in fiscal year 2008. In fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, we used $9 million, $15 million and $3 million, respectively, in the repayment of bank borrowings. In fiscal year 2007, we also used $12 million to repurchase the 35% ownership interest in our Japanese subsidiary from MELCO. Cash used for financing activities in fiscal years 2008 and 2006 also includes $1 million and $8 million (the value of withheld shares), respectively, used to satisfy employee tax withholding obligations when restricted performance share awards and restricted common stock vested. These uses were partially offset by cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $129 million, $45 million and $74 million in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively, as well as cash provided by excess tax benefits from share-based compensation of $42 million in fiscal year 2008, $20 million in fiscal year 2007 and $52 million in fiscal year 2006. In fiscal year 2007, we also borrowed $41 million in net cash from our credit facility. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 3.4% of revenues in fiscal year 2009. During fiscal year 2008, we had a $100 million unsecured revolving credit facility with Bank of America, N.A., or the BofA Credit Facility, to support general corporate purposes, including working capital, capital expenditures, permitted acquisitions and other lawful corporate purposes. The BofA Credit Facility would have expired, on July 27, 2009 but was amended and restated subsequent to the end of fiscal year 2008 (see below discussion regarding the amended and restated $150 million revolving credit facility with Bank of America, N.A.). Borrowings under the BofA Credit Facility accrued interest either (i) based on the London InterBank Offered Rate, or LIBOR, plus a margin of 0.45% to 0.70% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and earnings before interest, tax and depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA, or (ii) based upon a base rate of either the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or BofA announced prime rate, whichever is greater, plus a margin of 1.75% to 2.25% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA, depending upon our instructions to BofA. The BofA Credit Facility contained customary affirmative and negative covenants for facilities of this type. We also agreed to maintain certain financial covenants relating to (i) leverage ratios involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA, (ii) liquidity and (iii) consolidated assets. As of September 26, 2008, we were in compliance with all covenants and there were no outstanding balances under the BofA Credit Facility. In May 2008, our Japanese subsidiary, or VMS KK, entered into an agreement with BofA, or the Japanese BofA Credit Facility, providing for a revolving credit facility that enabled VMS KK to borrow in Japanese Yen up to a maximum amount equivalent to $30 million. On November 10, 2008, the Japanese BofA Credit Facility was terminated. Borrowings under the Japanese BofA Credit Facility could be used by VMS KK for working capital, capital expenditures and other lawful corporate purposes. VMS guaranteed the payment of the outstanding balance under the Japanese BofA Credit Facility. Borrowings under the Japanese BofA Credit Facility accrued interest based on the basic loan rate announced by the Bank of Japan plus a margin customary for this type of facility based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA. Interest rates on advances were adjustable daily. As of September 26, 2008, there was no outstanding balance under the Japanese BofA Credit Facility. On November 10, 2008, we amended and restated our revolving credit facility with Bank of America, N.A., the Amended BofA Credit Facility. We increased the line of credit to $150 million and secured a portion of the facility with a pledge of stock issued by certain of our present and future subsidiaries that are deemed to be material subsidiaries under the terms of the Amended BofA Credit Facility. As of November 10, 2008, we have pledged to BofA 65% of the voting shares that we hold in Varian Medical 75 Table of Contents Systems Nederland B.V., a wholly-owned subsidiary. The Amended BofA Credit Facility may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, permitted acquisitions and other lawful corporate purposes. The Amended BofA Credit Facility will expire, if not extended by mutual agreement of us and Bank of America, N.A., on November 10, 2011. Borrowings under the Amended BofA Credit Facility accrue interest either (i) based on LIBOR plus a margin of 1.25% to 1.50% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA, or (ii) based upon a base rate of either the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or BofA announced prime rate, whichever is greater, minus a margin of 0.5% to 0% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA, depending upon our instructions to BofA. We may select borrowing periods of one, two, three or six months for advances based on the LIBOR rate. Interest rates on advances based on the base rate are adjustable daily. As of November 11, 2008, there was no outstanding balance under the Amended BofA Credit Facility. The Amended BofA Credit Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for facilities of this type. We have also agreed to maintain certain financial covenants relating to (i) leverage ratios involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA, (ii) liquidity and (iii) consolidated assets. For further discussion regarding our credit facilities, please refer to Note 6 Credit Facilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Total debt as a percentage of total capital decreased to 3.8% at September 26, 2008 compared to 9.9% at September 28, 2007 largely due to the repayments of outstanding balances under the credit facilities during fiscal year 2008. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities increased to 1.81 to 1 at September 26, 2007 from 1.50 to 1 at September 28, 2007 primarily due to the increase in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2008. Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements through fiscal year 2009. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to repurchase our common stock, make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business and invest in advancing our systems and processes. Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable days sales outstanding, or DSO, were 74 days at September 26, 2008 compared to 88 days at September 28, 2007. Our accounts receivable and DSO are primarily impacted by timing of product shipments, collections performance, payment terms and mix of revenues from different regions. As of September 26, 2008, less than 1% of our accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with extended payment terms with more than one year. Stock Repurchase Program During fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, we paid $262 million, $319 million and $271 million, respectively, to repurchase 5,110,000 shares, 7,000,000 shares and 5,395,100 shares, respectively, of VMS common stock under various Board of Directors authorizations. All shares that have been repurchased have been retired. As of September 26, 2008, 5,890,000 shares of VMS common stock remained available for repurchase under an authorization that expires on December 31, 2008. On November 17, 2008, we announced that our Board of Directors had authorized the repurchase of an additional 8,000,000 shares of our common stock from January 1, 2009 through December 31, 2009. 76 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of September 26, 2008 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Fiscal Year 2009 Fiscal Years 2010 - 2011 Fiscal Years 2012 - 2013 Beyond Total Long term debt(1) $ 8.0 $ 14.5 $ 11.6 $ 6.3 $ 40.4 Interest obligation on long term debt 2.6 3.6 1.3 0.3 7.8 Operating Leases(2) 15.2 20.0 11.2 9.6 56.0 Total(3) $ 25.8 $ 38.1 $ 24.1 $ 16.2 $ 104.2 (1) At September 26, 2008, we had long-term debt of $40.4 million. Long-term debt, including current maturities, decreased $9 million from September 28, 2007 due to principal repayments. The fixed interest rates on the outstanding debt on this date ranged from 6.70% to 7.58% with a weighted average interest rate of 6.88%. As of September 26, 2008, land and buildings with a carrying amount of $14.4 million were pledged as collateral against certain loans we assumed related to purchases of land and buildings in Las Vegas. The remaining unsecured loan agreements contain certain covenants relating to loan prepayment, future borrowings and dividend payments. We have also agreed to maintain covenants relating to working capital and operations results. During fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006, the Company was in compliance with all restrictive covenants of the unsecured term loan agreements. For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 5 Long-term Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) We lease office space and have entered into other lease commitments in North America as well as various locations in Europe, Asia, Australia and South America. Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases as of September 26, 2008. (3) As a result of the adoption of FIN 48, we reclassified unrecognized tax benefits to long-term income taxes payable, which is included in Other long-term liabilities in fiscal year 2008. Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of September 26, 2008, our liability for uncertain tax positions was $89.5 million and we do not anticipate payment of these amounts in the next twelve months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of future payments related to uncertain tax positions; therefore, the liability for uncertain tax positions has been excluded from the table above. We have also excluded obligations connected with our pension and post-retirement plans as they are not contractually fixed as to timing and amount. See Note 9 Retirement Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion of these benefit plans. In October 2008, to support the growth in our operations and our longer term objective of co-locating our operations, we consummated an agreement with VI for their surrender to us, for $21 million to be paid over a two-year period, of their sublease of a building containing approximately 210,000 square feet of floor space and the related leasehold interest for the land, which extends to 2056, located adjacent to our corporate headquarter in Palo Alto, California. Contingencies We are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world regulating the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances that do or may create increased costs for some of our operations. Although we follow procedures that we consider appropriate under existing regulations, 77 Table of Contents these procedures can be costly and we cannot completely eliminate the risk of contamination or injury from these materials, and, in the event of such an incident, we could be held liable for any damages that result. In addition, we could be assessed fines or penalties for failure to comply with environmental laws and regulations. These costs and any future violations or liability under environmental laws or regulations could have a material adverse effect on our business. In addition, we may be required to incur significant additional costs to comply with future changes in existing environmental laws and regulations or new laws and regulations. For example, several countries, including many in the European Union, or EU, are requiring medical equipment manufacturers to bear some or all of the cost of product disposal at the end of a product useful life, thus creating increased costs for our operations. The EU has also adopted a directive that may require the adoption of restrictions on the use of some hazardous substances in certain of our products sold in the EU as well as providing material content information to customers and requested parties. This directive could increase costs for our operations. From the time we began operating, we handled and disposed of hazardous materials and wastes following procedures that were considered appropriate under regulations, if any, existing at the time. We also hired companies to dispose of wastes generated by our operations. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA, or third parties have named us as a potentially responsible party, or PRP, under the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended, or CERCLA, at nine sites where we, as Varian Associates, Inc., are alleged to have shipped manufacturing waste for recycling or disposal and, as a PRP we may have an obligation to reimburse the EPA or other third parties for cleanup costs at these sites. In addition, we are overseeing environmental cleanup projects and, as applicable, reimbursing third parties for cleanup activities under the direction of, or in consultation with, federal, state and/or local agencies at certain current VMS or former Varian Associates, Inc. facilities (including facilities disposed of in connection with our sale of our Electron Devices business during 1995 and the sale of our thin film systems business during 1997). Under the terms of the agreement governing the distribution of the shares, or the spin-offs, of Varian, Inc., or VI and Varian Semiconductor Equipment Associates, Inc., or VSEA, by us in 1999, VI and VSEA are each obligated to indemnify us for one-third of these environmental cleanup costs (after adjusting for any insurance proceeds realized or tax benefits recognized by us). As described below, we have accrued a total of $14.7 million at September 26, 2008 to cover our liabilities for these cleanup projects. Various uncertainties make it difficult to estimate, or determine the likelihood within a range of estimates of, the project management costs, legal costs and costs of certain third-party claims at all of the sites and facilities. In addition, for the nine sites and one of the facilities, various uncertainties make it difficult to assess the likelihood and scope of further cleanup activities or to estimate the future cost of such activities. As of September 26, 2008, we nonetheless estimated that our future exposure (net of VI and VSEA indemnification obligations) for the cleanup costs for these ten locations, as well as project management costs, legal costs and the costs of certain third party-claims for all locations ranged in the aggregate from $3.3 million to $7.3 million. Management believes that no amount in the range of estimated future costs is more probable of being incurred than any other amount in the range and therefore we have accrued $3.3 million for these cleanup projects as of September 26, 2008. The amount accrued has not been discounted to present value due to the uncertainties that make it difficult to develop a best estimate of future costs. As to all other facilities, we have gained sufficient knowledge to better estimate the scope and costs of future cleanup activities based upon formal agreements with other parties defining our future liabilities or formal cleanup plans that have either been approved by or completed in accordance with the requirements of the state or federal environmental agency with jurisdiction over the facility. As of September 26, 2008, we estimated that our future exposure (net of VI and 78 Table of Contents VSEA indemnification obligations) for the cleanup costs at these facilities, and reimbursements of third party claims for these facilities, ranged in the aggregate from $6.4 million to $37.2 million. The time frames over which these cleanup project costs are estimated vary, ranging from 1 year to 30 years as of September 26, 2008. As to each of these facilities, management determined that a particular amount within the range of estimated costs was a better estimate of the future environmental liability than any other amount within the range, and that the amount and timing of these future costs were reliably determinable. The best estimate within the range was $16.3 million at September 26, 2008. We accordingly accrued $11.4 million, which represents our best estimate of the future costs of $16.3 million discounted at 4%, net of inflation. At September 26, 2008, our reserve for environmental liabilities, based upon future environmental related costs estimated as of that date, was calculated as follows: (In millions) Recurring Costs Non-Recurring Costs Total Anticipated Future Costs Fiscal Years: 2009 $ 0.9 $ 0.9 $ 1.8 2010 0.6 0.7 1.3 2011 0.7 0.7 1.4 2012 0.7 1.2 1.9 2013 0.8 0.5 1.3 Thereafter 10.1 1.8 11.9 Total costs $ 13.8 $ 5.8 19.6 Less imputed interest (4.9 ) Reserve amount $ 14.7 Recurring costs include expenses for such tasks as ongoing operation, maintenance and monitoring of cleanup while non-recurring costs include expenses for such tasks as soil excavation and treatment, injection/monitoring well installation and other costs for soil and groundwater in situ treatment by injection, ground and surface water treatment system construction, soil and groundwater investigation, certain governmental agency costs required to be reimbursed by us, governmental agency response costs (including agency costs required to be reimbursed by the responding company), treatment system and monitoring well removal and closure, and costs to defend against and settle pending and anticipated third-party claims. When we developed the estimates above, we considered the financial strength of other potentially responsible parties. These amounts are, however, only estimates and may be revised in the future as we get more information on these projects. We may also spend more or less than these estimates. Based on current information, we believe that our reserves are adequate, but as the scope of our obligations becomes more clearly defined, these reserves (and the associated indemnification obligations of VI and VSEA) may be modified and related charges/credits against earnings may be made. We receive certain cash payments in the form of settlements and judgments from defendants, our insurers and other third parties from time to time. We have also reached an agreement with an insurance company under which the insurance company has agreed to pay a portion of our past and future environmental-related expenditures, and we, therefore, had included a $2.9 million receivable in Other assets at September 26, 2008. We believe that this receivable is recoverable because it is based on a binding, written settlement agreement with a solvent and financially viable insurance company and the insurance company has paid the claims that we have made in the past. Our present and past facilities have been in operation for many years, and over that time in the course of those operations, these facilities have used substances, that are or might be considered hazardous, and 79 Table of Contents we have generated and disposed of wastes, that are or might be considered hazardous. Therefore, it is possible that additional environmental issues may arise in the future that we cannot now predict. Acquisition-Related Commitments/Obligations When we acquired ACCEL in January 2007, ACCEL was involved in a contract-related lawsuit. Subsequent to the acquisition, we settled this lawsuit and agreed to perform under a new contract for a fixed price. From January to September 2007, we gathered information related to the expected cost of satisfying our contract commitment and completed our assessment as of September 28, 2007. As a result, the final purchase price allocation of ACCEL included a loss accrual related to this contingency of 28.3 million. If the actual costs related to the contingency exceed the estimated amount or if the estimated loss increases, the variances will be recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in the periods these variances arise. As of September 26, 2008, the actual costs incurred had been consistent with the estimated costs for the contract and the balance of the loss accrual related to this contingency was 13.0 million. We are currently engaged in arbitration to resolve a dispute under the new contract. Other Matters We are involved, from time to time, in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations, arising in the ordinary course of our business. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. We accrue amounts that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. While we cannot assure you as to the ultimate outcome of any legal proceeding or other loss contingency involving us, management does not believe any pending matter will be resolved in a manner that would have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, it is possible that a legal or other proceeding brought against us could have an impact of this nature. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The term of these indemnification arrangements is generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these agreements is unlimited. As of September 26, 2008, we have not incurred any significant costs since the spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Generally, the maximum obligation under such indemnifications is not explicitly stated and, as a result, the overall amount of these obligations cannot be reasonably estimated. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In September 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, or SFAS, No. 157, Fair Value Measurements , or SFAS 157. SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in GAAP, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. In February 2008, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position, or FSP, No. FAS 157-1, or FSP No. 157-1, and FSP No. FAS 157-2, or FSP No. 157-2. FSP No. 157-1 amends SFAS 157 to exclude 80 Table of Contents from its scope SFAS No. 13, Accounting for Leases, or SFAS 13, and other accounting pronouncements that address fair value measurements for purposes of lease classification or measurement under SFAS 13. FSP No. 157-2 delays the effective date of SFAS 157 for nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities, except for items that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis, to our first quarter of fiscal year 2010. The measurement and disclosure requirements of SFAS 157 related to financial assets and financial liabilities are effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2009. The adoption of SFAS 157 for financial assets and financial liabilities is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. We are currently assessing the impact that SFAS 157 will have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows when SFAS 157 is applied to nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 158, Employer Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R) , or SFAS 158. SFAS 158 requires us to (a) recognize a plan funded status in our statement of financial position, (b) measure a plan assets and the obligations that determine its funded status as of the end of our fiscal year and (c) recognize changes in the funded status of a defined benefit plan in the year in which the changes occur through other comprehensive income. We adopted the requirement to recognize the funded status of a defined benefit plan and the disclosure requirements in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2007. Please refer to Note 9 Retirement Plans for a discussion of the effects of adopting the recognition provisions and disclosure requirements of SFAS 158. We are not required to adopt the measurement date provisions until fiscal year 2009. Based on the evaluation to date, we do not believe the adoption of the measurement date provisions of SFAS 158 will have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In February 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities -Including an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 115 , or SFAS 159. SFAS 159 permits entities to choose to measure many financial instruments and certain other items at fair value. SFAS 159 is effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2009, and it is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141 (revised 2007), Business Combinations , or SFAS 141(R). SFAS 141(R) establishes principles and requirements for how an acquirer recognizes and measures in our financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and the goodwill acquired. SFAS 141(R) also establishes disclosure requirements to enable the evaluation of the nature and financial effects of the business combination. SFAS 141(R) is effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010. The impact of the adoption of SFAS 141(R) will depend on the nature and extent of business combinations occurring on or after the beginning of fiscal year 2010. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 160, Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements an amendment of Accounting Research Bulletin No. 51 , or SFAS 160. SFAS 160 establishes accounting and reporting standards for ownership interests in subsidiaries held by parties other than the parent s, the amount of consolidated net income attributable to the parent and to the noncontrolling interest, changes in a parent ownership interest, and the valuation of retained noncontrolling equity investments when a subsidiary is deconsolidated. SFAS 160 also establishes disclosure requirements that clearly identify and distinguish between the interests of the parent and the interests of the noncontrolling owners. SFAS 160 is effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010. We are currently assessing the potential impact, if any, SFAS 160 may have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In March 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 161, Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities , or SFAS 161 , which is intended to improve financial reporting about derivative instruments and hedging activities by requiring enhanced disclosures to enable investors to better understand their 81 Table of Contents effects on an entity financial position, financial performance and cash flows. SFAS 161 is effective for us in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009. We are currently assessing the potential impact, if any, SFAS 161 may have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In May 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 162, The Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or SFAS 162, which identifies the sources of accounting principles and the framework for selecting the principles used in the preparation of financial statements of nongovernmental entities that are presented in conformity with GAAP (the GAAP hierarchy). SFAS 162 will become effective 60 days following the SEC approval of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board amendments to AU Section 411, The Meaning of Present Fairly in Conformity With Generally Accepted Accounting Principles . We do not expect the adoption of SFAS 162 to have a material effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. 
