CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2015-11-25


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview Our operations are currently grouped into two reportable operating segments: Oncology Systems and Imaging Components. Our GTC and VPT business are reflected in the Other category because these operating segments do not meet the criteria of a reportable operating segment. The operating segments were determined based on how our Chief Executive Officer, who is our CODM, views and evaluates our operations. The CODM allocates resources to and evaluates the financial performance of each operating segment primarily based on operating earnings. Total revenues increased 2% , gross margin decreased 1.3 percentage points, net earnings attributable to Varian increased 2% , and diluted net earnings per share increased 7% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 . During fiscal year 2015, operating expenses included a $13.3 million charge for restructuring programs, as compared to fiscal year 2014 where operating expenses included a $25.1 million charge for a litigation settlement and a $7.7 million charge relating to the impairment of Augmenix. Our effective tax rate decreased to 25.7% in fiscal year 2015 from 29.7% in fiscal year 2014 . We repurchased 4.8 million shares of VMS common stock totaling $422.0 million in fiscal year 2015 . Gross orders were flat in Oncology Systems, and decreased 16% in Imaging Components in fiscal year 2015, as compared to fiscal year 2014. We also recorded gross orders of $317.2 million in the Other category in fiscal year 2015 , as compared to $120.4 million in fiscal year 2014 . Our backlog at the end of fiscal year 2015 was $3.5 billion , or 10% higher , as compared to the end of fiscal year 2014 . In order to assist with the assessment of how our underlying businesses performed, we compare the percentage change in revenues and gross orders from one period to another, excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations ( i.e. , using constant currency exchange rates). To present this information on a constant currency basis, we convert current period revenues and gross orders in currencies other than U.S. Dollars into U.S. Dollars using the comparable prior period average exchange rate. For fiscal year 2015 , the U.S. Dollar was stronger against the Euro, the Japanese Yen and other foreign currencies, as compared to fiscal year 2014 , which had a significant unfavorable impact on our revenues and gross orders. Due to the unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, total revenues and Oncology Systems gross orders were negatively impacted in fiscal year 2015 by approximately $138 million and $141 million , respectively, as compared to fiscal year 2014 . In fiscal year 2015, our total revenues and Oncology Systems gross orders both increased 6% in constant currency, as compared to fiscal year 2014 . We expect that significant fluctuations of the Euro, the Japanese Yen and other foreign currencies against the U.S. Dollar will continue to cause variability in our financial performance. Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2015, our Rest of World region was consolidated into The Americas, EMEA and APAC. The Americas includes North America (primarily United States and Canada) and Latin America (previously reported within Rest of World ). EMEA includes Europe, Russia, the Middle East, India and Africa. APAC includes Asia (previously reported separately as Asia ) and Australia (previously reported within Rest of World ). Prior years amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year's presentation. Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufactures, sells and services hardware and software products for treating cancer with conventional radiation therapy and advanced treatments such as, IMRT, IGRT, VMAT, SRS, SBRT and brachytherapy, as well as informatics software for information management, clinical knowledge exchange, patient care management, practice management and decision-making support for comprehensive cancer clinics, radiotherapy centers and medical oncology practices. Our primary goal in the Oncology Systems business is to promote the adoption of more advanced and effective cancer treatments. In our view, the fundamental market forces that drive long-term growth in our Oncology Systems business are the rise in cancer cases; technology advances and product developments that are leading to improvements in patient care; customer demand for the more advanced and effective cancer treatments that we enable; competitive conditions among hospitals and clinics to offer such advanced treatments; continued improvement in safety and cost efficiency in delivering radiation therapy; and underserved medical needs outside of the United States. Over the last few years, we have seen a greater percentage of Oncology Systems gross orders and revenues coming from emerging markets within our international region, which typically purchase lower-priced products, which generally have lower gross margin percentages, compared to developed markets. We have also seen an increased portion of gross orders and revenues coming from services and software licenses, both of which have higher gross margin percentages than our hardware products. We have also been investing a higher portion of our Oncology Systems research and development budget in software and software-related products. 48 The radiation oncology market in North America is largely characterized by replacements of older machines, with periodic increases in demand driven by the introduction of new technologies. Reimbursement rates in the United States have generally supported a favorable return on investment for the purchase of new radiotherapy equipment. While we believe that improved product functionality, greater cost-effectiveness and prospects for better clinical outcomes with new capabilities such as IMRT, IGRT and VMAT tend to drive demand for radiotherapy products, large changes in reimbursement rates or reimbursement structure can affect customer demand and cause market shifts. We do not know what impact the Affordable Care Act in the United States will have on long-term growth or demand for our products and services. We believe, however, that growth of the radiation oncology market in the United States is being impacted as customers decision-making processes are complicated by the uncertainties surrounding the Affordable Care Act and reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery, and that this uncertainty will likely continue into the next fiscal year and result in a high degree of variability of gross orders and revenues from quarter-to-quarter. We also believe that the Affordable Care Act, Accountable Care Organizations and bundled payment arrangements are causing healthcare providers to re-evaluate their business models and we are seeing increased consolidation of hospitals and clinics and more integration of systems and equipment across multi-site healthcare networks, which is impacting transaction size, timing and purchasing processes, and also contributing to the increased business variability. In the radiation oncology markets outside of North America, we expect the long-term market growth of our EMEA region will be mixed. In APAC, we expect China to lead longer term regional growth, off-setting a slower Japanese market. Our long-term outlook for Latin America remains healthy. Overall, we believe the longer-term global radiation oncology market can grow, on average and in constant currencies, in the mid-single-digit range. In September 2015, we purchased certain assets comprising a business from a sole proprietor for treatment planning software tools that will enhance both planning efficiency and treatment plan quality and allow oncologists to quickly adjust their intended dose distributions ahead of the treatment planning process. The total purchase price of the acquisition was $27.0 million . See Note 15, "Business Combinations" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. In May 2015, we entered into a strategic alliance with FlatIron to develop the next generation of cloud-based oncology informatics products, leveraging our expertise in radiation oncology and FlatIron's expertise in medical oncology. The alliance intends to enable software for an integrated cloud-based oncology information product suite. Oncology Systems total revenues were flat in fiscal year 2015 , as compared to fiscal year 2014 . Oncology Systems gross margin percentage decreased 1.0 percentage points in fiscal year 2015 from fiscal year 2014 . Oncology Systems gross orders were flat in fiscal year 2015 , as compared to fiscal year 2014 , with an increase of 3% from North America, offset by a decrease of 2% from our international regions. Imaging Components . Our Imaging Components business segment designs, manufactures, sells and services X-ray imaging components for use in a range of applications, including radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, special procedures, computed tomography, computer aided diagnostics, and industrial applications. We provide a broad range of X-ray imaging components including X-ray tubes, flat panel digital image detectors, high voltage connectors, image processing software and workstations, ionization chambers and automatic exposure control systems. Our Imaging Components business segment also designs, manufactures, sells and services security and inspection products, which include Linatron X-ray accelerators, imaging processing software and image detection products for security and inspection purposes, such as cargo screening at ports and borders and nondestructive examination in a variety of applications. We continue to view the long-term fundamental growth driver for this business to be the ongoing success of key X-ray imaging OEMs that incorporate our products into their medical diagnostic, dental, veterinary, security and industrial imaging systems. Orders and revenues for our security and inspection products have been and may continue to be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with us or our OEM customers in a short time period, and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. Our success in Imaging Components depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. A significant portion of our Imaging Components customers are outside of the United States and in fiscal year 2015 demand for Imaging Components products was negatively impacted by pricing pressures resulting from the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar. Because the products in Imaging Components are generally priced in U.S. Dollars, some customers have asked for additional discounts, delayed purchasing decisions, or considered moving to in-sourcing supply of such components, or migrating to lower cost alternatives. We expect that a strong U.S. Dollar will negatively impact demand and pricing for Imaging Component products. The market for border protection systems has slowed significantly and end customers, particularly in oil-based economies and war zones in which we have a significant customer base, are delaying system deployments or tenders and considered moving to alternative sources, resulting in a decline in the demand for security and inspection products which is expected to continue. 49 In August 2015, we closed the acquisition of Claymount, a Netherlands-based supplier of components and subsystems for X-ray imaging equipment manufacturers. We integrated Claymount into our X-ray imaging tubes and flat panel products reporting unit to enhance its ability to support a continuing industry-wide transition from analog to digital X-ray imaging. The total purchase price of the acquisition was $58.0 million . In April 2015, we completed the acquisition of 73.5% of the then outstanding shares of MeVis, a public company based in Bremen, Germany that provides image processing software and services for cancer screening. The total purchase price of the acquisition was $25.5 million . See Note 15, "Business Combinations" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. In fiscal year 2015 , Imaging Components revenues decreased 7% and gross orders decreased 16% over fiscal year 2014 . Imaging Components gross margin percentage decreased 1.2 percentage points for fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 . Other . The Other category is comprised of VPT and the operations of GTC. VPT develops, designs, manufactures, sells and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy, another form of external beam radiotherapy using proton beams, for the treatment of cancer. GTC is our scientific research facility. The Other category revenues and gross orders increased $98.5 million and $196.8 million , respectively, in fiscal year 2015 , as compared to fiscal year 2014 . This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Item 1A, Risk Factors. We discuss our results of operations below. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, impairment of investments and allowance for notes receivable, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of loss contingencies, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain, and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, see Item 1A, Risk Factors. Revenue Recognition Our revenues are derived primarily from the sale of hardware and software products, and services from our Oncology Systems, Imaging Components and VPT businesses. We recognize revenues net of any value added or sales tax and net of sales discounts. We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. The allocation of consideration in a multiple element arrangement is affected by the determination of whether any software deliverables that function together with other hardware components to deliver the hardware products essential functionality are considered as non-software products for purpose of revenue recognition. The allocation of consideration to each non-software deliverable is based on the assumptions we use to establish its selling price, which are based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of selling price, if it exists, otherwise, third-party evidence of selling price, if it exists, and, if not, on 50 estimated selling prices. In addition, the allocation of consideration to each software deliverable in a multiple element arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether VSOE of its fair value exists in these arrangements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the amounts allocated to each element could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment, readiness of customers facilities for installation, installation requirements, availability of products or customer acceptance terms. If shipments or installations are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. Service revenues include revenues from hardware service contracts, software service agreements, bundled support arrangements, paid services and trainings, and parts that are sold by the service department. Revenues allocated to service contracts are generally recognized ratably over the period of the related contracts. In addition, revenues related to proton therapy systems and proton therapy system commissioning contracts are recognized in accordance with contract accounting. We recognize contract revenues under the percentage-of-completion method which are based on contract costs incurred to date compared with total estimated contract costs. Changes in estimates of total contract revenue, total contract cost or the extent of progress towards completion are recognized in the period in which the changes in estimates are identified. Estimated losses on contracts are recognized in the period in which the loss is identified. In circumstances in which the final outcome of a contract cannot be precisely estimated but a loss on the contract is not expected, we recognize revenues under the percentage-of-completion method based on a zero profit margin until more precise estimates can be made. If and when we can make more precise estimates, revenues and costs of revenues are adjusted in the same period. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. Share-based Compensation Expense We grant restricted stock units, deferred stock units, performance units, and stock options to employees and permit employees to purchase shares under the VMS employee stock purchase plan. We value our stock options granted and the option component of the shares of VMS common stock purchased under the employee stock purchase plan using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We value our performance units using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant under both the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected terms of share-based awards and the expected price volatilities of shares of VMS common stock and peer companies that are used to assess certain performance targets over the expected term of the awards, and the expected dividend yield of shares of VMS common stock. The expected term of our stock options is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We use a blended volatility in deriving the expected volatility assumption for our stock options. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility is derived based on traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the term of the exchange-traded options to the expected terms of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options on VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we could not rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected terms of the stock options we grant. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected terms of the stock options we grant and the implied volatility of exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock. In determining the grant date fair value of our performance units, historical volatilities of shares of VMS common stock, as well as the shares of common stock of peer companies, were used to assess certain performance targets. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock awards. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate, as well as the probability that certain performance conditions that affect 51 the vesting of performance units will be achieved, and recognize expense only for those awards expected to vest. If the actual forfeiture rate and/or the actual number of performance units that vest based on achievement of performance conditions are materially different from our estimates, the share-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Except for government tenders, group purchases and orders with letters of credit in Oncology Systems and for security and inspection products, our payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Impairment of Investments and Allowance for Notes Receivable We recognize an impairment charge when the declines in the fair values of our available-for-sale investments below their cost basis are determined to be other than temporary impairments ( OTTI ). Our available-for-sale investments primarily include CPTC loans and other corporate debt securities. We monitor our available-for-sale investments for possible OTTI on an ongoing basis. When there has been a decline in fair value of a debt security below the amortized cost basis, we recognize OTTI if: (i) we have the intent to sell the security; (ii) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the entire amortized cost basis; or (iii) we do not expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We assess the fair value of the CPTC loans, which is classified in the level 3 fair value hierarchy based on the income approach by using the discounted cash flow model with key assumptions that include discount rates corresponding to the terms and risks associated with the loans to CPTC (see Note 3, "Fair Value" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). We also have investments in privately-held companies, some of which are in the startup or development stages. We monitor these investments for events or circumstances indicative of potential impairment, and we make appropriate reductions in carrying values if we determine that an impairment charge is required, based primarily on the financial condition, near-term prospects and recent financing activities of the investee. These investments are inherently risky because the markets for the technologies or products these companies are developing are typically in the early stages and may never materialize. At times, we advance notes to third parties, including our customers. We assess these notes for collectibility and regularly review them for allowance by considering internal factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the receivable balances as well as external factors such as economic conditions that may affect the note holder's ability to pay. Our ongoing consideration of all the factors described above could result in impairment charges in the future, which could adversely affect our operating results. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and on order and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to these intangibles or to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. The allocation of the purchase price from business acquisitions to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. In addition, the allocation of the purchase price of the acquired businesses to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash 52 flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for those cash flows. Should conditions differ from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The evaluation includes consideration of qualitative factors including industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and factors affecting the reporting unit. If we determine that a quantitative analysis is necessary, the impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a combination of income and market approaches. The income approach is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units and the market approach is based on a market multiple calculated for each business unit based on market data of other companies engaged in similar business. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill against the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. We have four reporting units with goodwill: (i) Oncology Systems, (ii) X-ray tubes and flat panel products, (iii) Security and inspection products, and (iv) VPT. For all four reporting units, based upon the most recent annual goodwill analysis that we performed as of the end of the third quarter of fiscal year 2015 , either step one of the impairment test was not completed based on evaluation of qualitative factors or, for those which step one was completed, the fair value was substantially in excess of carrying value. However, significant changes in our projections about our operating results or other factors could cause us to make interim assessments of impairments in any quarter that could result in some or all of the goodwill being impaired. For our VPT reporting unit in particular, which had $50.0 million in goodwill as of October 2, 2015 , our estimates as to future operating results include certain assumptions about factors that cannot be predicted with certainty, including future market conditions, revenue growth rates, and operating margins. We will continue to make assessments of impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually 12 months from installation, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Loss Contingencies From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations or other legal matters, both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties, outcomes are not predictable with assurance, and actual liabilities could significantly exceed our estimates of potential liabilities. In addition, we are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations. In connection with our past and present operations and facilities, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts. Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review these accrued balances quarterly. If we were required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. 53 Defined Benefit Pension Plans We sponsor seven defined benefit pension plans in Germany (where we have three defined benefit pension plans), Japan, Switzerland, the Philippines and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expenses and liabilities related to the aforementioned plans. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, and rate of future compensation increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expenses and liabilities. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension plan expenses we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans are primarily based on the current effective yield of long-term corporate bonds that are of high quality with satisfactory liquidity and credit rating with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. A change in the discount rate may cause the present value of benefit obligations to change significantly. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency rate fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 3, "Fair Value" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts are calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services. One year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which mature in 13 months or less, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty credit default swap rates (for net assets) or our borrowing rate (for net liabilities). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact on the valuation of our derivative instruments, as well as on our result of operations. There were no transfers of assets or liabilities between fair value measurement levels during fiscal years 2015 , 2014 and 2013 . Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. The accounting for uncertainty in income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognizing, derecognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition, derecognition and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. A tax benefit should be recognized in the first period in which it meets the more likely than not recognition threshold, and conversely, a tax benefit previously recognized should be derecognized in the first period in which new information results in a change in judgment in which the position fails to meet the recognition threshold. A benefit not previously recognized would be recognized when the tax position is effectively settled through examination, negotiation or litigation with tax authorities, or when the statute of limitations for the relevant taxing authority to examine and challenge the position has expired. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for taxes on earnings. Generally, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in the applicable tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. 54 Our foreign earnings are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our foreign subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our foreign countries, or a change in the mix of foreign countries among particular tax jurisdictions could increase or decrease our effective tax rate. Our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2015 was the 53 -week period ended October 2, 2015 , fiscal year 2014 was the 52 -week period ended September 26, 2014 , and fiscal year 2013 was the 52 -week period ended on September 27, 2013 . Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal years 2015 , 2014 and 2013 . Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2015 , 2014 and 2013 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Product $ 2,077.9 % $ 2,083.8 1 % $ 2,055.7 Service 1,021.2 6 % 966.0 9 % 887.2 Total Revenues $ 3,099.1 2 % $ 3,049.8 4 % $ 2,942.9 Product as a percentage of total revenues 67 % 68 % 70 % Service as a percentage of total revenues 33 % 32 % 30 % Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in revenues from the Other category, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components. Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from Imaging Components. Product revenues were flat in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to decreases in revenues from Imaging Components and Oncology Systems, offset by an increase in revenues from the Other category. Product revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to increases in revenues from Oncology Systems and Imaging Components, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from the Other category. Service revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems. On a constant currency basis, total revenues increased 6% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and increased 4% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 . 55 Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Americas $ 1,546.0 9 % $ 1,416.5 4 % $ 1,356.9 EMEA 886.4 (2 )% 908.5 4 % 877.2 APAC 666.7 (8 )% 724.8 2 % 708.8 Total Revenues $ 3,099.1 2 % $ 3,049.8 4 % $ 2,942.9 North America $ 1,456.5 9 % $ 1,332.5 3 % $ 1,291.8 International (1) 1,642.6 (4 )% 1,717.3 4 % 1,651.1 Total Revenues $ 3,099.1 2 % $ 3,049.8 4 % $ 2,942.9 North America as a percentage of total revenues 46 % 43 % 44 % International as a percentage of total revenues 54 % 57 % 56 % (1) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. The Americas revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to increases in revenues from the Other category and Oncology Systems, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components. The Americas revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, increases in revenues from Imaging Components and the Other category. On a constant currency basis, The Americas revenues increased by 10% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and by 5% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 . EMEA revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components, partially offset by an increase in revenues from the Other category. EMEA revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from Imaging Components, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from the Other category. On a constant currency basis, EMEA revenues increased by 8% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and by 1% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 . APAC revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to a decrease from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, decreases in revenues from Imaging Components and from the Other category. APAC revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to increases in revenues from Imaging Components, the Other category and Oncology Systems. On a constant currency basis, APAC revenues decreased by 3% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 and increased by 7% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 . The U.S. Dollar was stronger against the Euro, the Japanese Yen and other foreign currencies in fiscal year 2015 , compared to fiscal year 2014 . The U.S. Dollar was weaker against the Euro and stronger against the Japanese Yen in fiscal year 2014, compared to fiscal year 2013, such that the differences in exchange rates largely offset each other and did not have a significant impact on the overall revenues. On a constant currency basis, international revenues increased 4% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 and increased 5% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 . Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Product $ 1,356.5 (4 )% $ 1,406.0 1 % $ 1,388.9 Service 987.5 5 % 938.2 9 % 863.8 Total Oncology Systems Revenues $ 2,344.0 % $ 2,344.2 4 % $ 2,252.7 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 58 % 60 % 62 % Service as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 42 % 40 % 38 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 76 % 77 % 77 % 56 Oncology systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from hardware products as a result of strategic pricing and an unfavorable foreign currency impact, partially offset by an increase in revenues from software licenses. Oncology Systems product revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products. Oncology Systems service revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 and in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 , primarily due to increased customer adoption of service contracts as the warranty period on our TrueBeam systems expire and by an increased number of customers as the installed base of our products continues to grow. Unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate in fiscal year 2015 had a negative impact on Oncology Systems service revenues. The extra week of operations in fiscal year 2015 , compared to fiscal year 2014 , contributed to an increase of approximately $7 million in Oncology Systems service revenues. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Americas $ 1,209.3 4 % $ 1,165.5 4 % $ 1,116.9 EMEA 703.9 % 701.1 6 % 662.7 APAC 430.8 (10 )% 477.6 1 % 473.1 Total Oncology System Revenues $ 2,344.0 % $ 2,344.2 4 % $ 2,252.7 North America $ 1,128.2 4 % $ 1,088.2 3 % $ 1,058.0 International 1,215.8 (3 )% 1,256.0 5 % 1,194.7 Total Oncology System Revenues $ 2,344.0 % $ 2,344.2 4 % $ 2,252.7 North America as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues 49 % 47 % 47 % International as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues 51 % 53 % 53 % The Americas Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in service revenues, partially offset by a slight decrease in product revenues. The Americas service revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to an increase in revenues from North America, and to a lesser extent an increase in revenues from Latin America. The Americas product revenues slightly decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from hardware products in North America, mostly offset by an increase in revenues from software licenses in North America. The Americas Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to increases in both service revenues and product revenues. The Americas service revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in revenues from services in North America. The Americas product revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products in Latin America, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from software licenses in North America, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from hardware products in North America. EMEA Oncology Systems revenues were flat in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in product revenues being mostly offset by a decrease in service revenues. EMEA product revenues increased primarily due to an increase in revenues from software licenses, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from hardware products. EMEA product and service revenues were negatively impacted by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. EMEA Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to an increase in service revenues, and to a lesser extent, an increase in product revenues. EMEA product revenues increased primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from software licenses. APAC Oncology Systems revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in product revenues, partially offset by an increase in service revenues. APAC product revenues decreased primarily due to a decrease in revenues from hardware products. APAC product and service revenues were negatively impacted by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. APAC Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 , primarily due to an increase in service revenues. 57 Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the North American and international regions are impacted by regional influences, which recently have included government stimulus programs, economic and political instability in some countries, uncertainty created by health care reform (such as the excise tax on the sale of most medical devices, Medicare reimbursement rates and consolidation of free standing clinics in the United States), and different technology adoption cycles that are consistent with the gross order patterns. See further discussion of orders under Gross Orders. Imaging Components Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Product $ 583.5 (8 )% $ 637.1 3 % $ 619.9 Service 27.7 20 % 23.1 5 % 22.0 Total Imaging Components Revenues $ 611.2 (7 )% $ 660.2 3 % $ 641.9 Product as a percentage of Imaging Components revenues 95 % 97 % 97 % Service as a percentage of Imaging Components revenues 5 % 3 % 3 % Imaging Components revenues as a percentage of total revenues 20 % 22 % 22 % Imaging Components product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from our security and inspection products and to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from our X-ray flat panel and tube products. Revenues from our security and inspection products decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to delays in system deployments or tenders in which our customers participate. The market for border protection systems has slowed significantly and end customers, particularly in oil-based economies and war zones in which we have a significant customer base, are delaying system deployments or tenders and considered moving to alternative sources, resulting in a decline in the demand for security and inspection products which is expected to continue in fiscal year 2016. Revenues from our X-ray flat panel and tube products decreased primarily due to pricing pressures resulting from the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar, and the decision of a key customer to in-source some of their products that they had previously purchased from our X-ray flat panel business. These decreases in product revenues were partially offset by a $10.8 million increase in revenues from acquisitions in fiscal year 2015 . Imaging Components product revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in revenues from X-ray flat panel products, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from X-ray tube products, as customers delayed purchases due to longer tube life resulting from improvements in our X-ray tubes, and a decrease in revenues from security and inspection products. Imaging Components service revenues in fiscal years 2015 , 2014 and 2013 were primarily attributed to our security and inspection products. Imaging Components service revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a $3.8 million increase in service revenues from one of our acquisitions and in part due to the extra week of operations in fiscal year 2015 . Because sales transactions in Imaging Components are generally denominated in U.S. Dollars, fluctuations in currency exchange rates did not have a material direct impact on Imaging Components international revenues. However, revenues for Imaging Components products were negatively impacted by pricing pressures resulting from the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar against the Japanese Yen and the Euro in fiscal year 2015 , compared to fiscal year 2014 which made our products relatively more expensive as compared to non-U.S. manufacturers and to customers outside the U.S. 58 Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Americas $ 219.3 (5 )% $ 230.0 3 % $ 223.9 EMEA 155.9 (17 )% 188.1 3 % 182.3 APAC 236.0 (3 )% 242.1 3 % 235.7 Total Revenues $ 611.2 (7 )% $ 660.2 3 % $ 641.9 North America $ 210.9 (6 )% $ 223.2 3 % $ 217.7 International 400.3 (8 )% 437.0 3 % 424.2 Total Revenues $ 611.2 (7 )% $ 660.2 3 % $ 641.9 North America as a percentage of total Imaging Components revenues 34 % 34 % 34 % International as a percentage of total Imaging Components revenues 66 % 66 % 66 % The Americas Imaging Components revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to decreases in revenues from security and inspection products and X-ray tube and flat panel products. The decrease in The Americas Imaging Components revenues were partially offset by an increase in revenues from acquisitions of $6.9 million in fiscal year 2015 . The Americas Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in revenues from X-ray flat panel products, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from X-ray tube products. EMEA Imaging Components revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from security and inspection products. The decrease in EMEA Imaging Components revenues were partially offset by an increase in revenues from acquisitions of $5.6 million in fiscal year 2015 . EMEA Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to an increase in revenues from X-ray tube and flat panel products, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from security and inspection products. APAC Imaging Components revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease from X-ray flat panel products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from security and inspection products, partially offset by an increase in revenues from X-ray tube products. The decrease in APAC Imaging Components revenues were partially offset by an increase in revenues from acquisitions of $2.1 million in fiscal year 2015 . APAC Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in revenues from X-ray flat panel products, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from X-ray tube products. Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Product $ 137.9 239 % $ 40.7 (13 )% $ 46.9 Service 6.0 30 % 4.7 236 % 1.4 Total Other revenues $ 143.9 217 % $ 45.4 (6 )% $ 48.3 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 4 % 1 % 1 % Other category revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in VPT product revenues. VPT product revenues increased primarily due to the completion of the financing for the MPTC project in fiscal year 2015, which resulted in approximately $81 million of revenue recorded related to that project, and due to continued production and installation of VPT projects that are in our backlog. Other category revenues decreased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to a decrease in VPT product revenues. 59 Gross Margin Fiscal Years Dollars by segment 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 (Dollars in millions) Oncology Systems $ 998.9 (2 )% $ 1,021.1 5 % $ 976.2 Imaging Components 250.6 (10 )% 278.6 4 % 268.1 Other 33.2 n/m 2.0 (63 )% 5.4 Gross margin $ 1,282.7 (1 )% $ 1,301.7 4 % $ 1,249.7 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 42.6 % 43.6 % 43.3 % Imaging Components 41.0 % 42.2 % 41.8 % Total Company 41.4 % 42.7 % 42.5 % n/m = not meaningful Total gross margin percentage decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to decreases in margins from Imaging Components and Oncology Systems, and an increase in revenues from the Other category which has lower margins. Total gross margin percentage increased slightly in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to increases in gross margin percentages in Oncology Systems and Imaging Components, mostly offset by a decrease in the gross margin percentage in the Other category. Total product gross margin percentage was 33.1% in fiscal year 2015 , compared to 36.9% in fiscal year 2014 and 37.0% in fiscal year 2013 . Total service gross margin percentage was 58.3% in fiscal year 2015 , compared to 55.1% in fiscal year 2014 and 55.2% in fiscal year 2013 . Oncology Systems product gross margin percentage was 31.6% in fiscal year 2015 , compared to 35.6% in fiscal year 2014 and 35.7% in fiscal year 2013 . The decrease in product gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 was due to an unfavorable foreign currency impact and a shift to geographies which generally have lower margins. The decrease in product gross margin in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 was primarily due to targeted price decreases, partially offset by a favorable hardware product mix. Oncology Systems service gross margin percentage was 57.8% in fiscal year 2015 , compared to 55.5% in fiscal year 2014 and 55.7% in fiscal year 2013 . The increase in service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 was primarily due to cost containment and an increase in service revenues, partially offset by an unfavorable foreign currency impact. The decrease in service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 was primarily due to an unfavorable product mix partly offset by higher service contract volume (which lowered the costs per contract), and cost control measures in fiscal year 2014. We believe the shift of Oncology Systems revenues towards emerging markets, which typically have purchased less complex and lower-priced products compared to developed markets, will generally continue and will negatively impact Oncology Systems gross margin. We believe that the foreign currency exchange rates will continue to cause variability in our Oncology Systems gross margin. Imaging Components gross margin percentage decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to decreases in gross margin percentage from X-ray tubes and flat panel products, partially offset by an increase in gross margin percentage from security and inspection products. The decrease in gross margin percentage in our X-ray tube and flat panel products in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , was primarily due to increased pricing pressures resulting from the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar and higher material costs in X-ray tube products, partially offset by product and quality cost reductions. The increase in gross margin percentage in security and inspection products was due to a favorable product mix, partially offset by pricing pressures and significantly lower volumes in the second half of fiscal year 2015. Imaging Components gross margin percentage increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to a higher mix of flat panel sales which generally have higher margins, plus an increase in gross margin percentage in X-ray tube products, partially offset by decreases in gross margin percentages from X-ray flat panel products, security and inspection products, and services. 60 The increase in gross margin percentage in X-ray tube products during fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 was primarily due to improved quality costs. The decrease in gross margin percentage in X-ray flat panel products during the fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 was primarily due to increased pricing pressures. The decrease in gross margin percentage in our security and inspection products during fiscal year 2014, compared to fiscal year 2013 was due to customer pricing pressures and an unfavorable product mix. Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Research and development $ 245.2 4 % $ 234.8 13 % $ 208.2 As a percentage of total revenues 8 % 8 % 7 % Research and development expenses increased $10.4 million in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to increases in expenses of $10.5 million in Imaging Components and $2.4 million in the Other category, partially offset by a $2.2 million decrease in expense in Oncology Systems. The $10.5 million increase in expenses in Imaging Components was due to new product development projects and enhancement of existing products and $3.7 million in additional research and development expenses related to our acquisitions in fiscal year 2015. The $2.4 million increase in expenses from the Other category was due to an increase in development projects and headcount for our VPT business offset by a favorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated research and development expenses were translated into U.S. Dollars. The $2.2 million decrease in Oncology Systems was primarily due to a favorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated research and development expenses were translated into U.S. Dollars, which was partially offset by an increase in expense due to new product development projects and enhancement of existing products. Research and development expenses increased $26.6 million in fiscal year 2014, over fiscal year 2013 due to an increase in expenses of $21.1 million in Oncology Systems, $4.1 million in Imaging Components, and $1.4 million in the Other category. The $21.1 million increase in expenses in Oncology Systems was due to expenses relating to new product development projects and enhancement of existing products, and an unfavorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated research and development expenses for Oncology Systems were translated into U.S. Dollars. The $4.1 million increase in expenses in Imaging Components was due to new product development projects and enhancement of existing X-ray tube and flat panel products, partially offset by a decrease in expenses relating to security and inspection products. The $1.4 million increase in the Other category was due to expenses relating to new product development projects, a net increase in costs associated with increased headcount to support our growing engineering activities in VPT, and an unfavorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated research and development expenses for VPT were translated into U.S. Dollars, partially offset by a decrease in expenses due to completion of certain existing research and development projects. Selling, General and Administrative Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Selling, general and administrative $ 488.5 4 % $ 470.6 9 % $ 432.6 Litigation settlement (100 )% $ 25.1 $ Selling, general and administrative as a percentage of total revenues 16 % 15 % 15 % Litigation settlement as a percentage of total revenues 1 % Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $17.9 million in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to: a $34.5 million increase (including a $5.2 million increase in share-based compensation expense due to the timing of the equity awards) in employee-related costs largely due to an increase in headcount; and a $13.3 million restructuring charge related to our previously announced retirement and workforce reduction programs. These increases were offset by a approximately $16 million favorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated sales, general and administrative expenses were translated into U.S. Dollars; a lack of $7.7 million impairment charge of our investment in Augmenix in fiscal year 2014; and a $6.0 million decrease in bad debt expense. 61 Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $38.0 million in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to: a $32.2 million net increase (including a $3.6 million decrease in share-based compensation expense due to the timing of the equity awards) in employee-related costs largely due to an increase in headcount to support our growing business activities; a $7.7 million impairment charge of our investment in Augmenix; and a $3.7 million unfavorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated selling, general and administrative expenses were translated into U.S. Dollars. These increases were partially offset by a $9.3 million decrease in legal expenses and a $6.7 million decrease due to no restructuring charges incurred in fiscal year 2014. In addition to the above, the change in fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities decreased our selling, general and administrative expenses by $0.7 million in fiscal year 2014 and by $5.2 million in fiscal year 2013, respectively. In the second quarter of fiscal year 2014, we recorded a litigation settlement charge of $25.1 million as a result of settlement of patent litigation with University of Pittsburgh, and no such charges were recorded in fiscal years 2015 and 2013 (see Note 9, "Commitments and Contingencies" in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information). Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Interest income, net $ 5.7 70 % $ 3.3 5 % $ 3.2 Interest income, net of interest expense, increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to higher interest income generated from our loans to finance proton treatment centers, partially offset by a higher interest expense associated with increased borrowings from our credit facility. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Effective tax rate 25.7 % (4.0 )% 29.7 % 1.3 % 28.4 % Our effective tax rate decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a favorable shift in the geographic mix of earnings, including a decrease in the amount of loss from our VPT business in Germany, a jurisdiction for which we have a full valuation allowance, partially offset by the impact of a fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates. In addition, our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2015 reflected a full year benefit of the federal research and development credit, while the effective tax rate in fiscal year 2014 reflected only one quarter benefit of the credit. Our effective tax rate increased in fiscal year 2014 from fiscal year 2013 primarily due to a decrease in the benefit from the foreign rate differential. The decrease in the benefit from the foreign tax rate differential was primarily due to a fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates and our inability to recognize a tax benefit for losses in certain jurisdictions, primarily from our VPT business in Germany, a jurisdiction for which we have a full valuation allowance. In addition, our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2014 reflected only one quarter benefit of the federal research and development credit, while the effective tax rate in fiscal year 2013 reflected the full year federal research and development credit for fiscal year 2013 in addition to the three quarters retroactive reinstatement of the credit. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. See Note 14, "Taxes on Earnings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. 62 Diluted Net Earnings Per Share Fiscal Years 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Diluted net earnings per share $ 4.09 7 % $ 3.83 (4 )% $ 3.98 Diluted net earnings per share increased in fiscal year in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to share repurchases and a decrease in the effective tax rate, partially offset by a decrease in earnings before taxes. Earnings before taxes were negatively impacted by a $13.3 million charge in fiscal year 2015 relating to our restructuring programs. Diluted net earnings per share in fiscal year 2014 was negatively impacted by a litigation settlement expense of $25.1 million and an impairment charge of $7.7 million for our investment in Augmenix. Besides the increase in operating expenses, the decrease in diluted earnings per share in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 was due to an increase in our effective tax rate, partially offset by increases in revenues, gross margin, and a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to share repurchases. Gross Orders Total Gross Orders (by segment) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Oncology Systems $ 2,696.9 % $ 2,684.4 5 % $ 2,554.1 Imaging Components 605.1 (16 )% 722.5 8 % 668.2 Other 317.2 163 % 120.4 n/m 2.5 Total Gross Orders $ 3,619.2 3 % $ 3,527.3 9 % $ 3,224.8 n/m = not meaningful Gross orders are defined as the sum of new orders recorded during the period adjusted for any revisions to existing orders during the period. New orders are recorded for the total contractual amount, excluding certain pass-through items, once a written agreement for the delivery of goods or provision of services is in place and, for businesses other than VPT, when shipment of the product is expected to occur within two years, so long as any contingencies are deemed perfunctory. However, we will not record security and inspection products orders from governmental agencies with bid protest provisions until the expiration of the bid protest period. For our VPT business, we record orders when construction of the related proton therapy treatment center is reasonably expected to start within two years, but only if any contingencies are either deemed perfunctory or if the existence and nature of material contingencies is disclosed. However, we will not record VPT orders if there are major financing contingencies, if a substantial portion of the financing for the project is not reasonably assured or if customer board approval contingencies are pending. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders remain valid. Gross orders in any period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedules and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as orders for software or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance than hardware or older products. Gross orders and revenues for our security and inspection products in our Imaging Components segment have been and may continue to be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with us or with our OEM customers over a short period of time and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. Because an order for a proton therapy system can be relatively large, an order in one fiscal period will cause gross orders in our VPT business to vary significantly, making comparisons between fiscal periods more difficult. Furthermore, bid awards, primarily in our VPT business, may be subject to challenge by third parties, which can make these orders more unpredictable than other products. 63 Oncology Systems Gross Orders Gross Orders by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Americas $ 1,381.3 1 % $ 1,369.3 10 % $ 1,245.0 EMEA 826.0 % 826.2 3 % 801.1 APAC 489.6 % 488.9 (4 )% 508.0 Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders $ 2,696.9 % $ 2,684.4 5 % $ 2,554.1 North America $ 1,255.4 3 % $ 1,214.4 7 % $ 1,135.3 International 1,441.5 (2 )% 1,470.0 4 % 1,418.8 Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders $ 2,696.9 % $ 2,684.4 5 % $ 2,554.1 The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in gross orders from services and hardware products in North America, primarily offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products in Latin America and software licenses in North America. The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to increases in gross orders from software licenses and services in North America and from hardware products in Latin America, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products in North America. On a constant currency basis, The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased 1% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and increased 8% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013. EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders were flat in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in gross orders from services, offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products. EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to increases in gross orders from services, and software licenses, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products. On a constant currency basis, EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders increased 12% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and was flat in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013. APAC Oncology Systems gross orders were flat in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to increases in gross orders from services and software licenses, mostly offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products. APAC Oncology Systems gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 due to a decrease in gross orders from hardware products, partially offset by an increase in gross orders from services. On a constant currency basis, APAC Oncology Systems gross orders increased 9% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and increased 5% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013. The extra week of operations in fiscal year 2015 contributed to an increase of approximately $7 million in Oncology Systems service gross orders in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 . On a constant currency basis, overall Oncology Systems gross orders increased 6% in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , and increased 5% in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013. The trailing 12 month percentage change in gross orders for Oncology Systems at October 2, 2015 , and for the three immediately prior fiscal quarters were: October 2, 2015 July 3, 2015 April 3, 2015 January 2, 2015 Americas 1% 8% 8% 7% EMEA % (3)% (2)% 5% APAC % % (5)% 1% North America 3% 6% 6% 4% International (2)% 1% % 6% Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders % 3% 3% 5% 64 Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems gross orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations, with an overall shift of gross orders towards international regions and emerging markets. Oncology Systems gross orders are affected by foreign currency fluctuations. In addition, the availability of government programs that stimulate the purchase of healthcare products could affect the demand for our products from period to period, and could therefore make it difficult to compare our financial results. Imaging Components Gross Orders Gross Orders by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 Percent Change 2014 Percent Change 2013 Americas $ 204.9 (8 )% $ 222.1 3 % $ 214.9 EMEA 146.2 (35 )% 223.6 23 % 182.4 APAC 254.0 (8 )% 276.8 2 % 270.9 Total Imaging Components Systems Gross Orders $ 605.1 (16 )% $ 722.5 8 % $ 668.2 North America $ 195.8 (9 )% $ 216.2 4 % $ 208.6 International 409.3 (19 )% 506.3 10 % 459.6 Total Imaging Components Systems Gross Orders $ 605.1 (16 )% $ 722.5 8 % $ 668.2 The Americas Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from X-ray flat panel products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in gross orders from X-ray tube products, partially offset by an increase in gross orders from security and inspection products. The Americas Imaging Components gross orders increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in gross orders from X-ray flat panel products. EMEA Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from security and inspection products, and to a lesser extent a decrease in gross orders from X-ray tube products. EMEA Imaging Components gross orders increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013, primarily due to an increase in gross orders from security and inspection products and to a lesser extent an increase in gross orders from X-ray flat panel products. APAC Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from X-ray tube products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in gross orders from security and inspection products. APAC Imaging Components gross orders increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to an increase in gross orders from X-ray flat panel products, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders from X-ray tube products. The difference in currency exchange rates between the U.S. Dollar and foreign currencies in fiscal year 2015 , as compared to fiscal year 2014 , did not have a material impact on Imaging Components international orders because orders in Imaging Components are generally denominated in U.S. Dollars. However, overall, gross orders from Imaging Components in fiscal year 2015 , as compared to fiscal year 2014 , were negatively impacted by the pricing pressures resulting from strengthening of the U.S. Dollar against the Japanese Yen and the Euro. Other Gross Orders The Other category gross orders increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to VPT recording six proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2015. The Other category gross orders increased in fiscal year 2014 over fiscal year 2013 primarily due to VPT recording three proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2014, compared to no proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2013. Backlog Backlog is the accumulation of all gross orders for which revenues have not been recognized and are still considered valid. Backlog also includes a small portion of billed service contracts that are included in deferred revenue. Backlog is stated at 65 historical foreign currency exchange rates and revenue is released from backlog at current exchange rates, with any difference recorded as a backlog adjustment. Backlog at October 2, 2015 was $3.5 billion , including approximately $345 million in VPT backlog, which was an increase of 10% over the backlog at September 26, 2014 . Our Oncology Systems backlog at October 2, 2015 was 7% higher than the backlog at September 26, 2014 , which reflected an 8% increase for the international region and a 5% increase for North America. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders in the backlog remain valid. Aged orders that are not expected to be converted to revenues are deemed dormant and are reflected as a reduction in the backlog amounts in the period identified. Backlog adjustments are comprised of dormancies, cancellations, foreign currency exchange rate adjustments, backlog acquired from acquisitions, and other adjustments. In fiscal years 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , our backlog adjustments were $214.9 million , $176.3 million and $257.3 million , respectively. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses or make other investments or loans, repurchase shares of VMS common stock, and fund continuing operations and capital expenditures. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases and investment income. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: October 2, September 26, (In millions) 2015 2014 Increase (Decrease) Cash and cash equivalents $ 845.5 $ 849.3 $ (3.8 ) The decrease in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2015 compared to fiscal year 2014 was due to $422.0 million of cash used for the repurchase of shares of VMS common stock, $195.0 million used for repayments under the credit facility agreement, $95.3 million used for business acquisitions net of cash acquired and $91.4 million used for purchases of property, plant and equipment. These decreases were mostly offset by $469.6 million in cash provided by operating activities, $145.0 million in cash borrowed under our credit facility agreement, $108.6 million in net cash borrowed under our credit facility agreements with maturities less than 90 days and $91.0 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. At October 2, 2015 , we had approximately $18.4 million , or 2% , of cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $827.1 million , or 98% , of cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and a portion of this amount could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of October 2, 2015 , most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. Dollars and were primarily held as bank deposits. In addition to cash flows generated from operations, a significant portion of which are generated in the United States, we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, VMS share repurchases, acquisitions, and other corporate purposes. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2015 2014 2013 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 469.6 $ 449.0 $ 455.2 Investing activities (210.9 ) (133.1 ) (96.3 ) Financing activities (276.7 ) (595.5 ) 51.6 Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 14.2 11.0 2.8 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ (3.8 ) $ (268.6 ) $ 413.3 66 Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2015 , 2014 , and 2013 , were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $469.6 million in fiscal year 2015 , compared to $449.0 million in fiscal year 2014 . The $20.6 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2015 compared to fiscal year 2014 was driven primarily by an increase of $23.1 million in the net change from operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and an increase of $8.3 million in net earnings, partially offset by a decrease of $10.8 million in non-cash items. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2015 were as follows: Accounts receivable increased $79.4 million primarily due to longer payment cycles and higher revenues in VPT. Inventories increased $41.6 million due to an increase in inventories in Imaging Components and Oncology Systems in anticipation of future demand, partially offset by a decrease in inventories in VPT as a result of the recognition of revenue relating to MPTC. Deferred revenue and advance payments from customers increased $71.6 million due to receipts of down payments for orders for which revenues have not been recognized and due to the nature of contracts and timing of customer acceptances primarily in Oncology Systems. The $6.2 million decrease in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2014 compared to fiscal year 2013 was driven primarily by a decrease of $34.5 million in net earnings and a decrease of $2.3 million in net change from operating assets and liabilities (working capital items), partially offset by an increase of $30.6 million in non-cash items. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2014 were as follows: Accounts receivable increased $74.5 million due to higher revenues and longer payment cycles. Inventories increased $43.3 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2015 mainly in VPT. Deferred revenue and advance payments from customers increased $31.9 million due to receipts of down payments for VPT and Oncology Systems orders for which revenues have not been recognized. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. See Item 1A, Risk Factors. Investing activities used $210.9 million of net cash in fiscal year 2015 , compared to $133.1 million of net cash used in fiscal year 2014 and $96.3 million of net cash used in fiscal year 2013 . Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment increased to $91.4 million in fiscal year 2015 , compared to $89.6 million in fiscal year 2014 and $76.3 million in fiscal year 2013 , representing our continued investment to expand our global infrastructure. During fiscal year 2015 , we used $95.3 million of net cash primarily for the acquisitions of Claymount, certain assets from a sole proprietor and MeVis and $23.7 million for notes receivable. During fiscal year 2014, we used $45.2 million to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC, $31.5 million for acquisitions of businesses and $5.5 million to fund notes receivable, partially offset by $38.1 million received from the sale of a portion of our loan to CPTC. During fiscal year 2013, we used $10.0 million to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC and used $10.0 million to fund a note receivable. Financing activities used $276.7 million of net cash in fiscal year 2015 , compared to $595.5 million of net cash used in fiscal year 2014 and $51.6 million of net cash provided in fiscal year 2013 . In fiscal year 2015 , we used $422.0 million of net cash for the repurchase of VMS common stock compared to $627.7 million in fiscal year 2014 and $419.9 million in fiscal year 2013 . In fiscal years 2015 and 2014 , we repaid $195.0 million and $68.8 million of our credit facility agreement and other bank borrowings, as compared to no repayments in fiscal year 2013. In fiscal year 2013, net repayments totaled $155.0 million under the credit facility agreements with maturities less than 90 days. Cash provided by financing activities included cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $91.0 million , $99.7 million and $129.6 million in fiscal years 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , respectively. We had $145.0 million in borrowings under our credit facility agreement and $108.6 million in net borrowings under 67 credit facility agreements with maturities less than 90 days in fiscal year 2015. We borrowed $500.0 million under our credit facility agreement in fiscal year 2013. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 3% of revenues in fiscal year 2016. In August 2013, we entered into a five-year credit agreement (the Credit Agreement ) with certain lenders and BofA as administrative agent that provides for (i) a five-year term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $500 million (the 2013 Term Loan Facility ) and (ii) a five-year revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $300 million (the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility and collectively with the 2013 Term Loan Facility, the 2013 Credit Facility ). The 2013 Revolving Credit Facility also includes a $50 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and permits swing line loans of up to $25 million. The aggregate commitments under the 2013 Term Loan Facility may be increased by up to $100 million and the aggregate commitments under the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility may be increased by up to $200 million, subject to certain conditions being met, including lender approval. We may prepay, reduce or terminate the commitments without penalty. The 2013 Credit Facility contains provisions that limit our ability to pay cash dividends. The proceeds of the 2013 Credit Facility may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, Company share repurchases, acquisitions and other corporate purposes. At October 2, 2015 , borrowings under the 2013 Term Loan Facility totaled $387.5 million with a weighted average interest rate of 1.32% . At September 26, 2014, borrowings under the 2013 Term Loan Facility totaled $437.5 million with a weighted average interest rate of 1.28%. At October 2, 2015 , there was $90.0 million outstanding on the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 1.57% . At September 26, 2014, there were no amounts outstanding under the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility. We were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement for all the periods presented within these consolidated financial statements. In November 2015, we amended the Credit Agreement to increase the aggregate commitments under the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility from $300 million to $500 million. In addition, our Japanese subsidiary ( VMS KK ) has an unsecured uncommitted credit agreement with Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation that enables VMS KK to borrow and have outstanding at any given time a maximum of 3 billion Japanese Yen (the Sumitomo Credit Facility ). In February 2015, the Sumitomo Credit Facility was extended and will expire in February 2016. At October 2, 2015 , there was $18.4 million outstanding under the Sumitomo Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 0.63% . At September 26, 2014, there were no outstanding balances under the Sumitomo Credit Facility. See Note 7, "Borrowings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion regarding the 2013 Credit Facility and the Sumitomo Credit Facility. In April 2014, we paid the outstanding balance of $6.3 million for the principal amount and accrued interest of our unsecured term loan. The following table provides additional information regarding our short-term borrowings (excluding current maturities of long-term debt): Fourth Quarter of Fiscal Year 2015 Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2015 2014 2013 Amount outstanding (at end of period) $ 108.4 $ 108.4 $ $ Weighted average interest rate (at end of period) 1.41 % 1.41 % % % Average amount outstanding (during period) $ 142.5 $ 104.5 $ 8.2 $ 167.8 Weighted average interest rate (during period) 1.44 % 1.48 % 0.72 % 1.45 % Maximum month-end amount outstanding during period $ 139.2 $ 140.0 $ 29.6 $ 231.9 Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for the next 12 months and into the foreseeable future. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make 68 strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes, repurchase VMS common stock and fund our loan commitments and other strategic investments. Total debt as a percentage of total capital increased to 22.3% at October 2, 2015 from 21.3% at September 26, 2014 primarily due to increased borrowings under our 2013 Credit Facility. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities decreased to 1.83 to 1 at October 2, 2015 from 2.08 to 1 at September 26, 2014. Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable days sales outstanding ( DSO ) was 90 days at October 2, 2015 compared to 85 days at September 26, 2014. Excluding VPT, DSO was 82 days at October 2, 2015 compared to 80 days at September 26, 2014. Our accounts receivable and DSO are impacted by a number of factors, primarily including the timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, collections performance, payment terms, the mix of revenues from different regions and the effects of continued economic instability. As of October 2, 2015 , approximately 6% of our accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with remaining terms of more than one year. Share Repurchase Program During fiscal years 2015, 2014 and 2013, we repurchased 4,824,849 , 7,750,000 and 6,000,000 shares, respectively, of VMS common stock under our repurchase programs. The aggregate amount of these repurchases totaled $422.0 million , $624.0 million and $423.7 million in fiscal years 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , respectively. The repurchased shares include shares of VMS common stock repurchased under various accelerated share repurchase agreements. All shares that were repurchased have been retired. In August 2014, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of 6,000,000 shares of VMS common stock from August 15, 2014 through December 31, 2015 . As of October 2, 2015 , 1,425,151 shares of VMS common stock remained available for repurchase under the August 2014 authorization. In November 2015, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional 8,000,000 shares of VMS common stock through December 31, 2016 . For more details see Note 11, "Stockholders' Equity" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of October 2, 2015 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period Fiscal Year Fiscal Years Fiscal Years (In millions) 2016 2017-2018 2019-2020 Beyond Total Long-term debt (1) (including current maturities) $ 50.0 $ 337.5 $ $ $ 387.5 Interest obligation on long-term debt (including current maturities) (2) 4.9 7.4 12.3 Operating leases (3) 22.2 31.4 16.5 20.9 91.0 Purchase obligations (4) 24.8 14.8 1.5 41.1 Defined benefit pension plans (5) 7.6 7.6 Total (6) $ 109.5 $ 391.1 $ 18.0 $ 20.9 $ 539.5 (1) For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 7, "Borrowings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Interest on long-term debt has been calculated based on the interest rate applicable as of October 2, 2015 . (3) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases as of October 2, 2015 . (4) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, are legally binding and non-cancellable. Purchase obligations do not include agreements that are cancellable without penalty. 69 (5) As further described in Note 10, "Retirement Plans" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, our post-retirement benefit plan and two defined benefit pension plans are not presented in the table above as they are not material. As of October 2, 2015 , the remaining defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $20.4 million . Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and other economic and demographic assumptions the potential for changes in legislation in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions necessary to fund our defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (6) The following items are not included in the table above: Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of October 2, 2015, our total liability for uncertain tax positions was $44.5 million, of which we do not anticipate a payment in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of the remainder of future payments related to uncertain tax positions. See a detailed discussion in Note 14, "Taxes on Earnings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As further described in Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of October 2, 2015, we had accrued $8.8 million for environmental remediation liabilities. The amount accrued represents estimates of anticipated future costs and the timing and amount of actual future environmental remediation costs may vary as the scope of our obligations becomes more clearly defined. In connection with the acquisitions of businesses in prior years, we entered into agreements which include provisions to make additional consideration payments upon the achievement of certain milestones by the acquired businesses. As of October 2, 2015, the accrual for potential contingent consideration under these agreements was $4.1 million. As further described in Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of October 2, 2015, our outstanding commitment under the loan to MPTC was $22.8 million, to be paid in four installments of $5.7 million each on June 30, 2016, September 30, 2016, December 30, 2016 and March 31, 2017. As of October 2, 2015, our remaining commitment under the loan to the New York Proton Center ("NYPC") was $72.8 million, to be paid primarily through fiscal year 2018. As further described in Note 6, Related Party Transactions of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of October 2, 2015, we had an estimated fixed cost commitments of $4.4 million related to dpiX's amended agreement for the first quarter of fiscal year 2016. The fixed cost commitment for future periods will be determined and approved by the dpiX board of directors at the beginning of each calendar year. As further described in Note 15, "Business Combinations" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, subsequent to fiscal year 2015, in October 2015, we committed to grant the noncontrolling shareholders of MeVis: (1) an annual recurring net compensation of 0.95 per MeVis share and (2) a put right for their MeVis shares at 19.77 per MeVis share. As of October 2, 2015, noncontrolling share holders together held approximately 482,000 shares of MeVis, representing 26.5% of the outstanding shares. Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Other Matters From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. See Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies Other Matters of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. 70 Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The terms of these indemnification arrangements are generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is unlimited. As of October 2, 2015 , we have not incurred any significant costs since the Spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Recent Accounting Standards or Updates Not Yet Effective In November 2015, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to balance sheet classification of deferred taxes. The amendment requires that deferred tax liabilities and assets be classified as noncurrent in the statement of financial position, thereby simplifying the current guidance that requires an entity to separate deferred liabilities and assets into current and noncurrent amounts. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2018. Early adoption is permitted. The amendment can be adopted either prospectively or retrospectively. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this guidance to our consolidated financial statements. In September 2015, the FASB issued a new accounting standard that eliminates the requirement to restate prior period financial statements for measurement period adjustments following a business combination. The new guidance requires that the cumulative impact of a measurement period adjustment including the impact on prior periods be recognized in the reporting period in which the adjustment is identified along with additional disclosures. The new guidance will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017. The new guidance is required to be adopted prospectively with early adoption permitted for financial statements that have not yet been made available for issuance. The new guidance is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In July 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to inventory measurement. The amendment requires inventory measured using first-in, first-out (FIFO) or average cost to be subsequently measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value, thereby simplifying the current guidance that requires an entity to measure inventory at the lower of cost or market. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2018 and is required to be adopted prospectively. Early adoption is permitted. The new guidance is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In April 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to internal use software. The amendment clarifies that the software license element of a cloud computing arrangements should be accounted for consistent with the acquisition of other software licenses. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017. Early adoption is permitted. The amendment can be adopted either prospectively or retrospectively. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this guidance to our consolidated financial statements. In April 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to retirement benefits. The amendment provides a practical expedient that permits an entity with a fiscal year-end that does not coincide with a month-end to measure defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the entity fiscal year-end and apply that practical expedient consistently from year to year. The amendment also provides a practical expedient that permits an entity that has a significant event in an interim period to remeasure defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the date of the significant event. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017 and is required to be applied on a retrospective basis. Early adoption is permitted. The amendment is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In March 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to presentation of debt issuance costs. The amendment requires that debt issuance costs related to a recognized debt liability be presented in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of that debt liability. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017. Early adoption is not permitted. The amendment is required to be applied on a retrospective basis. In August 2015, the FASB further clarified that entities are permitted to defer and present debt issuance costs related to line-of- 71 credit arrangements as assets. These amendments are not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In February 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to consolidation. The amendment modifies the analysis that a reporting entity must perform to determine whether it should consolidate certain types of legal entities. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017. Early adoption is permitted. The amendment permits the use of either the retrospective or cumulative effect transition method. The amendment is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In June 2014, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to stock-based compensation. The amendment requires that a performance target that could be achieved after the requisite service period be treated as a performance condition that affects vesting, rather than a condition that affects the grant-date fair value. The new guidance will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017. Early adoption is permitted. The amendment can be applied on a prospective basis to all share-based payments granted or modified on or after the effective date. Entities will also be provided an option to apply the guidance on a modified retrospective basis to existing awards. The amendment is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In May 2014, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to revenue recognition. The amendment sets forth a single, comprehensive revenue recognition model for all contracts with customers to improve comparability. The amendment requires revenue recognition to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. In June 2015, the FASB approved a one-year deferral of the amendment. The new guidance will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2019, with early adoption permitted, but not before the first quarter of fiscal year 2018. The amendment can be applied either retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented ( i.e. , full retrospective adoption) or with the cumulative effect of initially applying the update recognized at the date of the initial application ( i.e. , modified retrospective adoption) along with additional disclosures. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this guidance to our consolidated financial statements. 
