CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2016-11-23


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Separation On May 23, 2016, we announced our intention to separate our Imaging Components business from the remainder of our businesses through a pro rata distribution of the common stock of a new entity, named Varex Imaging Corporation ( Varex ). Varex was incorporated in Delaware on July 18, 2016 for the purpose of holding the assets and liabilities associated with the Imaging Components business. Following the separation and distribution, Varex will be an independent, publicly traded company. The distribution is subject to certain conditions, including, among others, final approval of the Varian board of directors, receipt of one or more opinions with respect to certain U.S. federal income tax matters relating to the separation and the SEC declaring the effectiveness of the registration statement. There can be no assurance regarding the ultimate timing of the proposed transaction. Separation costs include expenses for transaction advisory services, consulting services, restructuring and other expenses. During fiscal year 2016, we incurred $16.9 million of costs relating to the separation of our Imaging Components business, of which approximately $14 million relates to transaction advisory services. We expect to incur an estimated $21 million in charges for transaction advisory services in fiscal year 2017. Further, we expect to incur significant additional expenses for consulting services, restructuring, and other expenses to complete the separation. Overview Our operations are currently grouped into two reportable operating segments: Oncology Systems and Imaging Components. Our GTC and VPT business are reflected in the Other category because these operating segments do not meet the criteria of a reportable operating segment. The operating segments were determined based on how our Chief Executive Officer, who is our CODM, views and evaluates our operations. The CODM allocates resources to and evaluates the financial performance of each operating segment primarily based on operating earnings. Total revenues increased 4% , gross margin increased 0.9 percentage points, net earnings attributable to Varian decreased 2% , and diluted net earnings per share increased 2% in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 . Our effective tax rate increased to 27.6% in fiscal year 2016 from 25.7% in fiscal year 2015 . We repurchased 5.7 million shares of VMS common stock totaling $461.3 million in fiscal year 2016 . Gross orders increased 1% in Oncology Systems and decreased 6% in Imaging Components in fiscal year 2016 , as compared to fiscal year 2015 . We also recorded gross orders of $104.7 million in the Other category in fiscal year 2016 , as compared to $317.2 million in fiscal year 2015 . Our backlog at the end of fiscal year 2016 was $3.5 billion , or 1% lower , as compared to the end of fiscal year 2015 . In order to assist with the assessment of how our underlying businesses performed, we compare the percentage change in revenues and gross orders from one period to another, excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations ( i.e. , using constant currency exchange rates). To present this information on a constant currency basis, we convert current period revenues and gross orders in currencies other than U.S. Dollars into U.S. Dollars using the comparable prior period average exchange rate. The U.S. Dollar strengthened against the Euro and weakened against the Japanese Yen in fiscal year 2016, compared to the year-ago period, but did not have a significant impact on total revenues and Oncology Systems gross orders. We expect that fluctuations of non-U.S. Dollar currencies against the U.S. Dollar will continue to cause variability in our financial performance. In December 2015, the U.S. President signed into law the Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015 ("PATH Act"), which suspended the 2.3% medical device excise tax implemented as part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (the Affordable Care Act ) for a two-year period through December 31, 2017. The suspension of the medical device excise tax had a positive impact on our gross margin in fiscal year 2016 compared to fiscal year 2015. We expect the suspension to have a positive impact on our gross margin in fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016 because the suspension was not effective during the first quarter of fiscal year 2016. Additionally, the PATH Act permanently extended the research and development ("R&D") tax credit, which has a favorable impact on our effective tax rate. The Americas region includes North America (primarily United States and Canada) and Latin America. The EMEA region includes Europe, Russia, the Middle East, India and Africa. The APAC region primarily includes East and Southeast Asia and Australia. 50 Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufactures, sells and services hardware and software products for treating cancer with conventional radiation therapy and advanced treatments such as, IMRT, IGRT, VMAT, SRS, SBRT and brachytherapy, as well as informatics software for information management, clinical knowledge exchange, patient care management, practice management and decision-making support for comprehensive cancer clinics, radiotherapy centers and medical oncology practices. Our primary goal in the Oncology Systems business is to promote the adoption of more advanced and effective cancer treatments. In our view, the fundamental market forces that drive long-term growth in our Oncology Systems business are the rise in cancer cases; technology advances and product developments that are leading to improvements in patient care; customer demand for the more advanced and effective cancer treatments that we enable; competitive conditions among hospitals and clinics to offer such advanced treatments; continued improvement in safety and cost efficiency in delivering radiation therapy; and underserved medical needs outside of the United States. Over the last few years, we have seen a greater percentage of Oncology Systems gross orders and revenues coming from emerging markets within our international region, which typically purchase lower-priced products, which generally have lower gross margin percentages, compared to developed markets. We have also seen an increased portion of gross orders and revenues coming from services and software licenses, both of which have higher gross margin percentages than our hardware products. We have also been investing a higher portion of our Oncology Systems research and development budget in software and software-related products. The radiation oncology market in North America is largely characterized by replacements of older machines, with periodic increases in demand driven by the introduction of new technologies. Reimbursement rates in the United States have generally supported a favorable return on investment for the purchase of new radiotherapy equipment and technologies. While we believe that improved product functionality, greater cost-effectiveness and prospects for better clinical outcomes with new capabilities such as IMRT, IGRT and VMAT tend to drive demand for radiotherapy products, large changes in reimbursement rates or reimbursement structure can affect customer demand and cause market shifts. We do not know what impact the Affordable Care Act or its potential repeal, or changes in administration and policy resulting from the recent U.S. presidential election, will have on long-term growth or demand for our products and services. We believe, however, that growth of the radiation oncology market in the United States is being impacted as customers decision-making processes are complicated by the uncertainties surrounding MACRA and the Affordable Care Act and reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery, and that this uncertainty will continue in future fiscal years. We also believe that the Affordable Care Act, Accountable Care Organizations and bundled payment arrangements are causing healthcare providers to re-evaluate their business models and we are seeing increased consolidation of hospitals and clinics and more integration of systems and equipment across multi-site healthcare networks, which is impacting transaction size, timing and purchasing processes, and also contributing to the increased business variability. In the radiation oncology markets outside of North America, we expect the EMEA market to grow over the long-term with mixed performance across the region. In APAC, we expect China to lead longer term regional growth, off-setting a slower Japanese market. Latin America is currently experiencing volatility, however, our long-term outlook is cautiously optimistic. Overall, we believe the global radiation oncology market can grow over the long-term, on average and in constant currencies, in the mid-single-digit range. In September 2016, we closed the acquisition of the radiotherapy business of Candela, our distributor of radiotherapy equipment in Poland, for a total purchase consideration of $35.2 million . We acquired this business to strengthen our market position in Poland. See Note 15, "Business Combinations" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Oncology Systems total revenues increased 5% in fiscal year 2016 , as compared to fiscal year 2015 . Oncology Systems gross margin percentage increased 1.7 percentage points in fiscal year 2016 from fiscal year 2015 . Oncology Systems gross orders increased 1% in fiscal year 2016 , as compared to fiscal year 2015 , with an increase of 5% from North America, offset by a decrease of 2% from our international regions. Imaging Components . Our Imaging Components business segment designs, manufactures, sells and services X-ray imaging components for use in a range of applications, including radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, special procedures, computed tomography, computer-aided diagnostics, and industrial applications. We provide a broad range of X-ray imaging components including X-ray tubes, flat panel digital image detectors, high voltage connectors, image processing software and workstations, computer-aided diagnostic software, collimators and automatic exposure control devices. Our Imaging Components business segment also designs, manufactures, sells and services security and inspection products, which include Linatron X-ray accelerators, imaging processing software and image detection products for security and inspection purposes, such as cargo screening at ports and borders and nondestructive examination in a variety of applications. We continue to view the long-term fundamental growth driver for this business to be the ongoing success of key X-ray imaging OEMs that 51 incorporate our products into their medical diagnostic, dental, veterinary, security and industrial imaging systems. Orders and revenues for our security and inspection products have been and may continue to be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with us or our OEM customers in a short time period, and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. Our success in Imaging Components depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. A significant portion of our Imaging Components customers are outside of the United States and products in this business are generally priced in U.S. Dollars. As a result, the demand for Imaging Components products has been negatively impacted by the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar, which began in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2014, and this has caused our products to be priced higher compared to products sold in non-U.S. Dollar currencies. In addition, some customers have asked for additional discounts, delayed purchasing decisions, or moved to in-sourcing supply of such components or migrated to lower cost alternatives. In the event of a continued strengthening of the U.S. Dollar, we expect that demand and pricing will continue to be negatively impacted for Imaging Component products. The market for border protection systems has slowed significantly and end customers, particularly in oil-based economies and war zones in which we have a significant customer base, are delaying tenders, resulting in a decline in the demand for security and inspection products. In fiscal year 2016 , Imaging Components revenues decreased 2% and gross orders decreased 6% as compared to fiscal year 2015 . Imaging Components gross margin percentage increased 0.6 percentage points in fiscal year 2016 as compared to fiscal year 2015 . Other . The Other category is comprised of VPT and the operations of GTC. VPT develops, designs, manufactures, sells and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy, another form of external beam radiotherapy using proton beams, for the treatment of cancer. GTC is our scientific research facility. Subsequent to fiscal year 2016, GTC was absorbed into primarily our Oncology Systems and Imaging Components businesses and is no longer a separate business. The Other category revenues increased $19.2 million in fiscal year 2016 , as compared to fiscal year 2015 . This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Item 1A, Risk Factors. We discuss our results of operations below. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, impairment of investments and notes receivable, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of loss contingencies, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain, and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, see Item 1A, Risk Factors. Revenue Recognition Our revenues are derived primarily from the sale of hardware and software products, and services from our Oncology Systems, Imaging Components and VPT businesses. We recognize revenues net of any value added or sales tax and net of sales discounts. 52 We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. The allocation of consideration in a multiple element arrangement is affected by the determination of whether any software deliverables that function together with other hardware components to deliver the hardware products essential functionality are considered as non-software products for purpose of revenue recognition. The allocation of consideration to each non-software deliverable is based on the assumptions we use to establish its selling price, which are based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of selling price, if it exists, otherwise, third-party evidence of selling price, if it exists, and, if not, on estimated selling prices. In addition, the allocation of consideration to each software deliverable in a multiple element arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether VSOE of its fair value exists in these arrangements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the amounts allocated to each element could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment, readiness of customers facilities for installation, installation requirements, and availability of products or customer acceptance terms. If shipments or installations are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. Service revenues include revenues from hardware service contracts, software service agreements, bundled support arrangements, paid services and trainings, and parts that are sold by the service department. Revenues allocated to service contracts are generally recognized ratably over the period of the related contracts. In addition, revenues related to proton therapy systems and proton therapy system commissioning contracts are recognized in accordance with contract accounting. We recognize contract revenues under the percentage-of-completion method which are based on contract costs incurred to date compared with total estimated contract costs. Changes in estimates of total contract revenue, total contract cost or the extent of progress towards completion are recognized in the period in which the changes in estimates are identified. Estimated losses on contracts are recognized in the period in which the loss is identified. In circumstances in which the final outcome of a contract cannot be precisely estimated but a loss on the contract is not expected, we recognize revenues under the percentage-of-completion method based on a zero profit margin until more precise estimates can be made. If and when we can make more precise estimates, revenues and costs of revenues are adjusted in the same period. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. Share-based Compensation Expense We grant restricted stock units, deferred stock units, performance units, and stock options to employees and permit employees to purchase shares under the VMS employee stock purchase plan. We value our stock options granted and the option component of the shares of VMS common stock purchased under the employee stock purchase plan using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We value our performance units using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant under both the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected terms of share-based awards and the expected price volatilities of shares of VMS common stock and peer companies that are used to assess certain performance targets over the expected term of the awards, and the expected dividend yield of shares of VMS common stock. The expected term of our stock options is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We use a blended volatility in deriving the expected volatility assumption for our stock options. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility is derived based on traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the term of the exchange-traded options to the expected terms of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options on VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above 53 factors, we determined that we could not rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected terms of the stock options we grant. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected terms of the stock options we grant and the implied volatility of exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock. In determining the grant date fair value of our performance units, historical volatilities of shares of VMS common stock, as well as the shares of common stock of peer companies, were used to assess certain performance targets. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock awards. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate, as well as the probability that certain performance conditions that affect the vesting of performance units will be achieved, and recognize expense only for those awards expected to vest. If the actual forfeiture rate and/or the actual number of performance units that vest based on achievement of performance conditions are materially different from our estimates, the share-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Except for government tenders, group purchases and orders with letters of credit in Oncology Systems and for security and inspection products, our payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Impairment of Investments and Notes Receivable We recognize an impairment charge when the declines in the fair values of our available-for-sale investments below their cost basis are determined to be other than temporary impairments ( OTTI ). Our available-for-sale investments primarily include CPTC loans. We monitor our available-for-sale investments for possible OTTI on an ongoing basis. When there has been a decline in fair value of a debt security below the amortized cost basis, we recognize OTTI if: (i) we have the intention to sell the security; (ii) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the entire amortized cost basis; or (iii) we do not expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We assess the fair value of the CPTC loans, which is classified in the level 3 fair value hierarchy based on the income approach by using the discounted cash flow model with key assumptions that include discount rates corresponding to the terms and risks associated with the loans to CPTC (see Note 3, "Fair Value" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). We also have investments in privately-held companies, some of which are in the startup or development stages. We monitor these investments for events or circumstances indicative of potential impairment, and we make appropriate reductions in carrying values if we determine that an impairment charge is required, based primarily on the financial condition, near-term prospects and recent financing activities of the investee. These investments are inherently risky because the markets for the technologies or products these companies are developing are typically in the early stages and may never materialize. At times, we advance notes to third parties, including our customers. We regularly assess these notes for collectability by considering internal factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the note balances as well as external factors such as economic conditions that may affect the note holder's ability to pay. Our ongoing consideration of all the factors described above could result in impairment charges in the future, which could adversely affect our operating results. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and on order and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have 54 understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to these intangibles or to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. The allocation of the purchase price from business acquisitions to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. In addition, the allocation of the purchase price of the acquired businesses to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for those cash flows. Should conditions differ from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The evaluation includes consideration of qualitative factors including industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and factors affecting the reporting unit. If we determine that a quantitative analysis is necessary, the impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a combination of income and market approaches. The income approach is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units and the market approach is based on a market multiple calculated for each business unit based on market data of other companies engaged in similar business. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill against the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. We have four reporting units with goodwill: (i) Oncology Systems, (ii) X-ray tubes and flat panel products, (iii) Security and inspection products, and (iv) VPT. For all four reporting units, based upon the most recent annual goodwill analysis that we performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2016 , either step one of the impairment test was not completed based on evaluation of qualitative factors or, for those for which step one was completed, the fair value was substantially in excess of carrying value. However, significant changes in our projections about our operating results or other factors could cause us to make interim assessments of impairments in any quarter that could result in some or all of the goodwill being impaired. For our VPT reporting unit in particular, which had $49.8 million in goodwill as of September 30, 2016 , our estimates as to future operating results include certain assumptions about factors that cannot be predicted with certainty, including future market conditions, revenue growth rates, and operating margins. We will continue to make assessments of impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually 12 months from installation, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Loss Contingencies From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations or other legal matters, both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or 55 otherwise. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties, outcomes are not predictable with assurance, and actual liabilities could significantly exceed our estimates of potential liabilities. In addition, we are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations. In connection with our past and present operations and facilities, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts. Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review these accrued balances quarterly. If we were required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. Defined Benefit Pension Plans We sponsor seven defined benefit pension plans in Germany (where we have three defined benefit pension plans), Japan, Switzerland, the Philippines and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expenses and liabilities related to the aforementioned plans. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, and rate of future compensation increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expenses and liabilities. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension plan expenses we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans are primarily based on the current effective yield of long-term corporate bonds that are of high quality with satisfactory liquidity and credit rating with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. A change in the discount rate may cause the present value of benefit obligations to change significantly. The net liabilities recognized for defined benefit pension plans increased by $19.8 million in fiscal year 2016 to $40.2 million at September 30, 2016, primarily due to a decrease in the discount rate. See Note 10, "Retirement Plans" in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency rate fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 3, "Fair Value" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts are calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services. One year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which mature in 13 months or less, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty credit default swap rates (for net assets) or our borrowing rate (for net liabilities). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact on the valuation of our derivative instruments, as well as on our result of operations. There were no transfers of assets or liabilities between fair value measurement levels during fiscal years 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. We account for uncertainty in income taxes following a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest 56 amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. Generally, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in the applicable tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. Our foreign earnings are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our foreign subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from foreign countries, or a change in the mix of foreign countries among particular tax jurisdictions could increase or decrease our effective tax rate. Our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be remitted or deemed to be remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2016 was the 52 -week period ended September 30, 2016 , fiscal year 2015 was the 53 -week period ended October 2, 2015 , and fiscal year 2014 was the 52 -week period ended on September 26, 2014 . Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal years 2016 , 2015 and 2014 . Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2016 , 2015 and 2014 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Product $ 2,142.3 3 % $ 2,077.9 % $ 2,083.8 Service 1,075.5 5 % 1,021.2 6 % 966.0 Total Revenues $ 3,217.8 4 % $ 3,099.1 2 % $ 3,049.8 Product as a percentage of total revenues 67 % 67 % 68 % Service as a percentage of total revenues 33 % 33 % 32 % Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from the "Other" category, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components. Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in revenues from the Other category, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components. Product revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from the "Other" category, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components. Product revenues were flat in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to decreases in revenues from Imaging Components and Oncology Systems, offset by an increase in revenues from the Other category. Service revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from Imaging Components. Service revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems. 57 Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change Constant Currency (1) 2015 Percent Change Constant Currency 2014 Americas $ 1,486.6 (4 )% (4 )% $ 1,546.0 9 % 10 % $ 1,416.5 EMEA 1,004.2 13 % 16 % 886.4 (2 )% 8 % 908.5 APAC 727.0 9 % 10 % 666.7 (8 )% (3 )% 724.8 Total Revenues $ 3,217.8 4 % 5 % $ 3,099.1 2 % 6 % $ 3,049.8 North America $ 1,394.3 (4 )% (4 )% $ 1,456.5 9 % 10 % $ 1,332.5 International (2) 1,823.5 11 % 13 % 1,642.6 (4 )% 4 % 1,717.3 Total Revenues $ 3,217.8 4 % 5 % $ 3,099.1 2 % 6 % $ 3,049.8 North America as a percentage of total revenues 43 % 46 % 43 % International as a percentage of total revenues 57 % 54 % 57 % (1) Constant currency is the percent change excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations against the U.S. Dollar. (2) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. The Americas revenues decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to a decrease in revenues from the Other category, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components, partially offset by an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems. The Americas revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to increases in revenues from the Other category and Oncology Systems, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components. EMEA revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to increases in revenues from the "Other" category, Oncology Systems and Imaging Components. EMEA revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components, partially offset by an increase in revenues from the Other category. APAC revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from the Other category, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from Imaging Components. APAC revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to a decrease in revenues from Oncology Systems, and to a lesser extent, decreases in revenues from Imaging Components and from the Other category. Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change Constant Currency 2015 Percent Change Constant Currency 2014 Product $ 1,429.5 5 % 6 % $ 1,356.5 (4 )% 2 % $ 1,406.0 Service 1,027.6 4 % 5 % 987.5 5 % 11 % 938.2 Total Oncology Systems Revenues $ 2,457.1 5 % 6 % $ 2,344.0 % 6 % $ 2,344.2 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 58 % 58 % 60 % Service as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 42 % 42 % 40 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 76 % 76 % 77 % Oncology systems product revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to increases in revenues from hardware products and software licenses. Our hardware products revenue increased due to product mix. Oncology 58 Systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from hardware products as a result of strategic pricing and an unfavorable foreign currency impact, partially offset by an increase in revenues from software licenses. Oncology Systems service revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 and in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , primarily due to increased customer adoption of service contracts as the warranty period on our TrueBeam systems expire and by an increased number of customers as the installed base of our products continues to grow. The extra week of operations in fiscal year 2015 contributed approximately an additional $7 million in Oncology Systems service revenues. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change Constant Currency 2015 Percent Change Constant Currency 2014 Americas $ 1,228.9 2 % 2 % $ 1,209.3 4 % 4 % $ 1,165.5 EMEA 739.3 5 % 9 % 703.9 % 13 % 701.1 APAC 488.9 13 % 12 % 430.8 (10 )% (2 )% 477.6 Total Oncology System Revenues $ 2,457.1 5 % 6 % $ 2,344.0 % 6 % $ 2,344.2 North America $ 1,144.8 1 % 2 % $ 1,128.2 4 % 4 % $ 1,088.2 International 1,312.3 8 % 10 % 1,215.8 (3 )% 7 % 1,256.0 Total Oncology System Revenues $ 2,457.1 5 % 6 % $ 2,344.0 % 6 % $ 2,344.2 North America as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues 47 % 49 % 47 % International as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues 53 % 51 % 53 % The Americas Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to increases in revenues from services, primarily in North America, and software licenses, partially offset by a decrease from hardware products. The Americas Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in revenues from services, primarily in North America, and, to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from services in Latin America. Also contributing to the increase in the Americas Oncology Systems revenues was an increase in revenues from software licenses in North America. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in revenues from hardware products in North America. EMEA Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products, and, to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from services and software licenses. EMEA Oncology Systems revenues were flat in fiscal year 2015 compared to fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in revenues from software licenses being mostly offset by decreases in revenues from services and hardware products. APAC Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products, and to a lesser extent, increases in revenues from software licenses and services. APAC Oncology Systems revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , primarily due to a decrease in revenues from hardware products revenues, partially offset by an increase revenues from service revenues. Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the North American and international regions are impacted by regional influences, which recently have included government stimulus programs, economic and political instability in some countries, uncertainty created by health care reform (such as the excise tax on the sale of most medical devices, Medicare reimbursement rates and consolidation of free standing clinics in the United States), and different technology adoption cycles that are consistent with the gross order patterns. See further discussion of orders under Gross Orders. 59 Imaging Components Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Product $ 559.3 (4 )% $ 583.5 (8 )% $ 637.1 Service 38.3 38 % 27.7 20 % 23.1 Total Imaging Components Revenues $ 597.6 (2 )% $ 611.2 (7 )% $ 660.2 Product as a percentage of Imaging Components revenues 94 % 95 % 97 % Service as a percentage of Imaging Components revenues 6 % 5 % 3 % Imaging Components revenues as a percentage of total revenues 19 % 20 % 22 % Imaging Components product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from our flat panel and X-ray tube products, partially offset by an increase of $34.6 million from acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015. Revenues from our flat panel and tube products decreased primarily due to pricing pressures resulting from a strong U.S. Dollar, customers migrating to lower cost alternatives, and the decision of a customer to in-source some of its flat panel products in the second half of fiscal year 2015. In addition, lower purchases from a customer with higher X-ray tube inventory, due in part to longer tube life, also contributed to the declines in revenues. Imaging Components product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from our security and inspection products and flat panel products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from our X-ray tube products, partially offset by $10.8 million in revenues from acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015. Revenues from our security and inspection products decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to pricing pressures and delays in tenders in which our customers participate. Revenues from our flat panel and X-ray tube products decreased primarily due to pricing pressures resulting from the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar, and the decision of a customer to in-source some of their products that they had previously purchased from our flat panel business. Imaging Components service revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an increase of $7.7 million in service revenues from one of our acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015, and an increase in revenues from our security and inspection products. Imaging Components service revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , primarily due to $3.8 million in service revenues from one of our acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015 and in part due to the extra week of operations in fiscal year 2015. Because sales transactions in Imaging Components are generally denominated in U.S. Dollars, fluctuations in currency exchange rates did not have a material direct translational impact on Imaging Components international revenues. However, a strong U.S. Dollar against certain foreign currencies has increased pricing pressures and has made our X-ray tube and flat panel products relatively more expensive as compared to competitors' products sold in non-U.S. Dollar currencies. 60 Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Americas $ 202.2 (8 )% $ 219.3 (5 )% $ 230.0 EMEA 179.5 15 % 155.9 (17 )% 188.1 APAC 215.9 (8 )% 236.0 (3 )% 242.1 Total Revenues $ 597.6 (2 )% $ 611.2 (7 )% $ 660.2 North America $ 194.0 (8 )% $ 210.9 (6 )% $ 223.2 International 403.6 1 % 400.3 (8 )% 437.0 Total Revenues $ 597.6 (2 )% $ 611.2 (7 )% $ 660.2 North America as a percentage of total Imaging Components revenues 33 % 34 % 34 % International as a percentage of total Imaging Components revenues 67 % 66 % 66 % The Americas Imaging Components revenues decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to a decrease in revenues from flat panel products, partially offset by an increase of $19.8 million in revenues from acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015. The Americas Imaging Components revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to decreases in revenues from X-ray tube, flat panel products, and security and inspection products, partially offset by $6.9 million in revenues from acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015. EMEA Imaging Components revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to an increase of $13.7 million in revenues from acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015, and to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from flat panel products. EMEA Imaging Components revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to a decrease in revenues from security and inspection products, partially offset by $5.6 million in revenues from acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015. APAC Imaging Components revenues decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a decrease in revenues from X-ray tube products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from flat panel products, partially offset by an increase of $8.8 million in revenues from acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015. APAC Imaging Components revenues decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease from flat panel products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from security and inspection products, partially offset by $2.1 million in revenues from acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015 and an increase in revenues from X-ray tube products. Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Product $ 153.5 11 % $ 137.9 239 % $ 40.7 Service 9.6 58 % 6.0 30 % 4.7 Total Other revenues $ 163.1 13 % $ 143.9 217 % $ 45.4 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 5 % 4 % 1 % Other category revenues increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to the continued production and installation of VPT projects that are in our backlog. Other category revenues increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to the completion of the financing for the MPTC project in fiscal year 2015, which resulted in approximately $81 million of revenue recorded related to that project, and due to the continued production and installation of VPT projects that are in our backlog. 61 Gross Margin Fiscal Years Dollars by segment 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 (Dollars in millions) Oncology Systems $ 1,087.7 9 % $ 998.9 (2 )% $ 1,021.1 Imaging Components 248.5 (1 )% 250.6 (10 )% 278.6 Other 25.1 (24 )% 33.2 n/m 2.0 Gross margin $ 1,361.3 6 % $ 1,282.7 (1 )% $ 1,301.7 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 44.3 % 42.6 % 43.6 % Imaging Components 41.6 % 41.0 % 42.2 % Total Company 42.3 % 41.4 % 42.7 % n/m = not meaningful Total gross margin percentage increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 due to increases in gross margin percentage from Oncology Systems and Imaging Components, partially offset by an increase in revenues from the Other category which has lower overall margins. Total gross margin percentage decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to decreases in margins from Imaging Components and Oncology Systems, and an increase in revenues from the Other category which has lower overall margins. Total product gross margin percentage was 34.1% in fiscal year 2016 , compared to 33.1% in fiscal year 2015 and 36.9% in fiscal year 2014 . Total service gross margin percentage was 58.7% in fiscal year 2016 , compared to 58.3% in fiscal year 2015 and 55.1% in fiscal year 2014 . Oncology Systems product gross margin percentage was 34.2% in fiscal year 2016 , compared to 31.6% in fiscal year 2015 and 35.6% in fiscal year 2014 . The increase in product gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 was primarily due to the suspension of the medical device excise tax in fiscal year 2016, an increase in software license revenue which has a higher gross margin percentage, and the impact of cost reduction programs. The decrease in product gross margin in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 was due to an unfavorable foreign currency impact and a shift to geographies which generally have lower margins. Oncology Systems service gross margin percentage was 58.2% in fiscal year 2016 , compared to 57.8% in fiscal year 2015 and 55.5% in fiscal year 2014 . The increase in service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 was primarily due to cost containment and an increase in service revenues. The increase in service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 was primarily due to cost containment and an increase in service revenues, partially offset by an unfavorable foreign currency impact. Imaging Components gross margin percentage increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to increases in gross margin percentages from X-ray tube, flat panels, and security and inspection products. The increase in gross margin percentage from X-ray tube products was primarily due to productivity improvements, partially offset by increased quality costs. The increase in gross margin percentage from flat panel products was primarily due to productivity gains and a favorable product mix, partially offset by pricing pressures. The increase in security and inspection products gross margin percentage was primarily due to favorable product mix. Imaging Components gross margin percentage decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to decreases in gross margin percentage from X-ray tubes and flat panel products, partially offset by an increase in gross margin percentage from security and inspection products. The decrease in gross margin percentage in our X-ray tube and flat panel products in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , was primarily due to increased pricing pressures resulting from the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar and higher material costs in X-ray tube products, partially offset by product and quality cost reductions. The increase in gross margin percentage in security and inspection products was due to a favorable product mix, partially offset by pricing pressures and significantly lower volumes in the second half of fiscal year 2015. 62 Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Research and development $ 253.5 3 % $ 245.2 4 % $ 234.8 As a percentage of total revenues 8 % 8 % 8 % Research and development expenses increased $8.3 million in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a $5.3 million increase in the "Other" category and a $3.3 million increase in Imaging Components. The increase in the "Other" category was primarily due to an increase in new development projects and employee-related costs in VPT. The increase in Imaging Components was primarily due to an increase of $7.1 million in research and development expenses related to our acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015, partially offset by a reduction in spending on current projects. Research and development expenses increased $10.4 million in fiscal year 2015 , over fiscal year 2014 due to increases in expenses of $10.5 million in Imaging Components and $2.4 million in the Other category, partially offset by a $2.2 million decrease in expense in Oncology Systems. The increase in expenses in Imaging Components was due to new product development projects and enhancement of existing products and $3.7 million in additional research and development expenses related to our acquisitions in fiscal year 2015. The increase in expenses from the Other category was due to an increase in development projects and headcount for our VPT business partially offset by a favorable currency impact when non-U.S. Dollar currency denominated research and development expenses were translated into U.S. Dollars. The decrease in Oncology Systems was primarily due to a favorable currency impact when non-U.S. Dollar currency denominated research and development expenses were translated into U.S. Dollars, which was partially offset by an increase in expense due to new product development projects and enhancement of existing products. Selling, General and Administrative, Separation Costs, and Litigation Settlement Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Selling, general and administrative $ 540.1 11 % $ 488.5 4 % $ 470.6 Separation costs $ 16.9 % $ % $ Litigation settlement $ % $ (100 )% $ 25.1 Selling, general and administrative as a percentage of total revenues 17 % 16 % 15 % Separation costs as a percentage of total revenues 1 % % % Litigation settlement as a percentage of total revenues % % 1 % Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $51.6 million in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to: a $21.1 million increase in legal expenses primarily relating to legal proceedings, a $19.6 million increase in employee-related costs largely due to an increase in headcount primarily in Oncology Systems and accrued bonuses, a $10.2 million increase in operating expenses from our acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015, a $6.6 million increase in international commissions paid to third-party distributors who sell our products, and a $3.8 million increase in trade show expense. These increases were partially offset by a $8.4 million favorable currency impact when foreign-currency denominated expenses were translated into U.S. dollars and a $8.0 million decrease in restructuring charges. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $17.9 million in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to: a $34.5 million increase in employee-related costs (including a $5.2 million increase in share-based compensation expense due to the timing of the equity awards) largely due to an increase in headcount; and a $13.3 million restructuring charge related to retirement and workforce reduction programs. These increases were offset by an approximately $16 million favorable currency impact when non-U.S. Dollar currency denominated sales, general and administrative expenses were translated into U.S. Dollars; a $7.7 million impairment charge of our investment in Augmenix in fiscal year 2014 that did not occur in fiscal year 2015; and a $6.0 million decrease in bad debt expense. In fiscal year 2016, we recorded $16.9 million in costs relating to the separation of our Imaging Components business. See Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 63 In fiscal year 2014, we recorded a litigation settlement charge of $25.1 million as a result of settlement of patent litigation with University of Pittsburgh, and no such charges were recorded in fiscal year 2015. See Note 9, "Commitments and Contingencies" in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Interest income, net $ 5.6 % $ 5.7 70 % $ 3.3 Interest income, net of interest expense was flat in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 , primarily due to an increase in interest expense associated with increased borrowings from our credit facility being mostly offset by interest income generated from our loans to finance proton treatment centers. Interest income, net of interest expense, increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , primarily due to higher interest income generated from our loans to finance proton treatment centers, partially offset by a higher interest expense associated with increased borrowings from our credit facility. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Effective tax rate 27.6 % 1.9 % 25.7 % (4.0 )% 29.7 % Our effective tax rate increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an unfavorable shift in the geographic mix of earnings, including an increase in the amount of loss from our VPT business in Germany, a jurisdiction for which we have a full valuation allowance. This increase was partially offset by a larger benefit of the federal research and development credit. Because of the timing of the lapses and retroactive reinstatements of the federal research and development credit, we were eligible for seven quarters of benefit in fiscal year 2016 and four quarters of benefit in fiscal year 2015. Our effective tax rate decreased in fiscal year 2015 from fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a favorable shift in the geographic mix of earnings, including a decrease in the amount of loss from our VPT business in Germany, a jurisdiction for which we have a full valuation allowance, partially offset by the impact of a fluctuation in foreign currency exchange rates. In addition, our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2015 reflected a full year benefit of the federal research and development credit, while the effective tax rate in fiscal year 2014 reflected only one quarter benefit of the credit. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. See Note 14, "Taxes on Earnings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Diluted Net Earnings Per Share Fiscal Years 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Diluted net earnings per share $ 4.19 2 % $ 4.09 7 % $ 3.83 Diluted net earnings per share increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to share repurchases partially offset by an increase in the effective tax rate. Diluted earnings per share in fiscal year 2016 was negatively impacted by $24.8 million in legal expenses and $16.9 million in costs associated with the separation of our Imaging Components business. Diluted net earnings per share increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to share repurchases and a decrease in the effective tax rate, partially offset by a decrease in earnings before taxes. Diluted net earnings per share in fiscal year 2015 was negatively impacted by a $13.3 million charge relating to our restructuring programs and fiscal year 2014 was negatively impacted by a litigation settlement expense of $25.1 million and an impairment charge of $7.7 million for our investment in Augmenix. 64 Gross Orders Total Gross Orders (by segment) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Oncology Systems $ 2,723.6 1 % $ 2,696.9 % $ 2,684.4 Imaging Components 571.4 (6 )% 605.1 (16 )% 722.5 Other 104.7 (67 )% 317.2 163 % 120.4 Total Gross Orders $ 3,399.7 (6 )% $ 3,619.2 3 % $ 3,527.3 Gross orders are defined as the sum of new orders recorded during the period adjusted for any revisions to existing orders during the period. New orders are recorded for the total contractual amount, excluding certain pass-through items, once a written agreement for the delivery of goods or provision of services is in place and, for businesses other than VPT, when shipment of the product is expected to occur within two years, so long as any contingencies are deemed perfunctory. However, we will not record security and inspection products orders from governmental agencies with bid protest provisions until the expiration of the bid protest period. For our VPT business, we record orders when construction of the related proton therapy treatment center is reasonably expected to start within two years, but only if any contingencies are either deemed perfunctory or if the existence and nature of material contingencies is disclosed. However, we will not record VPT orders if there are major financing contingencies, if a substantial portion of the financing for the project is not reasonably assured or if customer board approval contingencies are pending. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders remain valid. Gross orders in any period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedules and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as orders for software or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance than hardware or older products. Gross orders and revenues for our security and inspection products in our Imaging Components segment have been and may continue to be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with us or with our OEM customers over a short period of time and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. Because an order for a proton therapy system can be relatively large, an order in one fiscal period will cause gross orders in our VPT business to vary significantly, making comparisons between fiscal periods more difficult. Furthermore, bid awards, primarily in our VPT business, may be subject to challenge by third parties, which can make these orders more unpredictable than other products. Oncology Systems Gross Orders Gross Orders by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change Constant Currency 2015 Percent Change Constant Currency 2014 Americas $ 1,437.5 4 % 4 % $ 1,381.3 1 % 1 % $ 1,369.3 EMEA 772.9 (6 )% (4 )% 826.0 % 12 % 826.2 APAC 513.2 5 % 3 % 489.6 % 9 % 488.9 Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders $ 2,723.6 1 % 2 % $ 2,696.9 % 6 % $ 2,684.4 North America $ 1,312.9 5 % 5 % $ 1,255.4 3 % 4 % $ 1,214.4 International 1,410.7 (2 )% (1 )% 1,441.5 (2 )% 8 % 1,470.0 Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders $ 2,723.6 1 % 2 % $ 2,696.9 % 6 % $ 2,684.4 The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an increase in gross orders from hardware products in North America, and to a lesser extent an increase in gross orders from services in North America, primarily offset by a decrease in gross orders from software licenses in North America. The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in gross orders from services and hardware products in North America, primarily offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products in Latin America and software licenses in North America. 65 EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from hardware products, and to a lesser extent decreases in gross orders from software licenses and services. EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders were flat in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to an increase in gross orders from services, offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products. APAC Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to increases in gross orders from services and hardware products. APAC Oncology Systems gross orders were flat in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 due to increases in gross orders from services and software licenses, mostly offset by a decrease in gross orders from hardware products. The extra week of operations in fiscal year 2015 approximately contributed an additional $7 million in Oncology Systems service gross orders in fiscal year 2015. The trailing 12 month percentage change in gross orders for Oncology Systems at September 30, 2016 , and for the three immediately prior fiscal quarters were: September 30, 2016 July 1, 2016 April 1, 2016 January 1, 2016 Americas 4% 1% % 2% EMEA (6)% 4% 4% (5)% APAC 5% 1% (1)% (5)% North America 5% 7% 3% 4% International (2)% (2)% (1)% (7)% Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders 1% 2% 1% (2)% Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems gross orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations. In recent years the percentage of domestic gross orders has increased but we expect in the long-term international gross orders, specifically emerging markets, will grow as a percentage of overall orders. Oncology Systems gross orders are affected by foreign currency fluctuations. In addition, the availability of government programs that stimulate the purchase of healthcare products could affect the demand for our products from period to period, and could therefore make it difficult to compare our financial results. Imaging Components Gross Orders Gross Orders by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2016 Percent Change 2015 Percent Change 2014 Americas $ 176.8 (14 )% $ 204.9 (8 )% $ 222.1 EMEA 189.0 29 % 146.2 (35 )% 223.6 APAC 205.6 (19 )% 254.0 (8 )% 276.8 Total Imaging Components Systems Gross Orders $ 571.4 (6 )% $ 605.1 (16 )% $ 722.5 North America $ 170.2 (13 )% $ 195.8 (9 )% $ 216.2 International 401.2 (2 )% 409.3 (19 )% 506.3 Total Imaging Components Systems Gross Orders $ 571.4 (6 )% $ 605.1 (16 )% $ 722.5 The Americas Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from flat panel products, partially offset by an increase in gross orders from our acquisitions completed in the second half fiscal year 2015. The decrease in gross orders from flat panel products in fiscal year 2016 was primarily due to pricing pressures resulting from a strong U.S. Dollar and a decision of a customer to in-source some of their flat panel products in the second half of fiscal year 2015. The Americas Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal 66 year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from flat panel products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in gross orders from X-ray tube products, partially offset by an increase in gross orders from security and inspection products. EMEA Imaging Components gross orders increased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to an increase in gross orders from our acquisitions completed in the second half of fiscal year 2015, and to a lesser extent, increases in gross orders from security and inspection products, X-ray tube products and flat panel products. EMEA Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 , primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from security and inspection products, and to a lesser extent a decrease in gross orders from X-ray tube products. APAC Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from flat panel products, partially offset by an increase in gross orders from our acquisitions completed in the second half fiscal year 2015. The decrease in flat panel gross orders in the fiscal year 2016 was primarily due to pricing pressures resulting from a strong U.S. Dollar and the timing of several large orders in flat panel products in the prior comparable period. APAC Imaging Components gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to a decrease in gross orders from X-ray tube products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in gross orders from security and inspection products. Because gross order transactions in Imaging Components are generally denominated in U.S. Dollars, fluctuations in currency exchange rates did not have a material direct translational impact on Imaging Components international gross orders. However, a strong U.S. Dollar against certain foreign currencies has increased pricing pressures and has made our X-ray tube and flat panel products relatively more expensive as compared to competitors' products sold in non-U.S. Dollar currencies. Other Gross Orders The Other category gross orders decreased in fiscal year 2016 over fiscal year 2015 primarily due to VPT recording two proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2016 compared to six proton therapy gross orders in fiscal year 2015 . The Other category gross orders increased in fiscal year 2015 over fiscal year 2014 primarily due to VPT recording six proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2015 , compared to three proton therapy product gross orders in fiscal year 2014 . Backlog Backlog is the accumulation of all gross orders for which revenues have not been recognized and are still considered valid. Backlog also includes a small portion of billed service contracts that are included in deferred revenue. Backlog is stated at historical foreign currency exchange rates and revenue is released from backlog at current exchange rates, with any difference recorded as a backlog adjustment. Backlog at September 30, 2016 was $3.5 billion , including approximately $272 million in VPT backlog, which was a decrease of 1% over the backlog at October 2, 2015 . Our Oncology Systems backlog at September 30, 2016 was 3% higher than the backlog at October 2, 2015 , which reflected a 7% increase for North America and no change for our international region. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders in the backlog remain valid. Aged orders that are not expected to be converted to revenues are deemed dormant and are reflected as a reduction in the backlog amounts in the period identified. Backlog adjustments are comprised of dormancies, cancellations, foreign currency exchange rate adjustments, backlog acquired from our acquisitions, and other adjustments. In fiscal years 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , our backlog adjustments were a reduction of $203.8 million , $214.9 million and $176.3 million , respectively. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses or make other investments or loans, repurchase shares of VMS common stock, and fund continuing operations and capital expenditures. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. 67 Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: September 30, October 2, (In millions) 2016 2015 Increase (Decrease) Cash and cash equivalents $ 843.5 $ 845.5 $ (2.0 ) The decrease in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2016 compared to fiscal year 2015 was due to $461.3 million of cash used for the repurchase of shares of VMS common stock, $80.4 million used for purchases of property, plant and equipment, $21.7 million used for the issuance of notes receivable, and $21.1 million used for asset and business acquisitions, net of cash acquired. These decreases were mostly offset by $356.3 million in cash provided by operating activities, $167.1 million in net borrowings under our credit facility agreements, and $60.6 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. At September 30, 2016 , we had approximately $43.0 million , or 5% , of cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $800.5 million , or 95% , of cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and a portion of this amount could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of September 30, 2016 , most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. Dollars and were primarily held as bank deposits. In addition to cash flows generated from operations, a significant portion of which are generated in the United States, we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, VMS share repurchases, acquisitions, and other corporate purposes. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2016 2015 2014 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 356.3 $ 469.6 $ 449.0 Investing activities (109.2 ) (210.9 ) (133.1 ) Financing activities (245.8 ) (276.7 ) (595.5 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (3.3 ) 14.2 11.0 Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents $ (2.0 ) $ (3.8 ) $ (268.6 ) Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 , were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $356.3 million in fiscal year 2016 , compared to $469.6 million in fiscal year 2015 . The $113.3 million decrease in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2016 compared to fiscal year 2015 was driven primarily by a decrease of $92.4 million in the net change from operating assets and liabilities (working capital items), a decrease of $11.6 million in non-cash items, and a decrease of $9.3 million in net earnings. The major contributors to the net change in operating assets and liabilities in fiscal year 2016 were as follows: Accounts receivable increased $168.3 million primarily due to higher revenues and timing of collections in Oncology Systems and an increase in unbilled receivables in VPT. Inventories increased $27.7 million mainly due to increases in inventories in Imaging Components and VPT in anticipation of future demand, partially offset by a decrease in inventories in Oncology Systems due to increased sales activity. Accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities increased $61.0 million primarily due to timing of payments processed for employee compensation, an increase in our long-term pension liability and timing of income tax payments. Deferred revenues decreased $40.2 million primarily due to timing of revenue recognition in Oncology Systems and timing of customer payments in VPT. 68 The $20.6 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2015 compared to fiscal year 2014 was driven primarily by an increase of $23.1 million in net change from operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and an increase of $8.3 million in net earnings, partially offset by a decrease of $10.8 million in non-cash items. The major contributors to the net change in operating assets and liabilities in fiscal year 2015 were as follows: Accounts receivable increased $79.4 million primarily due to longer payment cycles and higher revenues in VPT. Inventories increased $41.6 million due to an increase in inventories in Imaging Components and Oncology Systems in anticipation of future demand, partially offset by a decrease in inventories in VPT as a result of the recognition of revenue relating to MPTC. Deferred revenues increased $71.6 million due to receipts of down payments for orders for which revenues have not been recognized and due to the nature of contracts and timing of customer acceptances primarily in Oncology Systems. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, collection of accounts receivable, inventory management, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. See Item 1A, Risk Factors. Investing activities used $109.2 million of net cash in fiscal year 2016 , compared to $210.9 million of net cash used in fiscal year 2015 and $133.1 million of net cash used in fiscal year 2014 . Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment were $80.4 million in fiscal year 2016 , $91.4 million in fiscal year 2015 and $89.6 million in fiscal year 2014 , representing our continued investment to expand our infrastructure. During fiscal year 2016 , we also used $21.7 million for the issuance of notes receivable and $21.1 million of net cash primarily for asset and business acquisitions, net of cash acquired. During fiscal year 2015, we also used $95.3 million of net cash for acquisitions of businesses, and $23.7 million for issuance of notes receivable. During fiscal year 2014, we used $45.2 million to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC, $31.5 million for acquisitions of businesses and $5.5 million for issuance of notes receivable, partially offset by $38.1 million received from the sale of a portion of our loan to CPTC. Financing activities used $245.8 million of net cash in fiscal year 2016 , compared to $276.7 million of net cash used in fiscal year 2015 and $595.5 million of net cash provided in fiscal year 2014 . In fiscal year 2016 , we used $461.3 million of net cash for the repurchase of VMS common stock compared to $422.0 million in fiscal year 2015 and $627.7 million in fiscal year 2014 . Cash provided by financing activities included cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $60.6 million , $91.0 million and $99.7 million in fiscal years 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , respectively. We had $167.1 million in net borrowings under our credit facility agreements in fiscal year 2016 compared to $58.6 million in fiscal year 2015. In fiscal year 2014 , we repaid $68.8 million of our credit facility agreement and other bank borrowings. In connection with our planned separation of Varex, we are reviewing our capital allocation strategies, some of which could have a significant impact on our liquidity but which, if there were a negative liquidity impact, is not expected to exceed a cash transfer of approximately $75 million from Varian to Varex. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 3% of revenues in fiscal year 2017. On August 27, 2013, VMS entered into an agreement, as amended to date, ("Credit Agreement") with certain lenders and Bank of America, N.A. ( BofA ) as administrative agent ("Debt Lenders"). The Credit Agreement provides for (i) a five-year term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $500 million (the 2013 Term Loan Facility ) and (ii) a five-year revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $500 million (the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility and, collectively with the 2013 Term Loan Facility, the 2013 Credit Facility ). The 2013 Revolving Credit Facility also includes a $50 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and permits swing line loans of up to $25 million. The aggregate commitments under the 2013 Term Loan Facility may be increased by up to $100 million , and the aggregate commitments under the 2013 Revolving Credit Facility, may be increased by up to $100 million , In September 2016, VMS amended its Credit Agreement to obtain the Debt Lenders' consent to the separation of its Imaging Components business, waive any potential default that may arise as a result of the separation, and increase the maximum consolidated leverage ratio that we must maintain. The Credit Agreement will expire in August 2018. The Credit Agreement contains provisions that limit our ability to, 69 among other things, incur future indebtedness, contingent obligations or liens, guarantee indebtedness, make certain investments and capital expenditures, sell stock or assets and pay dividends, and consummate certain mergers or acquisitions. The proceeds of the 2013 Credit Facility may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, VMS share repurchases, acquisitions and other corporate purposes. We may prepay, reduce or terminate the commitments without penalty. In addition, our Japanese subsidiary ( VMS KK ) has an unsecured uncommitted credit agreement with Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation that enables VMS KK to borrow and have outstanding at any given time a maximum of 3 billion Japanese Yen (the Sumitomo Credit Facility ). In February 2016, the Sumitomo Credit Facility was extended and will expire in February 2017. The following table summarizes our short-term and long-term debt: September 30, 2016 October 2, 2015 (In millions except for percentages) Amount Weighted-Average Interest Rate Amount Weighted-Average Interest Rate Current portion of 2013 Term Loan Facility $ 50.0 1.65 % $ 50.0 1.32 % 2013 Revolving Credit Facility 300.0 1.91 % 90.0 1.57 % Sumitomo Credit Facility 29.6 0.53 % 18.4 0.63 % Total short-term debt $ 379.6 $ 158.4 2013 Term Loan Facility $ 287.5 1.65 % $ 337.5 1.32 % Total long-term debt $ 287.5 $ 337.5 See Note 7, "Borrowings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion regarding the 2013 Credit Facility and the Sumitomo Credit Facility. The following table provides additional information regarding our short-term borrowings (excluding current maturities of long-term debt): Fourth Quarter of Fiscal Year 2016 Fiscal Years (In millions except for percentages) 2016 2015 2014 Amount outstanding (at end of period) $ 329.6 $ 329.6 $ 108.4 $ Weighted average interest rate (at end of period) 1.78 % 1.78 % 1.41 % % Average amount outstanding (during period) $ 366.3 $ 320.8 $ 104.5 $ 8.2 Weighted average interest rate (during period) 1.79 % 1.68 % 1.48 % 0.72 % Maximum month-end amount outstanding during period $ 406.5 $ 431.6 $ 140.0 $ 29.6 Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for the next 12 months and into the foreseeable future. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes, repurchase VMS common stock and fund our loan commitments and other strategic investments. Total debt as a percentage of total capital increased to 27.7% at September 30, 2016 from 22.3% at October 2, 2015 primarily due to increased borrowings under our 2013 Credit Facility. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities decreased to 1.62 to 1 at September 30, 2016 from 1.74 to 1 at October 2, 2015 . Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable days sales outstanding ( DSO ) was 93 days at September 30, 2016 compared to 90 days at October 2, 2015 . Excluding VPT, DSO was 85 days at September 30, 2016 compared to 82 days at October 2, 2015 . Our 70 accounts receivable and DSO are impacted by a number of factors, primarily including the timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, collections performance, payment terms, the mix of revenues from different regions and the effects of continued economic instability. As of September 30, 2016 , approximately 6% of our accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with remaining terms of more than one year. Share Repurchase Program We repurchased shares of VMS common stock under various authorizations during the periods presented as follows: Fiscal Years (In millions, except per share amounts) 2016 2015 2014 Number of shares 5.7 4.8 7.8 Average repurchase price per share $ 81.61 $ 87.47 $ 80.52 Total cost $ 461.3 $ 422.0 $ 624.0 The repurchased shares include shares of VMS common stock repurchased under various accelerated share repurchase agreements. All shares that were repurchased have been retired. In November 2015, the VMS Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of 8.0 million shares of VMS common stock through December 31, 2016 . As of September 30, 2016 , approximately 3.8 million shares of VMS common stock remained available for repurchase under the November 2015 authorization. In November 2016, the VMS Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of additional 8.0 million shares of VMS common stock commencing on January 1, 2017. For more details see Note 11, "Stockholders' Equity and Noncontrolling Interests" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of September 30, 2016 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period Fiscal Year Fiscal Years Fiscal Years (In millions) 2017 2018-2019 2020-2021 Beyond Total Long-term debt (1) (including current maturities) $ 50.0 $ 287.5 $ $ $ 337.5 Interest obligation on long-term debt (including current maturities) (2) 5.3 4.0 9.3 Operating leases (3) 27.5 36.1 23.3 19.4 106.3 Purchase obligations (4) 27.9 35.2 13.8 76.9 Defined benefit pension plans (5) 7.2 7.2 Total (6) $ 117.9 $ 362.8 $ 37.1 $ 19.4 $ 537.2 (1) For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 7, "Borrowings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Interest on long-term debt has been calculated based on the interest rate applicable as of September 30, 2016 . (3) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our non-cancellable operating leases as of September 30, 2016 . (4) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, are legally binding and non-cancellable. Purchase obligations do not include agreements that are cancellable without penalty. (5) As further described in Note 10, "Retirement Plans" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, our post-retirement benefit plan is not presented in the table above as it is not material. As of September 30, 2016 , the remaining defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $40.2 million . Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and other economic and demographic assumptions, the potential for changes in legislation in 71 the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions necessary to fund our defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (6) The following items are not included in the table above: Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of September 30, 2016, our total liability for uncertain tax positions was $46.2 million, of which we do not anticipate a payment in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of the remainder of future payments related to uncertain tax positions. See a detailed discussion in Note 14, "Taxes on Earnings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As further described in Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 30, 2016, we had accrued $8.1 million for environmental remediation liabilities. The amount accrued represents estimates of anticipated future costs and the timing and amount of actual future environmental remediation costs may vary as the scope of our obligations becomes more clearly defined. As further described in Note 16, "VPT Loans, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 30, 3016, our outstanding commitment under the loan to MPTC was $11.4 million, which was paid in October 2016. As of September 30, 2016, our outstanding commitment under the loans to CPTC was $1.1 million and is expected to be drawn down over the next 12 months. As further described in Note 6, Related Party Transactions of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 30, 2016, we had an estimated fixed cost commitment of $4.5 million related to dpiX's amended agreement through December 31, 2016. The fixed cost commitment for future periods will be determined and approved by the dpiX board of directors at the beginning of each calendar year. As further described in Note 11, "Stockholders' Equity and Noncontrolling Interests" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, in October 2015, we committed to grant the noncontrolling shareholders of MeVis: (1) an annual recurring net compensation of 0.95 per MeVis share and (2) a put right for their MeVis shares at 19.77 per MeVis share. As of September 30, 2016, noncontrolling shareholders together held approximately 0.5 million shares of MeVis, representing 26.4% of the outstanding shares. In connection with the acquisitions of businesses in prior years, we entered into agreements which include provisions to make additional consideration payments upon the achievement of certain milestones by the acquired businesses. As of September 30, 2016, the accrual for potential contingent consideration under these agreements was $1.3 million. Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Other Matters From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. See Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies Other Matters of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements 72 In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The terms of these indemnification arrangements are generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is unlimited. As of September 30, 2016 , we have not incurred any significant costs since the Spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Accounting Pronouncement Recently Adopted In November 2015, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to balance sheet classification of deferred taxes. The amendment requires that deferred tax assets and liabilities be classified as noncurrent in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The amendment is effective for all annual periods, and interim periods within those annual periods, beginning after December 15, 2016, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this amendment in the third quarter of fiscal year 2016, on a retrospective basis. To conform to the current year presentation, we decreased current deferred tax assets by $132.1 million and current deferred tax liabilities, which was included in accrued liabilities, by $6.3 million and increased long-term deferred tax assets by $110.0 million and decreased deferred tax liabilities, which was included in other long-term liabilities, by $15.8 million , on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of October 2, 2015. The adoption of this amendment had no impact to our Consolidated Statements of Earnings or Statements of Cash Flows. Recent Accounting Standards or Updates Not Yet Effective In November 2016, the FASB amended its guidance on the classification and presentation of restricted cash in the statement of cash flow. The amendment requires entities to include restricted cash and restricted cash equivalents in its cash and cash equivalents in the statement of cash flow. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2019 with early adoption permitted. The amendment is required to be adopted retrospectively. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this amendment to our consolidated financial statements. In October 2016, the FASB amended its guidance for tax accounting for intra-entity asset transfers. The amendment removes the prohibition against the immediate recognition of the current and deferred income tax effects of intra-entity transfers of assets other than inventory. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2019. Early adoption is permitted. The amendment is required to be adopted on a modified retrospective basis. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this amendment to our consolidated financial statements. In August 2016, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to the classification of certain cash receipts and cash payments. The amendment was issued to reduce the diversity in practice in how certain transactions are classified in the statement of cash flows. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2019 with early adoption permitted. The amendment is required to be adopted retrospectively unless it is impracticable. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this amendment to our consolidated financial statements. In June 2016, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to impairment of financial instruments. The amendment adds a new impairment model that is based on expected losses rather than incurred losses. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2021 with early adoption permitted beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2020. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this amendment to our consolidated financial statements. In March 2016, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to employee share-based payments. The amendment simplifies several aspects of the accounting for employee share-based payments including the accounting for income taxes, forfeitures, and statutory tax withholding requirements, as well as classification in the statement of cash flows. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2018 with early adoption permitted. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this amendment to our consolidated financial statements. In February 2016, the FASB issued a new standard on accounting for leases. The new standard is intended to provide enhanced transparency and comparability by requiring lessees to record right-of-use assets and corresponding lease liabilities on the balance sheet. The new standard will continue to classify leases as either finance or operating, with classification affecting the 73 pattern of expense recognition in the statement of earnings. The new standard is required to be adopted using a modified retrospective method to each prior reporting period presented with various optional practical expedients. The new standard will be effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2020 with early adoption permitted. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this amendment to our consolidated financial statements. In January 2016, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to recognition and measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities. The amendment addresses certain aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of financial instruments. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2019. We are evaluating the impact of adopting this amendment to our consolidated financial statements. In September 2015, the FASB issued a new accounting standard that eliminates the requirement to restate prior period financial statements for measurement period adjustments following a business combination. The new standard became effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2017. The new standard is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In July 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to inventory measurement. The amendment requires inventory measured using first-in, first-out (FIFO) or average cost to be subsequently measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value, thereby simplifying the current guidance that requires an entity to measure inventory at the lower of cost or market. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2018. The amendment is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In April 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to internal use software. The amendment clarifies that the software license element of a cloud computing arrangements should be accounted for consistent with the acquisition of other software licenses. The amendment became effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2017. The amendment is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In April 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to retirement benefits. The amendment provides a practical expedient that permits an entity with a fiscal year-end that does not coincide with a month-end to measure defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the entity fiscal year-end. The amendment also provides a practical expedient that permits an entity that has a significant event in an interim period to remeasure defined benefit plan assets and obligations using the month-end that is closest to the date of the significant event. The amendment became effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2017. The amendment is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In March 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to presentation of debt issuance costs. The amendment requires that debt issuance costs related to a recognized debt liability be presented in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of that debt liability. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017. In August 2015, the FASB further clarified that entities are permitted to defer and present debt issuance costs related to line-of-credit arrangements as assets. These amendments are not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In February 2015, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to consolidation. The amendment modifies the analysis that a reporting entity must perform to determine whether it should consolidate certain types of legal entities. The amendment became effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2017. The amendment is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In June 2014, the FASB issued an amendment to its accounting guidance related to stock-based compensation. The amendment requires that a performance target that could be achieved after the requisite service period be treated as a performance condition that affects vesting, rather than a condition that affects the grant-date fair value. The amendment became effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2017. The amendment is not expected to have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements. In May 2014, the FASB issued a new revenue standard, which sets forth a single, comprehensive revenue recognition model for all contracts with customers to improve comparability. The new standard requires revenue recognition to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. In March 2016, the FASB amended the principal-versus-agent implementation guidance and illustrations in the new standard. In April 2016, the FASB amended the guidance on identifying performance obligations and the implementation guidance on licensing in the new standard. In May 2016, the FASB amended the guidance on collectability, noncash consideration, presentation of sales tax and transition in the new standard. The new standard will be 74 effective for us beginning in our first quarter of fiscal year 2019, with early adoption permitted, but not before the first quarter of fiscal year 2018. The new standard can be applied either retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented (i.e., full retrospective adoption) or with the cumulative effect of initially applying the update recognized at the date of the initial application (i.e., modified retrospective adoption) along with additional disclosures. We currently anticipate adopting this standard using the full retrospective method to restate each prior period presented. We are evaluating the timing and the impact of adopting this standard to our consolidated financial statements. 
