CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2018-11-26


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview We, Varian Medical Systems, Inc., are a Delaware corporation originally incorporated in 1948 as Varian Associates, Inc. We are the world leading manufacturer of medical devices and software for treating cancer and other medical conditions with radiotherapy, stereotactic radiosurgery, stereotactic body radiotherapy, brachytherapy and proton therapy. Our vision is a world without fear of cancer. Our mission is to combine the ingenuity of people with the power of data and technology to achieve new victories against cancer. To meet this challenge, we offer comprehensive solutions for fighting cancer. We have two reportable operating segments: Oncology Systems and Proton Solutions (formerly known as Varian Particle Therapy). The operating segments were determined based on how our Chief Executive Officer, who is our Chief Operating Decision Maker ( CODM ), views and evaluates our operations. The CODM allocates resources to and evaluates the financial performance of each operating segment primarily based on operating earnings. The Americas region includes North America (primarily the United States and Canada) and Latin America. The EMEA region includes Europe, Russia, the Middle East, India, and Africa. The APAC region primarily includes East and Southeast Asia, and Australia. Long-term growth and value creation strategy We are focused on cancer care solutions and well-positioned to positively influence more and more patients globally every day by bringing smarter and simpler solutions to healthcare providers. Our long-term growth and value creation strategy is to transform our company from the global leader in radiation therapy to be the global leader in multidisciplinary, integrated cancer care solutions. We intend to leverage our deep customer relationships, human-centered design, scale and financial strength to selectively broaden our capabilities to help cancer patients. To achieve these long-term objectives, we are focused on driving growth through strengthening our leadership in radiation therapy, extending our global footprint and expanding into other addressable markets. Highlights from fiscal year 2018 Financial Summary Fiscal Years (In millions, except per share amounts) 2018 2017 Change Gross Orders $ 3,171.6 $ 3,076.0 3 % Oncology Systems 3,113.9 2,846.8 9 % Proton Solutions 57.7 229.2 (75 )% Backlog $ 3,183.0 $ 3,083.2 3 % Revenues $ 2,919.1 $ 2,619.3 11 % Oncology Systems 2,770.2 2,436.8 14 % Proton Solutions 148.9 182.5 (18 )% Gross margin as a percentage of revenues 43.6 % 42.5 % 110bps Effective tax rate 66.8 % 25.4 % Net earnings from continuing operations $ 150.3 $ 226.0 (34 )% Diluted net earnings per share $ 1.62 $ 2.42 (33 )% Net cash provided by operating activities $ 454.9 $ 399.1 14 % Number of shares repurchased 1.6 3.3 (50 )% Total cost of shares repurchased $ 181.9 $ 294.5 (38 )% Adoption of ASC 606. At the beginning of our fiscal year 2018, we early adopted Accounting Standard Codification 606 "Revenues from Contracts with Customers" ("ASC 606"), the new revenue recognition standard, and used the full retrospective method. All financial statements and disclosures have been recast to comply with ASC 606. See Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information. 44 Change in Gross Orders Policy. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2018, we decided to retroactively change our policy on how we record services gross orders. Under the new policy, services gross orders do not include changes in deferred services revenue. We made the change to more accurately reflect the operational performance of the services business and to eliminate variations in orders reporting due to the timing of services billings. This policy change also impacts backlog, which no longer reflects the deferred revenue related to purchasable services. These changes only impact the Oncology Systems gross orders. All prior periods' gross orders and backlog have been recast to reflect this policy change. Distribution. On January 28, 2017 (the "Distribution Date"), we completed the separation and distribution (the "Distribution") of Varex Imaging Corporation ("Varex"), our former Imaging Components business segment. The historical financial position and results of operations of the Imaging Components business and costs relating to the Distribution are reported in the consolidated financial statements as discontinued operations for all the periods presented. Unless otherwise noted, the financial information herein has been recast to reflect the effect of the Distribution. The Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Earnings and the Statements of Cash Flows have not been recast to reflect the effect of the Distribution. See Note 3, "Business Combinations" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for additional information. Sirtex Medical Limited. On January 30, 2018, we signed an agreement to acquire Sirtex Medical Limited ("Sirtex"), an Australian company that was listed on the Australian Securities Exchange, for A$28 per share or approximately A$1.6 billion. On May 4, 2018, Sirtex received an unsolicited non-binding, indicative and conditional proposal from CDH Investments ("CDH"), a China-based alternative asset manager, for the acquisition of all of the issued shares in Sirtex for A$33.60 per share. On June 14, 2018, we received notification from Sirtex that it had accepted the proposal from CDH. Consequently, Sirtex terminated its agreement with us, and we received a net $9.0 million breakup fee from Sirtex. Acquisitions. In fiscal year 2018, we acquired four companies, including two privately-held software companies, a distributor of radiotherapy equipment, and a manufacturer of a surface-guided radiation therapy positioning and motion management system, for an aggregate purchase price of $109.0 million . The purchase price allocation of all four acquisitions primarily consisted of $49.9 million in finite-lived intangible assets and $72.1 million in goodwill. We have integrated these four acquisitions into our Oncology Systems reporting unit. Acquisition-related expenses. In fiscal year 2018, we incurred acquisition-related expenses of $36.4 million , which primarily includes $29.7 million in losses related to hedging the anticipated Australian dollar purchase price for Sirtex, partially offset by a net $9.0 million breakup fee received from Sirtex in connection with the termination of the acquisition. 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. On April 3, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement (the "2018 Credit Agreement") with certain lenders and Bank of America, N.A. ("BofA"), as the administrative agent. The 2018 Credit Agreement provides for a five-year revolving credit facility (the "2018 Revolving Credit Facility") in an aggregate principal amount of up to $1.8 billion. The 2018 Revolving Credit Facility also includes a $50.0 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and permits swing line loans of up to $25 million. The proceeds of the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, our share repurchases, permitted acquisitions and other corporate purposes, as well as to satisfy the prior outstanding obligation under the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility. As of September 28, 2018 , we did not have an outstanding principal balance on our 2018 Revolving Credit Facility. See, Liquidity and Capital Resources, herein for more information. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the "Act") was signed into U.S. law on December 22, 2017. Two provisions of the new law had an immediate impact on us. First, the U.S. corporate tax rate was reduced from 35% to 21%. This rate reduction required us to remeasure our net deferred tax assets, which were originally recorded assuming a future tax benefit at the 35% rate. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded a provisional tax expense of $43.2 million related to remeasuring our net deferred tax assets as a result of the rate reduction. Second, as part of the transition to a modified territorial system, the Act imposes a one-time transition tax on the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. We recorded a provisional tax expense related to the one-time transition tax of $164.6 million during fiscal year 2018. We intend to elect to pay this tax over an eight-year period. The Securities and Exchange Commission has issued guidance allowing companies a measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of enactment, to refine their estimates of the tax impact of the new law. We will continue to refine our estimates and complete our accounting for the tax effects of the Act over the measurement period. Medical Device Excise Tax. On January 22, 2018, a continuing budget resolution was signed into law that included a provision to extend the moratorium on the 2.3% medical device excise tax for two more years, or through December 31, 2019. This tax has had, and may continue to have, a negative impact on our gross margin when the moratorium expires. 45 Tariff Measures. On July 6, 2018, the Trump Administration imposed 25% tariffs on a variety of imports from China, including Varian radiotherapy systems manufactured in China and certain components imported into the U.S. for our manufacturing and service activities. The Administration subsequently imposed tariffs on two additional lists of products from China; the first of these additional lists involves 25% tariffs and the second list imposes 10% tariffs increasing to 25% on January 1, 2019. We expect our imports into the U.S. to be impacted less by these two tariff lists than by the initial tariff list. China responded to the multiple U.S. tariff lists by announcing several lists of products from the U.S. that are subject to additional tariffs upon import to China. The first round of Chinese retaliatory tariffs went into effect on July 6, 2018. Our products are not impacted by these tariffs. Our exports of U.S. manufactured radiotherapy systems to China are impacted by the second Chinese list, implemented on August 23, 2018, which is subject to a 25% tariff. A third group of items, including certain of our manufacturing inputs and services, is subject to 5 to 10% tariffs which went into effect on September 24, 2018. Any tariffs imposed by the United States and China that include Varian technology could increase the cost of our products and adversely impact the competitiveness of our products and/or our operational results in the future. We are participating in the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative process to consider product-specific exclusions from these tariffs. While we are uncertain of the outcome of these exclusion discussions, if we are successful certain Varian products could be provided relief from these tariffs retroactive to the date of their enactment. In addition, we continue to engage in ongoing planning in and optimization of our global manufacturing and supply chain operations both in light of the long-term uncertainty of these tariff measures and to have a more flexible business disruption and continuity plan. Currency Fluctuations. In order to assist with the assessment of how our underlying businesses performed, we compare the percentage change in revenues and Oncology Systems gross orders from one period to another, excluding the effect of foreign currency fluctuations (i.e., using constant currency exchange rates). To present this information on a constant currency basis, we convert current period revenues and gross orders in currencies other than U.S. Dollars into U.S. Dollars using the comparable prior period average exchange rate. Percentage changes in revenue and gross orders are not adjusted for constant currency unless indicated. Currency fluctuations had a $50.6 million and a $38.0 million favorable impact on total revenues and Oncology Systems gross orders, respectively, in fiscal year 2018 compared to fiscal year 2017. We expect that fluctuations of non-U.S. Dollar currencies against the U.S. Dollar may continue to cause variability in our financial performance. Reportable Segments Oncology Systems . Our Oncology Systems business designs, manufactures, sells and services hardware and software products for treating cancer with conventional radiotherapy, and advanced treatments such as fixed field intensity-modulated radiation therapy ("IMRT"), image-guided radiation therapy ("IGRT"), volumetric modulated arc therapy ("VMAT"), stereotactic radiotherapy, stereotactic body radiotherapy and brachytherapy, as well as associated quality assurance equipment. Our software solutions also include informatics software for information management, clinical knowledge exchange, patient care management, practice management and decision-making support for comprehensive cancer clinics, radiotherapy centers and medical oncology practices. Our primary goal in the Oncology Systems business is to promote the adoption of more advanced and effective cancer treatments. In our view, the fundamental market forces that drive long-term growth in our Oncology Systems business are the rise in cancer cases; technology advances and product developments that are leading to improvements in patient care; customer demand for the more advanced and effective cancer treatments that we enable; competitive conditions among hospitals and clinics to offer such advanced treatments; continued improvement in safety and cost efficiency in delivering radiation therapy; and underserved medical needs outside of the United States. Approximately half of Oncology Systems gross orders and revenues come from international markets, within which certain emerging markets often have lower gross margins and longer installation cycles since many of these purchases are for new sites where treatment vaults need to be constructed. We have also seen an increased portion of gross orders and revenues coming from services and software licenses, both of which have higher gross margin percentages than our hardware products. We have also been investing a higher portion of our Oncology Systems research and development expenses in software and software-related products. The radiation oncology market in North America is largely characterized by replacements of older machines, with periodic increases in demand driven by the introduction of new technologies. Reimbursement rates in the United States have generally supported a favorable return on investment for the purchase of new radiotherapy equipment and technologies. While we believe that improved product functionality, greater cost-effectiveness and prospects for better clinical outcomes with new capabilities such as IMRT, IGRT and VMAT tend to drive demand for radiotherapy products, large changes in reimbursement rates or reimbursement structure can affect customer demand and cause market shifts. We believe that growth of the radiation oncology market in the United States could be impacted as customers decision-making processes are complicated by the uncertainties surrounding the medical device excise tax, and reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery, and that this uncertainty will likely continue in future fiscal years. We believe this uncertainty could impact transaction size, timing and purchasing 46 processes, and also contribute to increased quarterly business variability. Given all the dynamic elements affecting this market, as outlined above, we believe the North America market will continue to grow in the low to mid-single digit range. In the radiation oncology markets outside of North America, we expect the EMEA market to grow over the long-term with varying growth rates across the region. In APAC, we expect China to lead longer-term regional growth, with slower growth in the Japanese market. Latin America is currently experiencing volatility; however, our long-term outlook is cautiously optimistic. Overall, we believe the global radiation oncology market can grow over the long term, in constant currencies, in the low to mid-single-digit range. Proton Solutions . Our Proton Solutions business develops, designs, manufactures, sells and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy, another form of external beam radiotherapy using proton beams, for the treatment of cancer. Proton therapy is a preferred option for treating certain cancers, particularly tumors near critical structures such as the optic nerve and pediatric cancers. Although proton therapy has been in clinical use for more than four decades, it has not been widely deployed due to the high capital cost. We are investing substantial resources to grow this business. Proton therapy facilities are large-scale construction projects that are time consuming and involve significant customer investment and often complex project financing. Consequently, this business is vulnerable to general economic and market conditions, as well as reimbursement rates. Customer decision-making cycles tend to be very long, and orders generally involve many contingencies. While credit markets have improved in recent years, the funding environment for large capital projects, such as proton therapy projects, remains constrained. Our current focus is bringing our expertise in traditional radiation therapy to proton therapy to improve its clinical utility and to reduce its cost of treatment per patient, so that it is more widely accepted and deployed. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded $22.1 million in impairment charges on our Maryland Proton Treatment Center ("MPTC') subordinated loan due to the expected difference in value between the original loan and the value of the new security, issued to us in exchange, as part of the refinancing that occurred in August 2018. As part of the refinancing, in exchange for our outstanding subordinated loan, we received $22.9 million in Subordinate Revenue Bonds ("MPTC Series B-2 Bonds") that carry an interest rate of 8.5% per annum with interest accruing up to the principal amount of $33.9 million until January 1, 2022 and then will pay cash interest semi-annually. The MPTC Series B-2 Bonds will mature on January 1, 2049. In exchange for the outstanding deferred payment arrangement, we also received $6.0 million in cash and $25.0 million in Subordinate Revenue Bonds ("MPTC Series B-1 Bonds") that carry an interest rate of 7.5% with interest accruing up to the principal amount of $32.0 million until January 1, 2022 and then will pay cash interest semi-annually. The MPTC Series B-1 Bonds will mature on January 1, 2048. As of September 28, 2018, the MPTC Series B-1 Bonds are expected to be sold over the next twelve months. The MPTC Series B-1 Bonds are senior in right and time to the MPTC Series B-2 Bonds. In July 2018, we purchased the remaining $11.8 million of the commitment for our Georgia Proton Treatment Center ("GPTC") available-for-sale securities. In September 2018, we sold $8.5 million , including accrued interest, of our current carrying value of the securities for $8.3 million in cash. As of September 28, 2018, our remaining GPTC available-for-sale securities of $7.9 million are expected to be sold over the next twelve months. In March 2017, California Proton Treatment Center, LLC ( Original CPTC ) filed for bankruptcy and concurrently entered into a Debtor-in-Possession facility (the "DIP Facility") with ORIX Capital Markets, LLC, J.P. Morgan and Varian (the Lenders ). In September 2017, the Lenders to the Scripps Proton Therapy Center ("Scripps") signed a Transition Agreement to transition the operations of the center from Scripps to Proton Doctors Professional Corporation. As a result of these events, in fiscal year 2017, we recorded impairment charges of $51.4 million related to our Original CPTC loans and recorded an allowance for doubtful accounts of $34.2 million, which included $17.2 million related to CPTC long-term unbilled receivables. On December 6, 2017 ( Closing Date ), the Bankruptcy Court approved the sale of Scripps Proton Therapy Center to the California Proton Therapy Center, LLC ( CPTC ), an entity owned by the Lenders. The Lenders purchased all assets and assumed $112.0 million ( Term Loan ) of Original CPTC outstanding liabilities. On December 13, 2017, the Bankruptcy Court dismissed the bankruptcy filing of Original CPTC. On the Closing Date, the Lenders entered into a Credit Agreement with Original CPTC of which the terms of the Original CPTC Loans, DIP Facility and accrued interest (collectively Former Loans ) were modified. As a result, we received a 47.08% equity ownership in CPTC. Original CPTC has assigned all its Former Loans to CPTC at an amount of $112.0 million, the partially satisfied loan balance. 47 Per the terms of the Credit Agreement, our portion of the $112.0 million is $53.5 million; the remainder is allocated between ORIX and J.P. Morgan. The $53.5 million is composed of four tranches: Tranche A of $2.0 million, Tranche B of $7.2 million, Tranche C of $15.6 million, and Tranche D of $28.7 million (collectively the "Term Loan"). The maturity date of the Term Loan is three years from the Closing Date. The Term Loan is secured by the assets of CPTC. In addition, the Lenders have committed to lend up to $15.0 million in a Revolving Loan with a maturity date of one year from the Closing Date. Our share of the funding commitment from the Revolving Loan is $7.2 million, and as of September 28, 2018 , we have funded $3.7 million . All of the tranches of the Term Loan accrue paid-in-kind interest at 7.5% per annum, except the Tranche B, which accrues paid-in-kind interest at 10% per annum. The seniority of these loans is as follows: Revolving Loan, Tranche A, Tranche B, Tranche C, and Tranche D. If CPTC is in default, the interest of the Tranche A, C, and D will increase to 9.5% and the interest of the Tranche B and the Revolving Loan will increase to 12.0%. Considering Original CPTC financial difficulties, the modification of the original terms of the Former Loans, and the Lenders agreement to grant a concession on the Original CPTC Loans, we classified this transaction as a troubled debt restructuring ( TDR ). We did not have any unamortized fees from the Former Loans and any prepayment penalties. As a result, the cost basis and fair value of our outstanding Term Loan approximates the carrying value of the Former Loans prior to the TDR of $53.5 million . We used a discounted cash flow approach and determined the fair value of CPTC's equity as of Closing Date was $20.1 million. Our 47.08% ownership percentage amounts to a $9.5 million equity interest in CPTC. Since the common stock received was in addition to a loan receivable partially satisfied through the bankruptcy proceedings, in accordance with TDR accounting guidance, we recorded the equity interest at fair value and as an offset to the reinstated loan balance. The equity investment in CPTC is accounted for under the equity method of accounting and we account for our equity method share of the income or loss of CPTC on a quarter lag basis. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded a loss of $7.3 million in selling, general and administrative expenses on the Consolidated Statements of Earnings. As of September 28, 2018 , we had a total of $47.7 million in loans outstanding to CPTC and $117.1 million carrying value of loans outstanding, including accrued interest, Proton Solutions customers, available-for-sale securities and short-term senior secured debt. See Note 16, "Proton Solutions Loans and Investment" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. We discuss our results of operations below. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, impairment of investments and notes receivable, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of loss contingencies, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain, and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors. Revenue Recognition Our revenues are derived primarily from the sale of hardware and software products, and services from our Oncology Systems and Proton Solutions businesses. We recognize revenues net of any value added or sales tax and net of sales discounts. 48 We frequently enter into revenue arrangements with customers that contain multiple performance obligations including hardware, software, and services. Judgments as to the stand alone selling price and allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the individual performance obligations, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements. Changes to the performance obligations, contact terms, or credit worthiness of the customer can impact the arrangement and the amounts allocated to each element could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment, readiness of customers facilities for installation, installation requirements, and availability of products. If shipments or installations are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. Service revenues include revenues from hardware service contracts, software service agreements, bundled support arrangements, paid services and trainings, and parts that are sold by our service department. Revenues allocated to service contracts are generally recognized ratably over the period of the related contracts. We recognize revenues on proton therapy contracts over the life of the project as costs are incurred. We recognize revenue related to our proton therapy systems over time because the customer controls the work in process, the Company's performance does not create an asset with alternative use to the Company, and the Company has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. Changes in estimates of total contract revenue, total contract cost or the extent of progress towards completion are recognized in the period in which the changes in estimates are identified. Estimated losses on contracts are recognized in the period in which the loss is identified. In circumstances in which the final outcome of a contract cannot be reliably estimated but a loss on the contract is not expected, we recognize revenues to the extent of costs incurred until reliable estimates can be made. If and when we can make more reliable estimates, revenues and costs of revenues are adjusted in the same period. Recognizing revenue over time based on costs incurred requires the use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods. Because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be required to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods, and our financial results could suffer. For a discussion of the impact of ASC 606 on our revenue recognition, please see Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to the consolidated financial statements. Share-based Compensation Expense We grant our employees restricted stock units, stock options, performance units and performance options permit employees to purchase shares under the VMS employee stock purchase plan and grant our directors restricted stock units. We value our stock options and performance options granted and the component of the shares of VMS common stock purchased under the employee stock purchase plan using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We value our performance units that were granted prior to fiscal year 2018, which contain a market condition, using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant under both the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected terms of share-based awards and the expected price volatilities of shares of VMS common stock and peer companies that are used to assess certain performance targets over the expected term of the awards, and the expected dividend yield of shares of VMS common stock. For performance units granted in fiscal year 2018, we value them at fair market value and adjust the value according to the contingent market condition as specified in terms and conditions of those awards. The expected term of our stock options is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We use a blended volatility in deriving the expected volatility assumption for our stock options. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. In determining the grant date fair value of our performance units, historical volatilities of shares of VMS common stock, as well as the shares of common stock of peer companies, were used to assess certain performance targets. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock awards. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2018, we now record forfeitures as they occur. We estimate the probability that certain performance conditions that affect the vesting of performance units will be achieved, and recognize expense only for those awards expected to vest. If the actual number of performance units that vest based on achievement of performance conditions are materially different from our estimates, the share-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. 49 Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Except for government tenders, group purchases and orders with letters of credit in Oncology Systems, our payment terms often require payment of a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Impairment of Investments and Notes Receivable We recognize an impairment charge when the declines in the fair values of our available-for-sale securities and notes receivable below their cost basis are determined to be other than temporary impairments ( OTTI ). We monitor our available-for-sale securities for possible OTTI on an ongoing basis. When there has been a decline in fair value of a debt security below the amortized cost basis, we recognize OTTI if: (i) we have the intention to sell the security; (ii) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of the entire amortized cost basis; or (iii) we do not expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security. We assess the fair value of our available-for-sale securities, which are classified in the level 3 fair value hierarchy based on the income approach by using the discounted cash flow model with key assumptions that include discount rates corresponding to the terms and risks associated with the loans, as well as underlying cash flow assumptions. As of September 28, 2018 , we did not have any available-for-sale securities classified as level 3 in the fair value hierarchy. As of September 29, 2017 , we had $47.4 million , which was comprised of the fair value our Original CPTC Loans, of available-for-sale securities classified as level 3 in the fair value hierarchy. See Note 5, "Fair Value" and Note 16, "Proton Solutions Loans and Investment" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We also have investments in privately-held companies, some of which are in the startup or development stages. We monitor these investments for events or circumstances indicative of potential impairment, and we make appropriate reductions in carrying values if we determine that an impairment charge is required, based primarily on the financial condition, near-term prospects and recent financing activities of the investee. These investments are inherently risky because the markets for the technologies or products these companies are developing are typically in the early stages and may never materialize. At times, we advance notes to third parties, including our customers. We regularly assess these notes for collectability by considering internal factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the note balances as well as external factors such as economic conditions that may affect the note holder's ability to pay. Our ongoing consideration of all the factors described above could result in impairment charges in the future, which could adversely affect our operating results. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and on order and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Business Combinations We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows primarily from acquired technologies, patents, customer contracts and supplier relationships, useful lives and discount rates. Management estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from 50 estimates. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Impairment Assessment Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price in a business over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. The determination of the value of the intangible assets acquired involves certain judgments and estimates. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future and the appropriate discount weighted-average cost of capital ("WACC"). Each period we evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of purchased intangible assets and whether events or changes in circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization. Goodwill is allocated to reporting units expected to benefit from the business combination. We evaluate our reporting units when changes in our operating structure occur, and if necessary, reassign goodwill using a relative fair value allocation approach. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate its carrying value may not be recoverable. We can opt to perform a qualitative assessment to test a reporting unit goodwill for impairment or we can directly perform a quantitative assessment. Various factors are considered in the qualitative assessment, including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, financial performance and other relevant events affecting the reporting unit. Based on our qualitative assessment, if we determine that the fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50 percent) to be less than its carrying amount, the quantitative assessment will be performed. The quantitative assessment compares the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a combination of income and market valuation approaches. The income approach is based on the present value of estimated future cash flows that the reporting unit is expected to generate and the market approach is based on a market multiple calculated for each reporting unit based on market data of other companies engaged in similar business. Any excess of the reporting unit carrying value over its fair value will be recorded as an impairment loss. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates, operating margins and working capital needs to calculate projected future cash flows, WACC, future economic and market conditions, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our business and determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are inherently uncertain. Actual future results related to assumed variables could differ from these estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each reporting unit. We have two reporting units: (i) Oncology Systems and (ii) Proton Solutions, with $242.1 million and $51.5 million in goodwill, respectively, as of September 28, 2018 . Based upon the most recent annual goodwill analysis that we performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2018 , Proton Solutions' fair value was 48% in excess of its carrying value, and we believe each of the assumptions used to calculate Proton Solutions fair value to be reasonable. However, Proton Solutions could be at risk for a goodwill impairment because adjustments to proton therapy orders, revenue growth rates, operating margins, WACC and/or our working capital used in the fair value calculation could lead to an impairment. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually 12 months from installation, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Loss Contingencies From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations or other legal matters, both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any 51 liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties, outcomes are not predictable with assurance, and actual liabilities could significantly exceed our estimates of potential liabilities. In addition, we are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations. In connection with our past and present operations and facilities, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts. Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review these accrued balances quarterly. If we were required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. Defined Benefit Pension Plans We sponsor five defined benefit pension plans in Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expenses and liabilities related to the aforementioned plans. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, and rate of future compensation increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expenses and liabilities. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension plan expenses we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to report expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans are primarily based on the current effective yield of long-term corporate bonds that are of high quality with satisfactory liquidity and credit rating with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. A change in the discount rate may cause the present value of benefit obligations to change significantly. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency rate fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on net monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. There are three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 5, "Fair Value" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts is calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services. One-year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which mature in 13 months or less, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty credit default swap rates (for net assets) or our borrowing rate (for net liabilities). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact on the valuation of our derivative instruments. There were no transfers of assets or liabilities between fair value measurement levels during fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 . Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. We account for uncertainty in income taxes following a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. 52 Generally, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in the applicable tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. Our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our foreign subsidiaries do business. A decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from foreign countries, or a change in the mix of foreign countries among particular tax jurisdictions could increase or decrease our effective tax rate. Our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be remitted or deemed to be remitted to the United States. The Act was signed into law on December 22, 2017. Among other changes, the Act reduces the U.S. corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%. The reduction in the rate required us to remeasure our net deferred tax assets that were originally recorded assuming a future tax benefit at the 35% rate. During fiscal year 2018, we recorded a provisional tax expense of $43.2 million related to re-measuring our net deferred tax assets as a result of the rate reduction. As part of the transition to a modified territorial system, the Act imposes a one-time transition tax on the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. During fiscal year 2018, we recorded a $164.6 million provisional tax expense related to the one-time transition tax. We intend to elect to pay this tax over an eight-year period. The transition to a modified territorial regime and the one-time transition tax on unremitted earnings has caused us to re-evaluate our intentions with respect to the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. In the past, we did not accrue U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries because the earnings were considered to be indefinitely reinvested. In light of the changes to the taxation of foreign earnings in the Act, we no longer consider the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested. On December 22, 2017, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 ( SAB 118 ). This guidance allows registrants a measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of enactment, to complete their accounting for the tax effects of the Act. SAB 118 further directs that during the measurement period, registrants who are able to make reasonable estimates of the tax effects of the Act should include those amounts in their financial statements as provisional amounts. Registrants should reflect adjustments over subsequent periods as they are able to refine their estimates and complete their accounting for the tax effects of the Act. We have made reasonable estimates and recorded provisional amounts within the meaning of SAB 118. Also, it is expected that the U.S. Treasury will issue regulations and other guidance on the application of certain provisions of the Act. We will analyze that guidance and other necessary information to refine our estimates and complete our accounting for the tax effects of the Act over the measurement period. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2018 was the 52-week period ended September 28, 2018 , fiscal year 2017 was the 52-week period ended September 29, 2017 , and fiscal year 2016 was the 52-week period ended September 30, 2016 . Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 . Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 Product $ 1,569.9 13 % $ 1,394.0 (3 )% $ 1,435.9 Service 1,349.2 10 % 1,225.3 6 % 1,157.8 Total Revenues $ 2,919.1 11 % $ 2,619.3 1 % $ 2,593.7 Product as a percentage of total revenues 54 % 53 % 55 % Service as a percentage of total revenues 46 % 47 % 45 % 53 Total product revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems, partially offset by a decrease from Proton Solutions. Total product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 due to a decrease in revenues from Oncology Systems, partially offset by an increase in revenues from Proton Solutions. Total service revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , and fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from Oncology Systems. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change Constant Currency 2017 Percent Change Constant Currency 2016 Americas $ 1,436.9 7 % 7 % $ 1,344.6 4 % 4 % $ 1,289.2 EMEA 942.8 24 % 18 % 759.2 (5 )% (3 )% 798.1 APAC 539.4 5 % 4 % 515.5 2 % 1 % 506.4 Total Revenues $ 2,919.1 11 % 10 % $ 2,619.3 1 % 1 % $ 2,593.7 North America $ 1,347.2 6 % 6 % $ 1,267.8 5 % 5 % $ 1,205.9 International 1,571.9 16 % 13 % 1,351.5 (3 )% (2 )% 1,387.8 Total Revenues $ 2,919.1 11 % 10 % $ 2,619.3 1 % 1 % $ 2,593.7 North America as a percentage of total revenues 47 % 48 % 46 % International as a percentage of total revenues 53 % 52 % 54 % The Americas revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 primarily due to Oncology Systems. The Americas revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 due to an increase in revenues from Proton Solutions and Oncology Systems. EMEA revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 primarily due to Oncology Systems. EMEA revenues decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 due to a decrease in revenues from Oncology Systems and Proton Solutions. APAC revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 primarily due to Oncology Systems partially offset by a decrease in revenues from Proton Solutions. APAC revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to an increase in revenues in Oncology Systems and Proton Solutions. Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change Constant Currency 2017 Percent Change Constant Currency 2016 Product $ 1,431.0 17 % 15 % $ 1,221.5 (5 )% (5 )% $ 1,282.4 Service 1,339.2 10 % 8 % 1,215.3 6 % 6 % 1,148.2 Total Oncology Systems Revenues $ 2,770.2 14 % 12 % $ 2,436.8 % % $ 2,430.6 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 52 % 50 % 53 % Service as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 48 % 50 % 47 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 95 % 93 % 94 % Oncology systems product revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from higher volumes of hardware unit shipments and an increase in revenues from our software products. Oncology Systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to a decrease in revenues from hardware products resulting from a lengthening backlog conversion cycle due to a greater portion of the backlog being from emerging markets, and customer readiness delays in several countries. 54 Oncology Systems service revenues, which include performance obligations for installation, training and warranty, increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 and in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to increased customer adoption of service contracts as the warranty period on our TrueBeam systems expire and an increased number of customers as the installed base of our products continues to grow. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change Constant Currency 2017 Percent Change Constant Currency 2016 Americas $ 1,351.3 8 % 8 % $ 1,256.8 2 % 2 % $ 1,233.7 EMEA 883.2 28 % 21 % 691.1 (3 )% (1 )% 712.7 APAC 535.7 10 % 9 % 488.9 1 % % 484.2 Total Oncology System Revenues $ 2,770.2 14 % 12 % $ 2,436.8 % % $ 2,430.6 North America $ 1,261.6 7 % 7 % $ 1,180.0 3 % 3 % $ 1,150.4 International 1,508.6 20 % 16 % 1,256.8 (2 )% (1 )% 1,280.2 Total Oncology System Revenues $ 2,770.2 14 % 12 % $ 2,436.8 % % $ 2,430.6 North America as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues 46 % 49 % 48 % International as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues 54 % 51 % 52 % The Americas Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products in North America and, to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from services, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from software licenses. The Americas Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from services in North America, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from software licenses. EMEA Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from hardware products and, to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from services and software licenses. EMEA Oncology Systems revenues decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 due to a decrease in revenues from software licenses and hardware products, partially offset by an increase in revenues from services. APAC Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from services, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from software licenses and hardware products. APAC Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to an increase in revenues from software licenses and, to a lesser extent, an increase in revenues from services, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from hardware products. Variations of higher and lower revenues between the North America and international regions are impacted by regional factors influencing our gross orders, which include government spending, philanthropy/donations, economic and political instability in some countries, uncertainty created by health care reform (such as the excise tax on the sale of most medical devices, Medicare reimbursement rates and consolidation of free standing clinics in the United States), and different technology adoption cycles. See further discussion of orders under Gross Orders. 55 Proton Solutions Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 Product $ 138.9 (19 )% $ 172.5 13 % $ 153.1 Service 10.0 % 10.0 4 % 9.5 Total Proton Solutions revenues $ 148.9 (18 )% $ 182.5 12 % $ 162.6 Proton Solutions revenues as a percentage of total revenues 5 % 7 % 6 % Proton Solutions revenues decreased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to completion of the financing of the Georgia Proton Treatment Center in fiscal year 2017, which resulted in $56.0 million of revenue recorded for that project in fiscal year 2017, partially offset by an increase in revenues from the continued production and installation of Proton Solutions projects in fiscal year 2018. Proton Solutions revenues increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to the continued production and installation of Proton Solutions projects, which included the completion of the financing of the Georgia Proton Treatment Center in fiscal year 2017. Other In fiscal year 2016, we had $0.5 million in revenues from our former Ginzton Technology Center business, which was dissolved in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017 and is no longer a separate business. Gross Margin Fiscal Years Dollars by segment 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 (Dollars in millions) Oncology Systems $ 1,253.2 14 % $ 1,097.9 2 % $ 1,079.5 Proton Solutions 20.4 27 % 16.0 (36 )% 25.2 Gross margin $ 1,273.6 14 % $ 1,113.9 1 % $ 1,104.7 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 45.2 % 45.1 % 44.4 % Proton Solutions 13.7 % 8.8 % 15.4 % Total Company 43.6 % 42.5 % 42.6 % Percentage by sales classification Total Company - Product 34.7 % 31.8 % 31.2 % Total Company - Service 54.0 % 54.7 % 56.8 % Oncology Systems product gross margin percentage was 36.5% in fiscal year 2018 , compared to 35.1% in fiscal year 2017 and 33.1% in fiscal year 2016 . The increase in product gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 was primarily due to the mix of higher-priced products. The increase in product gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 was due to a favorable product mix and supply chain efficiencies. Oncology Systems service gross margin percentage was 54.6% in fiscal year 2018 , compared to 55.0% in fiscal year 2017 and 57.1% in fiscal year 2016 . The decrease in service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2018 compared to fiscal year 2017 was primarily due to an increase in the mix of revenues from lower margin performance obligations. The decrease in service gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 was primarily due to higher personnel-related costs and materials associated with operating system upgrades for our installed customer base. 56 Proton Solutions gross margin percentage increased in fiscal year 2018 , compared to fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to expanding service revenues and more revenues from higher margin projects. Proton Solutions gross margin percentage decreased in fiscal year 2017 , compared to fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to lower service revenues and the revision of profitability estimates caused by the weakening of the British Pound for projects in the United Kingdom during the second quarter of fiscal year 2017, partially offset by higher margins of new project revenue recognized in fiscal year 2017. Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 Research and development $ 233.9 11 % $ 210.0 5 % $ 200.4 As a percentage of total revenues 8 % 8 % 8 % Research and development expenses increased $23.9 million in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to an increase in investments in new product development projects and the enhancement of existing products in Oncology Systems. Research and development expenses increased $9.6 million in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to increased headcount in Oncology Systems and an increase in consulting services to support new product development projects and enhancement of existing products in both Oncology Systems and Proton Solutions. Selling, General and Administrative, Impairment Charges and Acquisition-Related Expenses Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 Selling, general and administrative $ 539.3 (2 )% $ 550.4 16 % $ 472.2 Impairment charges $ 22.4 (56 )% $ 51.4 n/m $ 2.2 Acquisition-related expenses $ 36.4 n/m $ 1.9 (39 )% $ 3.1 Selling, general and administrative as a percentage of total revenues 18 % 21 % 18 % Impairment charges as a percentage of total revenues 1 % 2 % % Acquisition-related expenses as a percentage of total revenues 1 % % % n/m = not meaningful Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $11.1 million in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to a $32.7 million decrease in the allowance for doubtful accounts that was mostly for CPTC and another proton center in the first quarter of fiscal year 2017, a $15.3 million decrease in litigation expenses primarily as a result of the settlement with Elekta in April 2017, and an $11.3 million decrease in restructuring charges, partially offset by a $29.3 million increase in employee-related costs largely due to an increase in headcount, share-based compensation and accrued bonuses, a $7.3 million loss on our equity investment in CPTC, and a $3.9 million unfavorable impact when foreign-currency denominated expenses were translated into U.S. dollars. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $78.2 million in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to a $39.6 million increase in the allowance for doubtful accounts that was mostly for CPTC and another proton center in fiscal year 2017, a $24.4 million increase in employee-related costs largely due to an increase in headcount, a $9.1 million increase in restructuring charges, a $3.5 million increase in consulting expenses and a $3.4 million increase in trade show and marketing expenses, partially offset by an $8.3 million decrease in litigation expenses primarily as a result of the settlement with Elekta in April 2017 and a $4.4 million decrease in international commissions paid to third-party distributors who sell our products. In fiscal year 2018 , we recorded $22.4 million in impairment charges, which was mostly related to our MPTC subordinated loan. In fiscal year 2017 , we recorded $51.4 million in impairment charges related to our Original CPTC Loans. In fiscal year 2016 , we recorded a $2.2 million impairment charge related to the sale of the New York Proton Center Senior First Lien loan. See Note 16, "Proton Solutions Loans and Investment" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. 57 Acquisition-related expenses were $36.4 million in fiscal year 2018 , $1.9 million in fiscal year 2017 and $3.1 million in fiscal year 2016 . The increase in fiscal year 2018 was primarily due to $29.7 million in losses related to hedging the anticipated Australian dollar Sirtex purchase price, partially offset by the net $9.0 million breakup fee received from Sirtex in connection with the termination of the acquisition. See, Note 9, "Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the hedging losses. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 Interest income, net $ 10.5 263 % $ 2.9 (49 )% $ 5.6 Interest income, net of interest expense, increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to a decrease in interest expense associated with a decrease in borrowings from our credit facility in fiscal year 2018, and an increase in interest income generated from our loans to our Proton Solutions' customers and available-for-sale securities. In fiscal year 2018, interest income includes $6.0 million in cash received in exchange for the outstanding deferred payment arrangement with MPTC into the MPTC Series B-1 Bonds. Interest income, net of interest expense, decreased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to a decrease in interest income generated from our loans to our Proton Solutions' customers and available-for-sale securities, partially offset by an increase in interest expense associated with the borrowing from our credit facility. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 Taxes on earnings $ 301.8 292.0 % $ 77.1 (30.0 )% $ 110.1 Effective tax rate 66.8 % 25.4 % 25.5 % Our effective tax rate increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 primarily due to enactment of the Act, which was signed into U.S. law on December 22, 2017. Our effective tax rate decreased in fiscal year 2017 from fiscal year 2016 primarily due to a favorable shift in the geographic mix of earnings. Two provisions of the Act had an immediate impact on us: First, the U.S. corporate tax rate was reduced from 35% to 21%. This rate reduction required us to remeasure our net deferred tax assets which were originally recorded assuming a future tax benefit at the 35% rate. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded a provisional tax expense of $43.2 million related to re-measuring our net deferred tax assets as a result of the rate reduction. Second, as part of the transition to a modified territorial system, the Act imposes a one-time transition tax on the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded a provisional tax expense related to the one-time transition tax of $164.6 million . We intend to elect to pay this tax over an eight-year period. The SEC has issued guidance allowing companies a measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of enactment, to refine their estimates of the tax impact of the new law. We fully expect that we will true up our estimates of these tax impacts from the new tax legislation over the measurement period. We adopted the guidance related to employee share-based payments during the period ended December 29, 2017. Under the prior standard, the tax effect of the excess stock deduction related to stock-based compensation was recorded to Additional Paid-in Capital in the equity section on the Balance Sheet. For a stock-based compensation instrument, the excess stock deduction is the difference between the amount of the deduction for taxable income and the amount of book expense related to that instrument. Under the new standard, the tax effect of the excess stock deduction related to stock-based compensation is recorded as a discrete item to Taxes on Earnings in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded a tax benefit $6.9 million related to excess stock deduction activity. We expect that the new standard may cause our effective tax rate to be less predictable and more volatile going forward. 58 In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. See Note 12, "Taxes on Earnings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Discontinued Operations The following table summarizes the key components of net (loss) earnings from discontinued operations: Fiscal Years (1) (Dollars in millions) 2017 (2) 2016 Revenues $ 194.0 $ 596.7 Cost of revenues 117.3 348.3 Gross margin 76.7 248.4 Operating expenses (3) 76.1 132.6 Operating earnings 0.6 115.8 Taxes on earnings 7.4 38.4 Net (loss) earnings from discontinued operations (6.8 ) 77.4 Less: Net earnings from discontinued operations attributable to noncontrolling interests 0.1 0.5 Net (loss) earnings from discontinued operations attributable to Varian $ (6.9 ) $ 76.9 (1) There was no activity in net loss from discontinued operations in fiscal year 2018. (2) In fiscal year 2017, the net loss from discontinued operations represents activity through the date of the Distribution. (3) Operating expenses from discontinued operations included separation costs of $34.2 million and $16.9 million during fiscal years 2017 and 2016, respectively. Separation costs include expenses for transaction advisory services, consulting services, restructuring and other expenses. Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 Net earnings per diluted share - continuing operations $ 1.62 (33 )% $ 2.42 (28 )% $ 3.36 Net earnings per diluted share - discontinued operations n/m (0.07 ) n/m 0.80 Total net earnings per diluted share $ 1.62 (31 )% $ 2.35 (44 )% $ 4.16 n/m = not meaningful Net earnings per diluted share from continuing operations decreased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 , primarily due to an increase in income tax expense as a result of the Act, partially offset by an increase in operating earnings from continuing operations. Net earnings per diluted share from continuing operations increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 , primarily due to $51.4 million in impairment charges related to our Original CPTC Loans and a $37.8 million allowance for doubtful accounts from CPTC and another proton center in fiscal year 2017, partially offset by a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to share repurchases. 59 Gross Orders Total Gross Orders (by segment) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change 2017 Percent Change 2016 Oncology Systems $ 3,113.9 9 % $ 2,846.8 5 % $ 2,702.1 Proton Solutions 57.7 (75 )% 229.2 119 % 104.7 Total Gross Orders $ 3,171.6 3 % $ 3,076.0 10 % $ 2,806.8 Gross orders are defined as new orders recorded during the period and revisions to previously recorded orders. New orders are recorded for the total contractual amount, excluding certain pass-through items and service items which are recognized as the revenue is recognized, once a written agreement for the delivery of goods or provision of services is in place and, other than Proton Solutions, when shipment of the product is expected to occur within two years, so long as any contingencies are deemed perfunctory. For our Proton Solutions business, we record orders when construction of the related proton therapy treatment center is reasonably expected to start within two years, but only if any contingencies are deemed perfunctory. We will not record Proton Solutions orders if there are major financing contingencies, if a substantial portion of the financing for the project is not reasonably assured or if customer board approval contingencies are pending. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders remain valid. If an order is no longer expected to ultimately convert to revenue, we record a backlog adjustment, which reduces backlog but does not impact gross orders for the period. Gross orders in any period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedules and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as orders for software or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance than hardware or older products. Because an order for a proton therapy system can be relatively large, an order in one fiscal period will cause gross orders in our Proton Solutions business to vary significantly, making comparisons between fiscal periods more difficult. Oncology Systems Gross Orders Gross Orders by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2018 Percent Change Constant Currency 2017 Percent Change Constant Currency 2016 Americas $ 1,509.5 5 % 5 % $ 1,439.6 1 % 1 % $ 1,427.3 EMEA 1,009.6 17 % 13 % 860.3 12 % 13 % 765.7 APAC 594.8 9 % 8 % 546.9 7 % 7 % 509.1 Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders $ 3,113.9 9 % 8 % $ 2,846.8 5 % 5 % $ 2,702.1 North America $ 1,396.9 3 % 3 % $ 1,350.6 4 % 4 % $ 1,302.4 International 1,717.0 15 % 12 % 1,496.2 7 % 7 % 1,399.7 Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders $ 3,113.9 9 % 8 % $ 2,846.8 5 % 5 % $ 2,702.1 The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 primarily due to growth in orders for our products in both North America and Latin America. The Americas Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to an increase in gross orders for services and, to a lesser extent, software licenses in North America, partially offset by a decrease in gross orders for hardware products in Latin America. EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 due to growth across the region in hardware products, software licenses and services, with significant strength in Western Europe. EMEA gross orders were further impacted by a favorable foreign currency exchange impact in fiscal year 2018. EMEA Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to increases in gross orders for hardware products and, to a lesser extent, an increase in gross orders for services. 60 APAC Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 primarily due to growth in Greater China driven by hardware products, software licenses and services, Australia and Japan driven by hardware products and services. APAC Oncology Systems gross orders increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to increases in gross orders for hardware products and services. The trailing 12 months' growth in gross orders for Oncology Systems at the end of September 28, 2018 , and at the end of the three previous fiscal quarters were: Trailing 12 months ended September 28, 2018 June 29, 2018 March 30, 2018 December 29, 2017 Americas 5% 2% 1% 1% EMEA 17% 20% 15% 14% APAC 9% (3)% 2% 3% North America 3% 4% 2% 3% International 15% 9% 8% 7% Total Oncology Systems Gross Orders 9% 6% 5% 5% Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems gross orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations. Over the long-term, we expect international gross orders, specifically from emerging markets, will grow as a percentage of overall orders. Oncology Systems gross orders are affected by foreign currency fluctuations, which could impact the demand for our products. In addition, government programs that stimulate the purchase of healthcare products could affect the demand for our products from period to period, and could therefore make it difficult to compare our financial results. Proton Solutions Orders Proton Solutions orders decreased in fiscal year 2018 over fiscal year 2017 primarily due to recording two proton therapy orders in fiscal year 2018 compared to six proton therapy orders in fiscal year 2017 . Proton Solutions orders increased in fiscal year 2017 over fiscal year 2016 primarily due to recording six proton therapy orders 2017 , compared to two proton therapy orders in fiscal year 2016 . Backlog Backlog is the accumulation of all gross orders for which revenues have not been recognized but are still considered valid. Backlog is stated at historical foreign currency exchange rates and revenue is released from backlog at current exchange rates, with any difference recorded as a backlog adjustment. Backlog at September 28, 2018 was $3.2 billion , including approximately $232.8 million in Proton Solutions backlog, which was an increase of 3% over the backlog at September 29, 2017 . Our Oncology Systems backlog at September 28, 2018 was 7% higher than the backlog at September 29, 2017 , which reflected a 11% and 2% increase for our international and North America regions, respectively. We perform a quarterly review to verify that outstanding orders in the backlog remain valid. Aged orders that are not expected to ultimately convert to revenues are deemed dormant and are reflected as a reduction in the backlog amounts in the period identified. Backlog adjustments are comprised of dormancies, cancellations, foreign currency exchange rate adjustments, backlog acquired from our acquisitions, and other adjustments. Gross orders do not include backlog adjustments. Backlog adjustments total net reductions of $152.8 million , $154.5 million and $189.8 million in fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 , respectively. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses or make other investments or loans, repurchase shares of VMS common stock, and fund continuing operations and capital expenditures. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. 61 Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: September 28, September 29, (In millions) 2018 2017 Decrease Total cash and cash equivalents $ 504.8 $ 716.2 $ (211.4 ) The decrease in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2018 compared to fiscal year 2017 was primarily due to $350.0 million in debt repayments, net of borrowings, under our credit facility agreements, $181.9 million used for the repurchase of shares of VMS common stock, $109.0 million used for acquisitions, and $47.7 million used for purchases of property, plant and equipment. These decreases were partially offset by $454.9 million in cash provided by operating activities and $60.7 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. At September 28, 2018 , we had approximately $117 million , or 23% , of cash and cash equivalents in the United States, which included approximately $44 million held as money market funds, and approximately $388 million , or 77% , of cash and cash equivalents were held abroad. As a result of the transition to a modified territorial system and the one-time transition tax on the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries in the Act, we expect that the cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries will generally no longer be subject to U.S. federal income tax upon a subsequent actual repatriation to the United States. However, a portion of this cash may still be subject to foreign and state income taxes upon future remittance. In light of the changes to the taxation of foreign earnings in the Act, we no longer consider the earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested. As a result, we have accrued for the foreign and state income taxes that we expect would be imposed upon a future remittance. As of September 28, 2018 , most of our cash and cash equivalents that was held abroad was in U.S. Dollars and was primarily held as bank deposits. In addition to cash flows generated from operations, a significant portion of which are generated in the United States, we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, VMS share repurchases, acquisitions and other corporate purposes. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2018 2017 2016 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 454.9 $ 399.1 $ 356.3 Investing activities (184.0 ) (130.1 ) (109.2 ) Financing activities (487.0 ) (392.4 ) (245.8 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 4.7 (3.9 ) (3.3 ) Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents $ (211.4 ) $ (127.3 ) $ (2.0 ) Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 , were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $454.9 million in fiscal year 2018 , compared to $399.1 million in fiscal year 2017 . The $55.8 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2018 compared to fiscal year 2017 was driven primarily by an increase of $114.6 million in the net change from operating assets and liabilities, an increase of $10.1 million in non-cash items, partially offset by a decrease of $68.9 million in net earnings. The major contributors to the net change in operating assets and liabilities in fiscal year 2018 were as follows: Accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities increased $175.6 million primarily due to an increase in a long-term income tax liability that resulted from the enactment of the Act and an increase in accrued compensation costs. Trade and unbilled receivables increased $76.1 million primarily due to an increase in unbilled receivables in Oncology Systems, partially offset by higher collections than billings. 62 Inventories increased $16.4 million primarily due to an increase in hardware product inventory in Oncology Systems. Accounts payable increased $21.9 million primarily due to the timing of payments. We generated net cash from operating activities of $399.1 million in fiscal year 2017 , compared to $356.3 million in fiscal year 2016 . The $42.8 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016 was driven primarily by an increase of $ 137.5 million in the net change from operating assets and liabilities, an increase of $85.8 million in non-cash items, partially offset by a decrease of $180.5 million in net earnings. The major contributors to the net change in operating assets and liabilities in fiscal year 2017 were as follows: Trade and unbilled receivables increased $18.0 million primarily due to an increase in unbilled receivables associated with additional projects booked in Proton Solutions, partially offset by a decrease in unbilled receivables in Oncology Systems. Prepaid and other assets increased $48.9 million mainly due to an increase in prepaid income taxes. Accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities increased $12.7 million primarily due to an increase in accrued compensation and benefit costs, partially offset by a decrease in accruals for income taxes. Deferred revenues increased $43.2 million primarily due to an increase in service revenues and advances from customers in Oncology Systems. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, collection of accounts receivable, inventory management, contracts with extended payment terms, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. See Item 1A, Risk Factors. Cash used for investing activities was $184.0 million , $130.1 million and $109.2 million in fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 , respectively. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment was $47.7 million , $59.1 million and $80.4 million in fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 , respectively. During fiscal year 2018 , we also used $109.0 million for acquisitions, net of cash acquired, $17.8 million for investments in available-for-sale securities, $10.1 million for investments in privately-held companies, $9.2 million to increase in restricted cash, $5.9 million for loans to CPTC and $5.5 million for the purchase of a foreign currency option for the anticipated Sirtex acquisition, partially offset by $15.9 million received from the sale of available-for-sale securities and $6.3 million received from the repayment on notes receivables. During fiscal year 2017 , we also used $24.5 million for the purchase of a senior secured debt, $18.2 million for the issuance of notes receivable and $13.4 million for investments in available-for-sale securities. During fiscal year 2016 , we also used $21.7 million for the issuance of notes receivable and $21.1 million for acquisitions, net of cash acquired. Cash used for financing activities was $487.0 million , $392.4 million and $245.8 million in fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 , respectively. We used $181.9 million , $294.5 million and $461.3 million for the repurchase of VMS common stock in fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 , respectively. Cash proceeds from the issuance of common stock to employees was $60.7 million , $72.1 million and $60.6 million in fiscal years 2018 , 2017 and 2016 , respectively. Under our credit facility agreements, we had $350.0 million of net debt repayments in fiscal year 2018 , $314.5 million of net debt repayments in fiscal year 2017 and $167.1 million of net borrowings in fiscal year 2016 . In fiscal year 2017, we also received $200 million from the Varex Term Facility in conjunction with the Distribution, and contributed $42.6 million in cash and cash equivalents to Varex. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 2% of revenues in fiscal year 2019 . On April 3, 2018, we entered into the 2018 Credit Agreement with certain lenders and Bank of America, N.A. as administrative agent. The 2018 Credit Agreement provides for a five-year revolving credit facility ("2018 Revolving Credit Facility") in an aggregate principal amount of up to $1.8 billion. The 2018 Revolving Credit Facility also includes a $50.0 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and permits swing line loans of up to $25 million. Under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility, we have the right to (i) request to increase the aggregate commitments by an aggregate amount for all such requests of up to $100.0 million and (ii) request an additional increase in the commitments or establish one or more term loans, provided that, in 63 each case, the lenders are willing to provide such new or increased commitments and certain other conditions are met. The proceeds of the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, share repurchases, permitted acquisitions and other corporate purposes, as well as to satisfy the prior outstanding obligation under the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility. The 2018 Revolving Credit Facility replaced the 2017 Revolving Credit Facility of $600 million. In addition, our Japanese subsidiary ( VMS KK ) has an unsecured uncommitted credit agreement with Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation that enables VMS KK to borrow and have outstanding at any given time a maximum of 3.0 billion Japanese Yen (the Sumitomo Credit Facility ). The Sumitomo Credit Facility will expire in February 2019. The following table summarizes our short-term borrowings: September 28, 2018 September 29, 2017 (In millions, except for percentages) Amount Weighted-Average Interest Rate Amount Weighted-Average Interest Rate 2017 Revolving Credit Facility $ % $ 350.0 2.36 % Total short-term borrowings $ $ 350.0 As of September 28, 2018 , we did not have any outstanding borrowings under the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility and Sumitomo Credit Facility. See Note 8, "Borrowings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the 2018 Revolving Credit Facility and the Sumitomo Credit Facility. The following table provides additional information regarding our short-term borrowings (excluding current maturities of long-term debt): Fiscal Years (In millions, except for percentages) 2018 2017 2016 Amount outstanding (at end of period) $ $ 350.0 $ 329.6 Weighted average interest rate (at end of period) % 2.36 % 1.78 % Average amount outstanding (during period) $ 144.9 $ 192.6 $ 320.8 Weighted average interest rate (during period) 2.53 % 1.90 % 1.68 % Maximum month-end amount outstanding during period $ 340.0 $ 350.0 $ 431.6 Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for the next twelve months and into the foreseeable future. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes, repurchase VMS common stock and fund loan commitments and other strategic investments. We did not have any outstanding debt at September 28, 2018 . Total debt as a percentage of total capital was 18.9% at September 29, 2017 . The ratio of current assets to current liabilities increased to 1.63 to 1 at September 28, 2018 , from 1.40 to 1 at September 29, 2017 . Days Sales Outstanding Our Oncology Systems trade and unbilled receivables days sales outstanding ( DSO ) was 102 days at September 28, 2018 , and 111 days at September 29, 2017 . Our trade and unbilled receivable and DSO are impacted by a number of factors, primarily including the timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, collections performance, payment terms, the mix of revenues from different regions and the effects of economic instability. Proton Solutions' DSO is not meaningful because it is highly variable. As of September 28, 2018 , approximately 4% of our net trade and unbilled receivable balance was related to customer contracts with remaining terms of more than one year. 64 Share Repurchase Program We repurchased shares of VMS common stock under various authorizations during the periods presented as follows: Fiscal Years (In millions, except per share amounts) 2018 2017 2016 Number of shares 1.6 3.3 5.7 Average repurchase price per share $ 112.63 $ 90.63 $ 81.61 Total cost $ 181.9 $ 294.5 $ 461.3 In November 2016, the VMS Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional 8.0 million shares of VMS common stock commencing on January 1, 2017. As of September 28, 2018 , approximately 3.6 million shares of VMS common stock remained available for repurchase under the November 2016 authorization. Stock repurchases may be made in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchase programs), or under Rule 10b5-1 share repurchase plans, and also may be made from time to time or in one or more larger blocks. All shares that were repurchased under our share repurchase programs have been retired. For more details see Note 13, "Stockholders' Equity and Noncontrolling Interests" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of September 28, 2018 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period Fiscal Year Fiscal Years Fiscal Years (In millions) 2019 2020-2021 2022-2023 Beyond Total Operating leases (1) $ 25.9 $ 41.7 $ 27.2 $ 17.8 $ 112.6 Purchase obligations (2 ) 41.2 34.6 8.4 4.3 88.5 Defined benefit pension plans (3) 8.0 8.0 Total (4) $ 75.1 $ 76.3 $ 35.6 $ 22.1 $ 209.1 (1) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our non-cancellable operating leases as of September 28, 2018 . (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, are legally binding and non-cancellable. Purchase obligations do not include agreements that are cancellable without penalty. (3) As further described in Note 11, "Retirement Plans" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, our post-retirement benefit plan is not presented in the table above as it is not material. As of September 28, 2018 , the remaining defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $1.0 million . Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and other economic and demographic assumptions, the potential for changes in legislation in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions necessary to fund our defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (4) The following items are not included in the table above: Long-term income taxes payable, which include the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and other long-term tax liabilities. As of September 28, 2018 , our total liability for uncertain tax positions was $47.0 million , of which we do not anticipate a payment in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of the remainder of future payments related to uncertain tax positions; we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents, cash to be generated from operations, and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy any payment obligations that may arise related to our liability for uncertain tax positions. The Act allows taxpayers to elect to pay the one-time transition tax over a period of 8 years as follows: 8% per year for each of the first five years and 15%, 20%, and 25%, in years 6 through 8, respectively. As of September 28, 2018 , the noncurrent portion of the one-time transition tax on unremitted foreign earnings was 65 $142.1 million . See Note 12, "Taxes on Earnings" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information. As of September 28, 2018 , we had accrued $5.4 million for environmental remediation liabilities. The amount accrued represents estimates of anticipated future costs and the timing and amount of actual future environmental remediation costs may vary as the scope of our obligations becomes more clearly defined. See Note 10, "Commitments and Contingencies" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements or more information. As of September 28, 2018 , our outstanding loan commitment to CPTC was $3.5 million for the short-term revolving loan. See Note 16, "Proton Solutions Loans and Investment" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 10, "Commitments and Contingencies" Environmental Remediation Liabilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Other Matters From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. Note 10, "Commitments and Contingencies" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The terms of these indemnification arrangements are generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is unlimited. As of September 28, 2018 , we have not incurred any significant costs since the Spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Recent Accounting Standards or Updates Not Yet Effective See Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and the estimated effects on our consolidated financial statements. 
