CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-11-26


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview In fiscal year 2007, total revenues increased 11% to $1.8 billion and net orders increased 14% to $2.1 billion over fiscal year 2006 revenues. Fiscal year 2007 was a challenging year for Oncology Systems where net orders remained relatively flat in the first half of fiscal year and improved by 11% in the second half of the fiscal year compared to the same periods of fiscal year 2006. For fiscal year 2007, Oncology Systems revenues grew 8% and net orders increased by 7% from the prior year levels, primarily driven by growth in demand for IGRT products. Both revenues and net orders in the X-ray Products segment increased by 13% in fiscal year 2007 from 2006 primarily due to increased demand for our high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes and flat panel detectors. In fiscal year 2007, our businesses in the Other category grew revenues by 135% and net orders by 292% over fiscal year 2006 primarily due to contributions from our acquisitions of ACCEL Instruments GmbH, or ACCEL, and strong growth in our SIP business (which includes the recently acquired Bio-Imaging Research, Inc., or BIR). Backlog at September 28, 2007, including ACCEL and BIR, was up 21% to $1.7 billion from the total at the end of the prior year. Net earnings per diluted share were $1.83 in fiscal year 2007, compared to $1.81 in fiscal year 2006 when we had a $0.16 per diluted share benefit from discrete tax events and discontinued operations. The acquisitions of ACCEL and BIR reduced net earnings per diluted share by $0.06 for fiscal year 2007. Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufacturers, sells and services hardware and software products for treating cancer with radiation, including linear accelerators, treatment simulation and verification products, brachytherapy equipment, information management and treatment planning software and other sophisticated accessory products and services. In fiscal year 2007, Oncology Systems reported a weak net order growth of 2% in the first half of fiscal year 2007 over the same year-ago period. For the full fiscal year 2007, total net orders grew 7% over fiscal year 2006 with an increase in North America of 5% and an increase in the international region of 9%. The increase in both the North American and international regions reflected continued growth in demand for IGRT products and service contracts. Nearly all of our high energy accelerators ordered in North America and over 70% of high energy accelerators ordered worldwide during fiscal year 2007 were ordered with our On-Board Imager product, or OBI, which enables IGRT. As of September 28, 2007, we had more than 630 installations of OBI on our high-energy and Trilogy accelerators, either complete or in progress. However, the net order growth in fiscal year 2007 for IGRT in both the North American and the international regions was significantly offset by declines in other product lines, including IMRT upgrades and brachytherapy products. Since a portion of our orders are shipped within one year of the placement of the order, the weak net order growth in the first half of fiscal year 2007, as well as customer-requested delays for product deliveries, contributed to the lower growth in Oncology Systems revenues for fiscal year 2007 of 8% over the prior year, with an increase in North American revenues of 7% and an increase in international revenues of 9%. Oncology Systems revenue growth was primarily due to growth in our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI), our Trilogy linear accelerators and service contracts, partially offset by declines in revenues from our high energy linear accelerators and other non-IGRT products such as IMRT upgrades, simulators and brachytherapy products. Gross margin in fiscal year 2007 decreased by about 0.6 percentage points from fiscal year 2006 due principally to the effect of hedging foreign currency denominated sales contracts when the orders were booked to protect the gross profit dollars. While the weakening of the U.S. dollar positively affected our revenues, it had a negative impact on our gross margin percentage. We continue to believe that demand for our products that enable IGRT will remain strong as North America has adopted IGRT technology as a standard of care for radiation therapy and radiosurgery and 52 Table of Contents the international regions have shown increased demand for IGRT products. Since late fiscal year 2006, our international regions have experienced a slowdown in demand for radiotherapy capital equipment for IMRT after several years of strong international growth driven by the rapid adoption of IMRT technology. We believe regional fluctuations in demand are consistent with a historical pattern where the international regions and North America region have different cycles of demand and technology adoption. We are, however, seeing a faster adoption rate among the technology early adopters for IGRT as compared to IMRT, which may lead to more compressed growth phase cycles. Also, we are seeing greater variability in the length of the customer purchasing cycle, which we believe results from a more complex decision making process associated with large dollar value of transactions for more sophisticated IGRT and surgical equipment. This also may result in greater fluctuation in our net orders and revenue results. Our success in Oncology Systems largely depends upon our ability to retain leadership in technological innovation, the cost effectiveness of our products, the efficacy of our treatment technology and external economic influences. Factors affecting the adoption rate of new technologies such as IGRT could include more-widely demonstrated efficacy of IGRT and our internal efficiency in design, documentation and testing, deployment and installation. They may also include customer training, reimbursement and our ability to educate customers about the cost effectiveness of our new technologies and clinical outcome advantages. External economic influences could include hospital financial strength in the United States, foreign currency exchange rates, governmental healthcare policies, significant changes to Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement rates for radiotherapy procedures and government budgeting and tendering cycles. X-Ray Products . Our X-ray Products business segment manufactures and sells (i) X-ray tubes for use in a range of applications including computed tomography, or CT, scanning, radioscopic/fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, special procedures and industrial applications and (ii) flat panel digital image detectors for X-rays (commonly referred to as flat panel detectors or digital image detectors), which is an alternative to image intensifier tubes for fluoroscopy and X-ray film for radiography. In fiscal year 2007, increased demand for our high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes and flat panel detectors contributed to the solid net orders and revenues growth over fiscal year 2006. Gross margin for this business segment also improved significantly driven by leverage from higher sales volume, product mix shift towards high margin products and cost reduction efforts. We continued to make investments in the X-ray Products business. We completed the expansion of our Salt Lake City, Utah, facility where our flat panel product line is manufactured. In addition, in fiscal years 2006 and 2007, we invested $36.8 million into dpiX Holding LLC, or dpiX Holding, to help fund the acquisition and construction by dpiX Holding (through its subsidiary, dpiX LLC) of a new $92 million Gen 4 fabrication facility in Colorado where the next generation of amorphous silicon arrays will be produced. dpiX LLC is a key supplier of amorphous silicon arrays for our flat panel detector products and we are a 40% equity owner in dpiX Holding. The Colorado facility should be in production in the second half of 2009. Our success in our X-ray Products business depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. Factors affecting the success of our X-ray Products business include our ability to develop products with lower cost, better quality and superior technology and performance, and to maintain strong relationships with our OEM customers. Other . The Other category is comprised of our SIP business (including BIR, our recent acquisition), the ACCEL Proton Therapy and Research Instruments business and the operations of the Ginzton Technology Center, or GTC (see Note 15 Segment Information of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K). 53 Table of Contents SIP designs, manufactures, sells and services Linatron X-ray accelerators for security and inspection purposes, such as cargo screening, border protection and nondestructive examination for a variety of applications. The SIP business had exceptional growth in net orders and revenues in fiscal year 2007 over the prior year. We are beginning to see wider deployment of our Linatron X-ray accelerators for cargo screening as customers are starting to place orders for multiple units. Orders from both the North American and international regions contributed to this growth. While we are optimistic about the long-term potential of our SIP business and encouraged by the increased interest in our SIP products, use of this technology in security cargo screening and border protection is still in its early stages. Orders and revenues for our SIP products may be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place larger orders with our OEM customers in a short time period and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. In January 2007, we acquired ACCEL, a privately-held supplier of scientific research instruments and proton therapy systems for cancer treatment, the performance for which we report under the Other category. In September 2007, we completed the purchase price allocation of ACCEL related to a contingency that was associated with an unresolved lawsuit, existing at the time of the acquisition. As part of the settlement of this lawsuit, we agreed to perform under a contract for a fixed price. From January to September 2007, we were gathering information related to the expected cost of satisfying this contract commitment and completed its assessment as of September 28, 2007. As a result, we recorded an additional loss related to this contingency of 25.6 million, or approximately $36.1 million, in Accrued Liabilities and a reduction to net deferred tax liabilities of $2.7 million, with a corresponding net increase in goodwill of approximately $33.4 million. The final purchase price allocation of ACCEL includes a total contingent loss accrual of 28.3 million, or approximately $40 million. If the actual costs related to the contingency exceed the estimated amount or if the estimated loss increases subsequent to September 28, 2007, the variances will be recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in the periods these variances arise. In order to realize the full potential of the ACCEL business, we expect to invest substantial resources to properly commercialize ACCEL advanced proton technology and to build a new medical business. Therefore, we expect ACCEL will continue to be dilutive to our net earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2008. Additionally, orders and revenues for our proton therapy products, as well as for our ACCEL Research Instruments business, may be affected by a number of factors. Proton therapy facilities are relatively large scale construction projects and require significant capital investment and may involve complex project financing. The customer decision cycle for a proton therapy project is very long and orders for proton therapy systems generally include many contingencies, which need to be resolved before we book an order. Therefore, we do not expect to book any orders for proton therapy systems in the short term. The ACCEL Research Instruments business is driven by a few large projects in the billion-dollar range and an increasing number of national accelerator projects ranging from one to five hundred million dollars. As the research projects in this market are all publicly funded, decisions on new projects or project upgrades are subject to public and political factors. While it appears that there is relatively steady growth in the number and volume of these research projects worldwide, the timing of these research projects may vary significantly. Therefore, ACCEL engineering and manufacturing resources will fluctuate over time as they adapt to the resource requirements of these research projects. Consequently, orders and revenues for ACCEL may be unpredictable and fluctuate. GTC, our research facility for new and potential markets, continues to develop technologies that enhance our current businesses or that may lead to new business areas, including next generation digital X-ray imaging technology, volumetric and functional imaging, improved X-ray sources and technology for security and cargo screening applications. In addition, GTC is developing technologies and products that are designed to improve disease management by more precise targeting of radiation, as well as by employing targeted energy and molecular agents to enhance the effectiveness and broaden the application of radiation therapy. 54 Table of Contents This discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Risk Factors in Item 1A. We discuss our results of operations below. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or GAAP, requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies and estimates and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include share-based compensation expense, revenue recognition, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of environmental remediation liabilities, valuation of defined benefit and post-retirement benefit plans and valuation of taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies are impacted significantly by judgments, assumptions and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements, and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, also see Risk Factors In Item 1A. Share-based Compensation Expense Effective October 1, 2005, we adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment, or SFAS 123(R), using the modified prospective transition method. We have valued our share-based payment awards granted beginning in fiscal year 2006 using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model is affected by VMS stock price as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected term of stock awards and the expected price volatility of VMS stock over the expected term of the awards. The expected term is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. Upon the adoption of SFAS 123(R), we determined the expected term of stock options based on the demographic grouping of employees and retirement eligibility. Upon adoption of SFAS 123(R), we used a combination of historical and implied volatility, or blended volatility, in deriving the expected volatility assumption. The blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility was derived based on six-month traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the six-month term of the exchange-traded options to the expected lives of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options in our common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we cannot rely exclusively on implied volatility based on that fact that the term our six-month exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected lives of 55 Table of Contents the stock options granted by us. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected lives of the stock options granted by us and the implied volatility of six-month exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of our stock going forward. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock options. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in the application of SFAS 123(R) in future periods, the compensation expense that we record under SFAS 123(R) may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Revenue Recognition We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of the proceeds received from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, the determination of whether any undelivered elements are essential to the functionality of the delivered elements and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical in respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. In addition, the amount of product revenues recognized is affected by our judgments as to whether objective and reliable evidence of fair value exists for hardware products and vendor-specific objective evidence of the fair value for software products in arrangements with multiple elements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the ability to establish objective and reliable evidence of fair value or vendor-specific objective evidence of the fair value for those elements could affect the timing of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment and is subject to customer acceptance and the readiness of customers facilities. If shipments are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. In addition, revenues related to contracts for certain proton therapy and scientific research instruments products and services, as well as certain SIP products offered by the BIR business, are recognized under the percentage of completion method. Under the percentage-of-completion method of accounting, sales and gross profit are recognized as work is performed based on the relationship between actual costs incurred and total estimated costs at the completion of the contract. If a loss is expected on a contract, the estimated loss would be charged to cost of sales in the period the loss is identified. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the amounts to accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or a contract is later terminated, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts Credit evaluations are undertaken for all major sale transactions before shipment is authorized. Normal payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due upon signing of the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect the future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively impacted. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are specialized in nature or subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand 56 Table of Contents and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The majority of companies that we have acquired have not had significant identified tangible assets and, as a result, a significant portion of the purchase price has been typically allocated to intangible assets and goodwill. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. As a result of business acquisitions, the allocation of the purchase price to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. The allocation of the purchase price of the acquired companies to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for these cash flows. Should conditions be different from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. We evaluate goodwill and purchased assets with indefinite lives for impairment annually in accordance with SFAS 142 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. The impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units. If the carrying amount is in excess of the fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit with the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. We will continue to make assessments of impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of our fiscal years or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. We performed such evaluations for the two reporting units that carried goodwill in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2006, Oncology Systems and X-ray Products, and found no impairment. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2007, we performed goodwill impairment testing for the four reporting units that carried goodwill, Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, ACCEL and SIP, and found no impairment. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually one year, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends. If we were required to accrue additional warranty cost in the future, it would negatively impact our operating results. 57 Table of Contents Environmental Matters We are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world regulating the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous materials that do or may create increased costs for some of our operations. Environmental remediation liabilities are recorded when environmental assessments and/or remediation efforts are probable and the costs of these assessments or remediation efforts can be reasonably estimated, in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Statement of Position 96-1, Environmental Remediation Liabilities. The accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate as to the total costs of remediation and the time period over which these costs will be incurred. On a quarterly basis, we review these accrued balances. If we were required to accrue additional environmental remediation costs in the future, it would negatively impact our operating results. Defined Benefit and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans We sponsor six defined benefit pension plans in Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom covering the employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements. In July 2007, we made changes to the defined benefit plan in the United Kingdom by which we terminated the accrual of additional benefits for existing participants and suspended the enrollment of new participants. We also sponsor a post-retirement benefit plan that provides healthcare benefits to certain eligible retirees in the United States. We do not have any defined benefit pension plan in the United States. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expense and liability related to those plans for which the benefit is actuarially determined. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of future compensation increases and healthcare cost increases, which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use subjective factors, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expense and liability. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of pension expense we recorded. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return of those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans in all countries are based on high quality AA-rated corporate bonds with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. In countries where the corporate bond market is not sufficiently representative at longer durations, the discount rate also takes into account the yield of long-term government bonds corresponding to the duration of the benefit obligations and the difference between the yield curve on high quality corporate fixed-income investments and government fixed-income investment. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations. Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves addressing uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. We maintain reserves for potential tax contingencies arising in the jurisdictions in which we do business. Such reserves are based on our assessment of the likelihood of an unfavorable outcome and the potential loss from such contingencies, and may be adjusted from time to time in light of changing facts and circumstances. These reserves are maintained until such time as the matter is settled or the statutory period for adjustment has passed. Adjustments could be required in the future if we determine that our reserves for tax contingencies are inadequate. The provision for taxes on earnings includes the effect of changes to these reserves that are considered appropriate. 58 Table of Contents In addition, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in certain tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. Earnings derived from our international regions are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our international subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our international regions, or a change in the mix of international regions among particular tax jurisdictions, could increase our effective tax rate. Also, our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the United States. In July 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued FASB Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an interpretation of SFAS No. 109 . The provisions are effective beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2008. See Note 1 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2007 comprised the 52-week period ended on September 28, 2007. Fiscal year 2006 comprised the 52-week period ended on September 29, 2006 and fiscal year 2005 was the 52-week period ended on September 30, 2005. Discussion of Financial Data for Fiscal Years 2007, 2006 and 2005 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Product $ 1,448 8 % $ 1,342 16 % $ 1,162 Service Contracts and Other 329 29 % 256 16 % 221 Total Revenues $ 1,777 11 % $ 1,598 16 % $ 1,383 Product as a percentage of total revenues 81 % 84 % 84 % Service Contracts and Other as a percentage of total revenues 19 % 16 % 16 % Revenues by region North America $ 869 8 % $ 807 11 % $ 730 Europe 545 21 % 450 17 % 385 Asia 283 11 % 255 23 % 208 Rest of world 80 (7 )% 86 44 % 60 Total International(1) 908 15 % 791 21 % 653 Total $ 1,777 11 % $ 1,598 16 % $ 1,383 North America as a percentage of total revenues 49 % 51 % 53 % International as a percentage of total revenues 51 % 49 % 47 % (1) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. 59 Table of Contents Total revenues increased in fiscal years 2007 and 2006 over the respective prior years primarily due to increases in Oncology Systems revenues in each year, as well as contributions from the X-ray Products business segment and the Other category, which in fiscal year 2007 included the acquired businesses of ACCEL and BIR. The increase in total revenues in fiscal years 2007 and 2006 over the respective prior year periods was primarily due to the growth in product revenues, and to a lesser extent, an increase in service contracts and other revenues. Oncology Systems and the X-ray Products business segments, as well as our businesses in the Other category, contributed to the growth in product revenues in fiscal years 2007 and 2006 over the year-ago periods. Product revenues grew less in fiscal year 2007 than in fiscal year 2006 over their respective prior year periods primarily due to slower product revenue growth in Oncology Systems. In fiscal years 2007 and 2006, Oncology Systems and our businesses in the Other category contributed to the increase in service contracts and other revenues over the prior years. In fiscal year 2007, service contracts and other revenues grew at a higher rate than product revenues primarily due to the increase in Oncology Systems service contract revenues, as well as the contribution from ACCEL. The growth in Oncology Systems service contracts revenues, aided by the inclusion of ACCEL contract revenues, caused our service contracts and other revenues to represent a higher percentage of total revenues. In fiscal year 2006, the growth in Oncology Systems service contracts revenues was the primary contributor to the increase in total service contracts and other revenues over fiscal year 2005. International revenue growth exceeded the North American revenue growth in fiscal years 2007 and 2006 over the respective prior years and, in fiscal year 2007, for the first time international revenues represented more than half of our worldwide revenues. In fiscal year 2007, both business segments and our businesses in the Other category contributed to the revenue growth in all geographic regions, except for the rest of the world region where Oncology Systems revenues declined. In fiscal year 2006, Oncology Systems revenue growth was the primary contributor to the increases in revenue in all geographic regions over the prior year, with X-ray Products revenue growth contributing to a lesser extent. Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Product $ 1,145 5 % $ 1,088 16 % $ 942 Service Contracts(1) 295 19 % 248 16 % 214 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,440 8 % $ 1,336 16 % $ 1,156 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 80 % 81 % 81 % Service Contracts as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 20 % 19 % 19 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 81 % 84 % 84 % (1) Revenues from service contracts represent revenues from fixed-term service contracts and labor cost services. This excludes revenues from spare parts sold by our service department. Increases in both product and service contracts revenues contributed to the growth in Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006. The increase in Oncology Systems product revenues was driven by higher sales volume of accessory products that enable IGRT and our Trilogy linear accelerator; partially offset by lower sales volume of our high-energy linear accelerators and other non-IGRT products such as IMRT upgrades, simulators and brachytherapy products. Oncology Systems product revenues, however, grew at a slower rate in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 than growth in fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005 due primarily to weak first half net orders in fiscal year 2007. We saw greater variability in the length of the customer purchasing cycle, which we believe resulted from a 60 Table of Contents more complex decision making process associated with large dollar value of transactions for more sophisticated IGRT and surgical equipment. Because a portion of our orders for products are shipped within one year of the placement of such order from the customer, our fiscal year 2007 product revenues were adversely impacted since there were less product orders to ship within the fiscal year. During fiscal year 2007, Oncology Systems revenues were also negatively impacted by the timing of product shipments in accordance with planned customer-requested delivery dates. The increase in service contracts revenues in fiscal year 2007 from fiscal year 2006 was primarily driven by the increase in sophistication of our products and the growing installed base of software products that generate increased annual maintenance contracts and renewals. Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2006 increased from fiscal year 2005, primarily due to an increase in product revenues attributable to higher sales volume of accessory products that enable IMRT and IGRT (including our OBI) and our Trilogy linear accelerators, and to a lesser extent, higher sales volume of our software and brachytherapy products. The increase in service contracts revenues in fiscal year 2006 from fiscal year 2005 was primarily driven by the increase in sophistication of our products and the success of our software products which generate annual maintenance contracts and renewals. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 North America $ 754 7 % $ 705 10 % $ 643 Europe 454 12 % 404 18 % 344 Asia 160 8 % 148 28 % 116 Rest of world 72 (9 )% 79 47 % 53 Total International 686 9 % 631 23 % 513 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,440 8 % $ 1,336 16 % $ 1,156 North America as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 52 % 53 % 56 % International as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 48 % 47 % 44 % All of our geographic regions, except the rest of the world region, contributed to the Oncology Systems revenues growth in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006. Revenue growth in both the North American and international regions was slower in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 than the revenue growth in fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005. The slower revenue growth in the North American and international regions was primarily due to the weak net orders growth in the first half of fiscal year 2007. The growth in North American revenues in fiscal year 2007 over the year-ago period was primarily due to the higher sales volume of our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI) and our Trilogy linear accelerators, as well as increase in service contracts revenues, partially offset by lower sales volume of our high-energy linear accelerators. The increase in international revenues in fiscal year 2007 over the prior year was primarily due to the increase in international service contract revenues and the increase in sales volume of accessory products that enable IGRT and our Trilogy linear accelerators in Europe and Asia, which was partially offset by lower sales volume of other non-IGRT products such as, simulators and brachytherapy products in Europe, and the decrease in sales volume of our high-energy linear accelerators in the rest of world region. All of our geographic regions contributed to the increase in Oncology Systems revenues for fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005. Oncology Systems continued to benefit from strong cyclical demand in the international regions that started a few years ago driven by the adoption of IMRT and the underserved medical needs outside of the United States after several years of very slow international revenue growth. In fiscal year 2006, our North American revenues increased 10% over the prior year due to growth in demand for our new products for IGRT. 61 Table of Contents Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the international and North American regions is a historical pattern reflecting different technology adoption cycles and demand cycles that is consistent with the net order patterns discussed more fully under Net Orders. X-ray Products Revenues Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 North America $ 96 9 % $ 88 19 % $ 74 Europe 35 24 % 28 4 % 27 Asia 119 13 % 105 20 % 88 Rest of world 8 11 % 7 17 % 6 Total International 162 15 % 140 16 % 121 Total X-ray Products $ 258 13 % $ 228 17 % $ 195 North America as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 37 % 38 % 38 % International as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 63 % 62 % 62 % X-ray Products revenues as a percentage of total revenues 15 % 14 % 14 % X-ray Products revenues increased by 13% and 17% in fiscal years 2007 and 2006, over the respective prior years. All of our geographic regions contributed to the increase in X-ray Products revenues for fiscal years 2007 and 2006. The growth in X-ray Products revenues in North America in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was primarily driven by higher sales volume of our flat panel detectors primarily to our OEM customers. Revenue growth in North America was slower for fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 than the revenue growth in fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005 primarily due to lower sales volumes of general radiographic x-ray tubes to a major OEM customer. The growth in X-ray Products revenues in the international region in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was primarily driven by increased sales volumes of our high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes and our flat panel detectors, primarily to OEM customers in Asia and Europe. The growth in X-ray Products revenues in fiscal year 2006 over the prior year was primarily driven by higher sales volume of our flat panel detectors to our OEM customers in Asia and North America, and to a lesser extent, increased sales volumes of our high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes primarily to one OEM customer and X-ray tubes used in security screening. Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Product $ 45 76 % $ 26 3 % $ 25 Service Contracts and Other 34 322 % 8 19 % 7 Total Other $ 79 135 % $ 34 6 % $ 32 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 4 % 2 % 2 % For our Other category, which in fiscal year 2007 was comprised of SIP (including BIR), ACCEL and GTC, revenues increased 135% over fiscal year 2006. The growth in revenues was due to the contributions from ACCEL, which we acquired in the second quarter of fiscal year 2007, and the higher sales volume of our Linatron products to our OEM customers for cargo screening and border protection. Revenues from our businesses in the Other category increased 6% for fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005, primarily due to higher sales volume of the SIP Linatron products to our OEM customers for cargo screening and border protection. 62 Table of Contents Gross Margin Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Dollar by segment Oncology Systems $ 609 6 % $ 573 12 % $ 512 X-ray Products 104 30 % 80 18 % 67 Other 22 113 % 10 (26 )% 14 Gross margin $ 735 11 % $ 663 12 % $ 593 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 42.3 % 42.9 % 44.3 % X-ray Products 40.2 % 34.9 % 34.6 % Total Company 41.3 % 41.5 % 42.9 % In fiscal year 2007, total gross margin decreased by 0.2 percentage points from fiscal year 2006 due primarily to the integration of our recent acquisitions of ACCEL and BIR and a decrease in Oncology Systems gross margin, partially offset by significant improvement in X-ray Products gross margin. Total gross margin decreased by 1.4 percentage points in fiscal year 2006 compared to fiscal year 2005 due primarily to a decrease in Oncology Systems gross margin and the inclusion of share-based compensation expense in connection with our adoption of SFAS 123(R), partially offset by a slight increase in X-ray Products gross margin. Total gross margin of 42.9% in fiscal year 2005 was the highest achieved annual gross margin since we became a standalone medical systems company in 1999. Product gross margin was 41.1% in fiscal year 2007, compared to 41.2% and 43.0% in fiscal years 2006 and 2005, respectively. Service contracts and other gross margin was 42.6% in fiscal year 2007, compared to 43.4% and 42.3% in fiscal years 2006 and 2005, respectively. The decrease in total service contract and other gross margin in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was primarily due to the acquisition of ACCEL, the contract revenues of which provide gross margins that are lower than those of our other businesses. Oncology Systems gross margin decreased 0.6% in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006. In fiscal year 2007, Oncology Systems gross margin benefited from increases in service contracts gross margin and was unfavorably impacted by decreases in product gross margins over the prior year. Compared to fiscal year 2006, service gross margin increased from 44.1% to 45.7% for fiscal year 2007. The improvement in service contracts gross margin was due primarily to higher volume and the continued growth in higher margin software maintenance contracts in Oncology Systems. The 0.6 percentage points decrease in Oncology Systems product gross margin in fiscal year 2007 over the prior year was primarily due to the effect of hedging foreign currency denominated sales contracts when the orders were booked. While the weakening of the U.S. dollar positively affected our revenues in fiscal year 2007, it had a negative impact on our Oncology Systems gross margin percentage. Oncology Systems gross margin decreased in fiscal year 2006 compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decrease in product gross margin which was primarily attributable to: (i) higher ramp-up costs and higher proportion of revenue associated with our new products for IGRT; (ii) share-based compensation expense recorded in fiscal year 2006 in the Oncology Systems segment in connection with our adoption of SFAS 123(R); and (iii) a continuing mix shift towards a higher proportion of international revenues which typically have lower gross margins than revenues from North America. The decrease in product gross margin was partially offset by an improvement in service contracts gross margin, primarily due to higher volumes and growth in higher margin software maintenance contracts in Oncology Systems. X-ray Products gross margin in fiscal year 2007 increased by 5.3 percentage points from the prior year. The gain in gross margin resulted from (i) product mix shift towards sales of higher margin high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes and flat panel detectors, (ii) cost reduction efforts and (iii) leverage from higher sales volume. X-ray Products gross margin in fiscal year 2006 increased slightly from fiscal 63 Table of Contents year 2005 due to increased sales of our higher gross margin flat panel detectors was significantly offset by product mix shift toward lower gross margin X-ray tube products and increased share-based compensation expense in the X-ray Products segment. X-ray Products gross margin will continue to be impacted by factors including sales mix between flat panel detectors and X-ray tube products, product pricing, timing of new product introduction, cost reduction initiatives and other factors. Therefore, we may not be able to sustain the high gross margin achieved in fiscal year 2007. Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Research and development $ 117 17 % $ 100 22 % $ 82 As a percentage of total revenues 7 % 6 % 6 % The $17 million increase in research and development expenses in fiscal year 2007 was driven by increased spending of $10 million in Oncology Systems, $5 million in X-ray Products and $2 million in the Other category. The $9.8 million increase in research and development expenses in Oncology Systems in fiscal year 2007 compared to the year-ago period was attributable primarily to: (a) an increase in employee headcount, materials costs and consulting expenses of $5.1 million for development of our next generation linear accelerator products, (b) an increase in expenses for development of software products of $2.2 million, (c) unfavorable foreign currency impact of $2.2 million resulting from the relatively weak U.S. dollar as the research and development expenses incurred by our foreign operations was translated into U.S. dollars and (d) an increase in development expenses for radiosurgery products of $1.0 million. The $5.3 million increase in X-ray Products was primarily due to increased expenses for development projects related to flat panel detectors and X-ray tube products. The $1.9 million increase in the Other category was primarily due to an increase of $1.2 million associated with research and development at ACCEL, which was acquired in the second quarter of fiscal year 2007 and an increase of $0.8 million associated with the expenses incurred by BIR, which was acquired by us in the third quarter of fiscal year 2007. The $18 million increase in research and development expenses for fiscal year 2006 was driven by increased spending of $11 million in Oncology Systems, $4 million in the Other category and $3 million in X-ray Products. The $11 million increase in research and development expenses in Oncology Systems for fiscal year 2006 compared to fiscal year 2005 was attributable primarily to: (a) increased employee headcount, materials costs and consulting expenses totaling $10.5 million for the development of our next generation linear accelerator products and (b) increased share-based compensation expense of $2.0 million recorded in fiscal year 2006. These increases were partially offset by favorable foreign currency impact of $0.9 million in fiscal year 2006 resulting from the relatively strong U.S. dollar for our foreign operations as the research and development expenses are translated into U.S. dollars. The $3 million increase in X-ray Products was due to: (a) increased expenses totaling $2.7 million for new research and development projects related to both X-ray tubes and flat panel detectors and (b) share-based compensation expense of $0.7 million recorded in fiscal year 2006. The $4 million increase in the Other category was primarily due to: (a) increased expenses totaling $2.0 million for research and development of the SIP Linatron product line and (b) share-based compensation expense of $1.6 million recorded in fiscal year 2006. Selling, General and Administrative Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Selling, general and administrative $ 282 11 % $ 254 23 % $ 206 As a percentage of total revenues 16 % 16 % 15 % 64 Table of Contents Our selling, general and administrative expenses have remained relatively in line with our revenue growth in fiscal year 2007. The $28 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2007 compared to fiscal year 2006 was primarily attributable to: (a) operating expenses of $13.3 million associated with ACCEL and BIR, (b) an increase in employee-related and other operating expenses of $5.0 million associated with required corporate, regulatory and information technology infrastructure improvements to support our growing businesses, (c) unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $3.3 million resulting from the relatively weak U.S. dollar for our foreign operations as the selling, general and administrative expenses are translated into U.S. dollars, (d) increased fees of $4.3 million related to certain commission arrangements, (e) an increase in employee-related and other operating expenses of $2.7 million related to the expansion of our operations into China and (f) a decrease of $1.7 million in income on equity investment in dpiX Holding from the year-ago period (see Note 4 Related Party Transactions in Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). These increases were partially offset by $1.0 million in additional gains recognized for hedging balance sheet exposures from our various foreign subsidiaries and business units. The $48 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2006 compared to fiscal year 2005 was primarily attributable to: (a) increased share-based compensation expense of $28.7 million recorded for fiscal year 2006, (b) increased employee-related expenses of $14.9 million resulting from an increase in employee headcount and other associated costs in Oncology Systems and corporate headquarters to support our growing business activities, (c) increased professional fees of $2.7 million largely driven by information technology projects and (d) decreased income on equity investment in dpiX Holding of $2.0 million and (e) increased fees of $1.5 million related to certain non-employee related commission arrangements. These increases were partially offset by (i) a gain on balance sheet hedging of $3.1 million, (ii) a decrease in accounting fees of approximately $1.7 million primarily due to the unusually high expenses in fiscal year 2005 related to compliance with the required documentation and testing of internal control over financial reporting as mandated by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and (iii) favorable foreign currency translation impact of $1.7 million resulting from the relatively strong U.S. dollar for our foreign operations as the selling, general and administrative expenses are translated into U.S. dollars. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Interest income, net $ 7.4 (21 )% $ 9.3 178 % $ 3.4 The decrease in interest income, net in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was due to lower balances of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and increased borrowings in fiscal year 2007. The increase in interest income, net in fiscal year 2006 compared to fiscal year 2005 was attributable to an increase in interest rates in fiscal year 2006. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2007 Change 2006 Change 2005 Effective tax rate 30 % 6 % 24 % (9 )% 33 % The increase in the effective tax rates in fiscal year 2007 from fiscal year 2006 was primarily due to tax benefits recorded in the prior fiscal year related to (i) the repatriation of foreign earnings under the American Jobs Creation of 2004, or the Job Creation Act, which resulted in a decrease in our effective tax rate of approximately four percentage points in fiscal year 2006, (ii) a deferred tax asset adjustment for certain prior years state and federal temporary differences, which resulted a decrease in our effective tax rate of approximately two percentage points in fiscal year 2006. 65 Table of Contents The decrease in the effective tax rates in fiscal year 2006 from fiscal year 2005 was primarily due to tax benefits related to (i) the repatriation of foreign earnings under the Jobs Creation Act, which resulted in a decrease in our effective tax rate of approximately four percentage points, (ii) a deferred tax asset adjustment for certain prior years state and federal temporary differences, which resulted in a decrease in our effective tax rate of approximately two percentage points, (iii) the reduction of reserves for potential tax contingencies as a result of the lapse of the statute of limitations in certain domestic jurisdictions, which resulted in a one percentage point decrease in our effective tax rate and a shift in the geographic mix of earnings towards countries with lower tax rates, which resulted in a decrease in our effective tax rate of approximately three percentage points in fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005. During fiscal year 2006, we repatriated approximately $128 million in foreign earnings pursuant to the Jobs Creation Act and recorded a $12 million net tax benefit. We also recorded a net tax benefit of $7.2 million in fiscal year 2006 related to adjustments of certain prior years state and federal temporary differences. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate largely as a result of foreign income taxed at rates lower than the U.S. federal rate, and state income taxes. Our future effective tax rate could be adversely affected by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory rates and higher than anticipated in countries where we have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, or changes in tax laws or interpretations thereof. Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Net earnings per diluted share $ 1.83 1 % $ 1.81 21 % $ 1.50 The increase in net earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 can be attributed to the increase in total revenues and the reduction in outstanding shares of common stock due to stock repurchases, partially offset by the increase in effective tax rate and the decline in gross margin and profitability due to our planned investments in growth initiatives, including our proton therapy acquisition, research and development, and our expansion into China. The increase in earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2006 from fiscal year 2005 can be attributed to the increase in total revenues, the reduction in effective tax rate and the reduction in outstanding shares of common stock due to stock repurchases. Net earnings per diluted share increased in fiscal year 2006 from fiscal year 2005 by $0.31. These results include incremental share-based compensation expenses of $0.20 per diluted share related to our adoption of SFAS 123(R). The incremental share-based compensation expenses were partially offset by a one-time tax benefit of $0.09 per diluted share related to the repatriation of foreign earnings under the Jobs Creation Act, a net tax benefit of $0.05 per diluted share related adjustments of certain prior years state and federal temporary differences and a $0.01 per diluted share related to the release of a reserve for certain contingencies associated with the sale of our Electron Device Business in 1995, which was classified as earnings from discontinued operations, net of taxes, in the Consolidation Statement of Earnings. 66 Table of Contents Net Orders Total Net Orders (by segment and region) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Oncology Systems: North America $ 905 5 % $ 861 19 % $ 722 Total International 731 9 % 674 6 % 633 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,636 7 % $ 1,535 13 % $ 1,355 X-ray Products: North America $ 102 -8 % $ 111 45 % $ 76 Total International 171 30 % 131 3 % 128 Total X-ray Products $ 273 13 % $ 242 19 % $ 204 Other: $ 166 292 % $ 43 33 % $ 32 Total Net Orders $ 2,075 14 % $ 1,820 14 % $ 1,591 Our total net orders grew by 14% in fiscal year 2007 from fiscal year 2006, including acquired backlog from BIR and ACCEL of $50 million. All of our businesses contributed to the net order growth in fiscal year 2007. The 14% increase in our total net orders for fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005 was primarily due to the 13% increase in Oncology Systems net orders. Oncology Systems experienced a weak net order growth in the first half of fiscal year 2007, that impacted both the North American and the international regions and was caused by greater variability in the length of the customer purchasing cycle, which we believe resulted from a more complex decision process tied in part to the large dollar value of the transactions for more sophisticated IGRT and surgical equipment. Oncology Systems net orders recovered in the second half of the fiscal year 2007 and for the total year grew 7%, compared to a 13% growth from fiscal year 2006 over 2005. North American Oncology Systems net orders grew 5% in fiscal year 2007 from fiscal year 2006, compared to 19% in fiscal year 2006 from fiscal year 2005. The growth in North American net orders in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 reflect continued growth in demand for our products that enable IGRT (including our OBI), our Trilogy linear accelerators and service contracts, partially offset by declines in demand for non-IGRT products including IMRT upgrades and brachytherapy products. The growth in North American net orders in fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005 reflected increased demand for our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI) and for the Trilogy linear accelerators. We believe Oncology Systems experienced strong growth in North America in fiscal year 2006 as this region adopted IGRT technology. International net orders for Oncology Systems grew 9% in fiscal year 2007 over the prior year compared to 6% in fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005. All geographic regions contributed to the increase in international net orders in fiscal year 2007. The growth in international net orders also reflects increased demand for our products that enable IGRT (including our OBI), our Trilogy linear accelerators and service contracts, partially offset by decrease in demand for other product lines, including IMRT upgrades and brachytherapy products. After several years of strong growth driven by the rapid adoption of IMRT technology, the international region experienced a slowdown in demand for radiotherapy capital equipment for IMRT and net orders increased modestly by 6% in fiscal year 2006, compared to 31%, 36% and 30% in fiscal years 2005, 2004 and 2003 over the respective earlier year periods. Consistent with what we saw in North America, we expect net orders to be lower following a rapid IMRT adoption cycle and that IMRT is now an established treatment methodology in the international regions. We expect that IGRT will continue to emerge as one of the main contributors to net orders and revenue in our Oncology Systems business segment, with North America ahead of international regions in the timing of adoption. 67 Table of Contents By comparison, the trailing twelve months Oncology Systems net order growth rate as of June 29, 2007 was 7%, including a 12% increase for North America and a 1% increase for international regions. The trailing twelve-month Oncology Systems net orders growth rate as of March 30, 2007 was 8%, including a 12% increase for North America and a 3% increase for international regions. Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems net orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations. X-ray Products have relatively short turn around from net orders to shipments. The increase in X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 was due to increased demand for our high power, anode grounded CT scanning tubes and, to a lesser extent, increased demand for our flat panel detectors. The flat panel detector product line has become a significant contributor to our X-ray Products business segment. We believe the flat panel detector product line will continue to contribute to our growth in net orders as flat panel detectors, which enable filmless X-ray imaging, replace traditional film and image-intensifier X-ray products in many medical applications. The high growth in net orders in fiscal year 2007 over fiscal year 2006 in the Other category, which is comprised of SIP (including BIR), ACCEL and GTC, benefited from acquired backlog of $50 million from the acquisitions of ACCEL and BIR. Excluding the impact of acquired backlog, the growth in net orders in the Other category in fiscal year 2007 of 176% was driven by (i) the strong growth in net orders for our SIP Linatron X-ray accelerators for cargo screening and border protection and for replacements of older products for industrial inspection and non-destructive testing and (ii) new net orders received for proton therapy services and scientific research instruments from ACCEL. We are beginning to see wider deployment of our Linatron X-ray accelerators for cargo screening as customers are starting to place orders for multiple units of our Linatron X-ray accelerators. For fiscal year 2006 over fiscal year 2005, net orders in the Other category increased by 33% primarily due to a substantial increase in orders from OEM customers for our Linatron X-ray accelerators for cargo screening and border protection. While we are optimistic about the long-term potential of our SIP business and encouraged by the increased interest in our products, use of this technology in security cargo screening and border protection is in its early stages and governmental agencies have provided limited public information about plans for adopting such technologies. Orders for our SIP products may be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place larger orders with our OEM customers in a short time period and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. Also, while we believe there is a promising market for proton therapy systems, the market for proton therapy treatment is still developing, and we expect great variability in the demand for these products due to the large scale of the related construction projects, the complexity of project financing and the resulting longer customer decision cycles when compared with our Oncology Systems business. We do not expect to book an order for proton therapy system in the short term. We also expect that demand for ACCEL Research Instruments products will vary as they are tied primarily to large, government or national laboratory research projects. In any given period, orders growth in either North America or international regions, or both, could fluctuate, given the high dollar amount of individual orders particularly in our businesses other than X-ray Products. The actual timing of sales and revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedule and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products and are usually shorter for some types of orders, such as upgrades ( i.e., the addition of new features or accessories to existing equipment). Thus, orders in any quarter or period are not necessarily directly correlated to the level of sales or revenues in any particular future quarter or period. Moreover, as the overall mix of net orders includes a greater proportion of software products and newly introduced Oncology Systems products, which typically have a longer time from order to completion of installation, the average time period within which orders convert into sales could lengthen and our revenue in a specific period could be lower as a result. 68 Table of Contents Backlog At September 28, 2007, we had a backlog of $1.7 billion, an increase of 21% compared to September 29, 2006. Our Oncology Systems backlog at September 28, 2007 increased by 15% from September 29, 2006, including a 20% increase for North America and an 8% increase for international regions. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses and fund continuing operations. Our sources of cash include operations, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases, borrowings and interest income. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities The following table summarizes our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities: (In millions) September 28, 2007 September 29, 2006 Increase/ (Decrease) Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities: Cash and cash equivalents $ 263 $ 272 $ (9 ) Marketable securities 94 (94 ) Total $ 263 $ 366 $ (103 ) The $103 million decrease in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities in fiscal year 2007 was primarily attributable to cash used in fiscal year 2007 for the repurchase of our common stock of $319 million, capital expenditures of $64 million, the acquisition of ACCEL of $27 million, the acquisition of BIR of $21 million, investment in dpiX Holding of $25 million for the construction of a manufacturing facility in Colorado, the repayment of bank borrowings of $15 million, the repurchase of the 35% ownership interest in our Japanese subsidiary from Mitsubishi Electric Co., or MELCO, of $12 million, investment of $6 million in corporate-owned life insurance contracts and the earn-out payment of $4 million in connection with the acquisition of MELCO radiotherapy equipment and service business. These uses were significantly offset by $300 million cash generated from operating activities, $45 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases, $41 million of cash provided by net borrowings under the credit facility and $20 million of cash provided by the excess tax benefits from share-based compensation. In fiscal year 2007, exchange rate changes reduced cash and cash equivalents by $13 million. At September 28, 2007, we had approximately $24 million or 9% of total cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $239 million or 91% of total cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of September 28, 2007, most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. dollars. Additionally, because our cash levels in the United States are relatively low, we may need to borrow funds in the future to satisfy cash flow needs, such as borrowings through our revolving credit facility. 69 Table of Contents Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2007 2006 2005 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 300 $ 202 $ 252 Investing activities (56 ) (12 ) 52 Financing activities (240 ) (156 ) (195 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (13 ) (5 ) 1 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ (9 ) $ 29 $ 110 Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2007, 2006 and 2005 were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $300 million in fiscal year 2007, compared to $202 million and $252 million in fiscal years 2006 and 2005, respectively. As a result of our adoption of SFAS 123(R), we reported $20 million and $52 million of excess tax benefits from share-based compensation as cash provided by financing activities in fiscal years 2007 and 2006 respectively, which was previously reported as cash provided by operating activities in fiscal year 2005. The $98 million increase in net cash from operating activities in fiscal year 2007 from fiscal year 2006 was driven by a net change of $35 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and a net increase in non-cash items of $68 million and non-cash net earnings from discontinued operations in fiscal year 2006 of $1 million, partially offset by a decrease in net earnings of $6 million. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2007 were inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, deferred revenues and advance payments from customers. Inventories increased primarily due to higher productions to meet anticipated customer demands for products in all of our businesses. Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased due to overall growth of our business operations. Deferred revenues decreased due to higher amount of revenues recognized based on customer acceptance of our Oncology Systems products and the recognition of a portion of revenues associated with certain products that enable IGRT upon shipment beginning in the second quarter of fiscal year 2007, rather than deferring 100% of the revenues until customer acceptance. Advance payments from customers increased due to increased orders and lower revenue growth in Oncology Systems. The $50 million decrease in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2006 from 2005 was driven by a net change of $38 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and a net decrease in non-cash items of $51 million, partially offset by an increase in net earnings of $39 million. In fiscal year 2006, the major contributors to the net change in working capital items were accounts receivable, inventories, accrued expenses, deferred revenues and advance payments from customers. Accounts receivables increased due to higher revenues in fiscal year 2006 compared to the prior year and the continuing shift to a higher proportion of international deliveries, which typically have a longer collection cycle than North America and a longer period from shipment to revenue recognition. 70 Table of Contents Inventories increased due to the continuing shift to a higher proportion of international deliveries, which typically have a longer period from shipment to cost recognition, as well as due to anticipated customer demands for both Oncology Systems and X-ray Products business segments. Accrued expenses increased primarily due to increase in income taxes payable. The increase in income taxes payable was the result of lower estimated tax payments made during fiscal year 2006. Deferred revenues increased due to increasing revenue recognition deferrals related to timing of completion of installation of our Oncology Systems products and our growing sales of new Oncology Systems products, as well as the higher proportion of our Oncology Systems business represented by international revenues with the accompanying longer period from shipment to revenue recognition. Advance payments from customers increased primarily due to increased orders. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing of tax and other payments. For additional discussion, see Risk Factors in Item 1A. Investing activities used $56 million of net cash in fiscal year 2007, used $12 million in fiscal year 2006 and provided $52 million in fiscal year 2005. Our net proceeds from maturities of marketable securities were $94 million, $45 million and $121 million during fiscal years 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment was $64 million in fiscal year 2007, compared to $41 million and $44 million in fiscal years 2006 and 2005, respectively. We also invested $25 million and $12 million in fiscal years 2007 and 2006, respectively, in dpiX Holding for the construction of a manufacturing facility in Colorado. In fiscal year 2007, we used cash of $27 million to acquire ACCEL and $21 million to acquire BIR. We also made a $4 million earn-out payment to MELCO. We did not acquire any businesses during fiscal year 2006 and used $12 million in cash in fiscal year 2005 for the acquisition of Sigma Micro. Financing activities used net cash of $240 million in fiscal year 2007 compared to $156 million and $195 million in fiscal years 2006 and 2005, respectively. In fiscal year 2007, we used $319 million for the repurchases of common stock, compared to $271 million in fiscal year 2006 and $227 million in fiscal year 2005. In fiscal years 2007, 2006 and 2005, we used $15 million, $3 million and $5 million, respectively, in the repayment of bank borrowings. In fiscal year 2007, we also used $12 million to repurchase the 35% ownership interest in our Japanese subsidiary from MELCO. Cash used for financing activities in fiscal year 2006 also include $8 million (the value of withheld shares) for employees taxes due when restricted performance share awards and restricted common stock vested. These uses were partially offset by cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $45 million, $74 million and $38 million in fiscal years 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively, as well as cash provided by excess tax benefits from share-based compensation of $20 million in fiscal year 2007 and $52 million in fiscal year 2006. In fiscal year 2007, we also borrowed $41 million in net cash from the credit facility. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 4% of revenues in fiscal year 2008. In July 2007, we established a $100 million unsecured revolving credit facility with Bank of America, N.A., or BofA, to support general corporate purposes, including working capital requirements, capital expenditures, acquisitions and stock repurchases. Borrowings under the credit facility accrue interest 71 Table of Contents either (i) based on the London InterBank Offered Rate, or LIBOR plus a margin of .45% to .70% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and earnings before interest, tax and depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA or (ii) based upon a base rate of either the federal funds rate plus .5% or BofA announced prime rate, whichever is greater, plus a margin of 1.75% to 2.25% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA, depending upon our instructions to BofA as to whether advances are to be based on the LIBOR rate or the base rate. We may select borrowing periods of one, two, three or six months for advances based on the LIBOR rate. Interest rates on advances based on the base rate are adjustable daily. As of September 28, 2007, $41 million was outstanding under this line of credit with a weighted average interest rate of 6.04%. As of September 28, 2007, we were in compliance with all covenants associated with this credit facility. Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements through fiscal year 2008. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to repurchase our common stock, make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business and invest in our systems and processes. Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable days sales outstanding, or DSO, were 88 days at September 28, 2007 compared to 94 days at September 29, 2006. Our accounts receivable and DSO are primarily impacted by timing of product shipments, collections performance, payment terms and mix of revenues from different regions. Stock Repurchase Program During fiscal years 2007, 2006 and 2005, we paid $319 million, $271 million and $227 million, respectively, to repurchase 7,000,000 shares, 5,395,100 shares and 5,960,000 shares, respectively, of our common stock under various Board of Directors authorizations. All shares that have been repurchased have been retired. As of September 28, 2007, 11,000,000 shares of our common stock remained available for repurchase under an authorization that expires on December 31, 2008. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of September 28, 2007 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Fiscal Year 2008 Fiscal Years 2009 - 2010 Fiscal Years 2011 - 2012 Beyond Total Short-term borrowings(1) $ 41.0 $ $ $ $ 41.0 Long term debt(2) 9.0 17.0 17.1 6.3 49.4 Interest obligation on long term debt 3.2 4.7 2.4 0.7 11.0 Operating Leases(3) 15.3 21.1 9.2 8.8 54.4 Total $ 68.5 $ 42.8 $ 28.7 $ 15.8 $ 155.8 (1) On July 27, 2007, we established a $100 million unsecured revolving credit facility in the United States. As of September 28, 2007, $41 million was outstanding under this credit facility with a weighted average interest rate of 6.04%. This credit facility contains customary affirmative and 72 Table of Contents negative covenants for facilities of this type. We have also agreed to maintain certain financial covenants relating to (i) leverage ratios involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA, (ii) liquidity and (iii) consolidated assets. As of September 28, 2007, we were in compliance with all covenants. For further discussion regarding this credit facility, see Note 6 Line of Credit of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) At September 28, 2007, we had long-term debt of $49.4 million. Long-term debt, including current maturities, decreased $7.9 million from September 29, 2006 due to principal repayments. The fixed interest rates on the outstanding debt on this date ranged from 6.70% to 7.58% with a weighted average interest rate of 6.87%. As of September 28, 2007, land and buildings with a carrying amount of $7.4 million were pledged as collateral against certain loans we assumed related to purchases of land and buildings in Las Vegas. The remaining unsecured loan agreements contain certain covenants relating to loan prepayment, future borrowings and dividend payments. We have also agreed to maintain covenants relating to working capital and operations results. During fiscal years 2007, 2006 and 2005, the Company was in compliance with all restrictive covenants of the unsecured term loan agreements. For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 5 Long-term Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (3) We lease office space and have entered into other lease commitments in North America as well as various locations in Europe, Asia, Australia and South America. Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases as of September 28, 2007. Total debt as a percentage of total capital increased to 9.9% at September 28, 2007 compared to 8.0% at September 29, 2006 largely due to the borrowings under the credit facility during fiscal year 2007. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities decreased to 1.48 to 1 at September 28, 2007 from 1.80 to 1 at September 29, 2006 primarily due to short-term borrowings under the credit facility. Contingencies We are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world regulating the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous materials that do or may create increased costs for some of our operations. Although we follow procedures that we consider appropriate under existing regulations, these procedures can be costly and we cannot completely eliminate the risk of contamination or injury from these materials, and, in the event of such an incident, we could be held liable for any damages that result. In addition, we could be assessed fines or penalties for failure to comply with environmental laws and regulations. These costs and any future violations or liability under environmental laws or regulations could have a material adverse effect on our business. In addition, we may be required to incur significant additional costs to comply with future changes in existing environmental laws and regulations or new laws and regulations. For example, several countries, including many in the European Union, or EU, are requiring medical equipment manufacturers to bear some or all of the cost of product disposal at the end of a product useful life, thus creating increased costs for our operations. The EU has also adopted a directive that may require the adoption of restrictions on the use of some hazardous substances in certain of our products sold in the EU. This directive could increase costs for our operations. From the time we began operating, we handled and disposed of hazardous materials and wastes following procedures that were considered appropriate under regulations, if any, existing at the time. We also hired companies to dispose of wastes generated by our operations. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA, or third parties have named us as a potentially responsible party, or PRP, 73 Table of Contents under the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended, or CERCLA, at eight sites where we, as Varian Associates, Inc., are alleged to have shipped such wastes for recycling or disposal. As a PRP we may have an obligation to reimburse the EPA or other third parties for cleanup costs at these sites. In addition, we are overseeing environmental cleanup projects and, as applicable, reimbursing third parties for cleanup activities under the direction of, or in consultation with, federal, state and/or local agencies at certain current VMS or former Varian Associates, Inc. facilities (including facilities disposed of in connection with our sale of our Electron Devices business during 1995 and the sale of our thin film systems business during 1997). Under the terms of the agreement governing the distribution of the shares, or the spin-offs, of Varian, Inc., or VI, and Varian Semiconductor Equipment Associates, Inc., or VSEA, by us in 1999, VI and VSEA are each obligated to indemnify us for one-third of these environmental cleanup costs (after adjusting for any insurance proceeds realized or tax benefits recognized by us). As described below, we have accrued a total of $15.1 million at September 28, 2007 to cover our liabilities for these cleanup projects. Various uncertainties make it difficult to estimate the likelihood or cost of certain third-party claims, project management costs and legal costs at all of the sites and facilities. In addition, for the eight sites and one of the facilities, various uncertainties make it difficult to assess the likelihood and scope of further cleanup activities or to estimate the future costs of such activities. As of September 28, 2007, we nonetheless estimated that our future exposure (net of VI and VSEA indemnification obligations) for the cleanup costs, third-party claims, project management costs and legal costs for these nine locations ranged in the aggregate from $3.3 million to $7.5 million. The time frames over which these cleanup project costs are estimated vary, ranging from one year to 13 years as of September 28, 2007. We believe that no amount in the foregoing range of estimated future costs is more probable of being incurred than any other amount in such range and therefore we have accrued $3.3 million for these cleanup projects as of September 28, 2007. The amount accrued has not been discounted to present value due to the uncertainties that make it difficult to develop a best estimate of future costs. As to all other facilities, we have gained sufficient knowledge to better estimate the scope and costs of future cleanup activities based upon formal agreements with other parties defining our future liabilities or formal cleanup plans that have either been approved by or completed in accordance with the requirements of the state or federal environmental agency with jurisdiction over the facility. As of September 28, 2007, we estimated that our future exposure (net of VI and VSEA indemnification obligations) for the cleanup costs at these facilities, and reimbursements of third-party claims for these facilities, ranged in the aggregate from $8.8 million to $36.9 million. The time frames over which these cleanup project costs are estimated vary with each facility, ranging from 2 years to 30 years as of September 28, 2007. As to each of these facilities, management determined that a particular amount within the range of estimated costs was a better estimate of the future environmental liability than any other amount within the range, and that the amount and timing of these future costs were reliably determinable. The best estimate within the range was $16.9 million at September 28, 2007. We accordingly accrued $11.8 million, which represents our best estimate of the future costs of $16.9 million discounted at 4%, net of inflation. 74 Table of Contents At September 28, 2007, our reserve for environmental liabilities, based upon future environmental related costs estimated as of that date, was calculated as follows: (In millions) Recurring Costs Non-Recurring Costs Total Anticipated Future Costs Fiscal Years: 2008 $ 0.8 $ 0.8 $ 1.6 2009 0.6 0.6 1.2 2010 0.7 0.6 1.3 2011 0.6 0.6 1.2 2012 0.7 1.2 1.9 Thereafter 10.6 2.4 13.0 Total costs $ 14.0 $ 6.2 20.2 Less imputed interest (5.1 ) Reserve amount $ 15.1 Recurring costs include expenses for such tasks as ongoing operation, maintenance and monitoring of cleanup while non-recurring costs include expenses for such tasks as soil excavation and treatment, injection/monitoring well installation and other costs for soil and groundwater in situ treatment by injection, ground and surface water treatment system construction, soil and groundwater investigation, certain governmental agency costs required to be reimbursed by us, governmental agency response costs (including agency costs required to be reimbursed by the responding company), treatment system and monitoring well removal and closure, and costs to defend against and settle pending and anticipated third-party claims. When we developed the estimates above, we considered the financial strength of other potentially responsible parties. These amounts are, however, only estimates and may be revised in the future as we get more information on these projects. We may also spend more or less than these estimates. Based on current information, we believe that our reserves are adequate, but as the scope of our obligations becomes more clearly defined, these reserves (and the associated indemnification obligations of VI and VSEA) may be modified and related charges/credits against earnings may be made. We receive certain cash payments in the form of settlements and judgments from defendants, our insurers and other third parties from time to time. We have also reached an agreement with an insurance company under which the insurance company has agreed to pay a portion of our past and future environmental-related expenditures, and we, therefore, had included a $2.9 million receivable in Other assets at September 28, 2007. We believe that this receivable is recoverable because it is based on a binding, written settlement agreement with a solvent and financially viable insurance company and the insurance company has paid the claims that we have made in the past. Our present and past facilities have been in operation for many years, and over that time in the course of those operations, these facilities have used substances, that are or might be considered hazardous, and we have generated and disposed of wastes, that are or might be considered hazardous. Therefore, it is possible that additional environmental issues may arise in the future that we cannot now predict. We are also involved, from time to time, in other legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations, arising in the ordinary course of our business. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. We accrue amounts that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. While there can be no assurances as to the ultimate outcome of any legal proceeding or other loss contingency involving us, management does not believe any pending matter will be resolved in a manner that would have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, it is possible that a legal or other proceeding brought against us could have an impact of this nature. 75 Table of Contents Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The term of these indemnification arrangements is generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these agreements is unlimited. As of September 28, 2007, we have not incurred any significant costs since the spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Generally, the maximum obligation under such indemnifications is not explicitly stated and, as a result, the overall amount of these obligations cannot be reasonably estimated. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In July 2006, the FASB issued Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 , or SFAS 109. This interpretation clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with SFAS 109 . This interpretation is effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2008. We are still assessing the potential impact this interpretation may have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Based on a preliminary analysis, we expect that a cumulative effect adjustment of less than $20 million will be charged to retained earnings in the first quarter of fiscal year 2008 to increase the reserve for uncertain tax positions. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements , or SFAS 157. SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS 157 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007. We are currently assessing the potential impact that SFAS 157 may have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 158, Employer Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R) , or SFAS 158. SFAS 158 requires us to (a) recognize a plan funded status in the statement of financial position, (b) measure a plan assets and its obligations that determine its funded status as of the end of the employer fiscal year and (c) recognize changes in the funded status of a defined benefit plan in the year in which the changes occur through other comprehensive income. We adopted the requirement to recognize the funded status of a defined benefit plan and the disclosure requirements in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2007. See Note 10 Retirement Plans in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the effects of adopting the recognition provisions and disclosure requirements of SFAS 158. We are not required to adopt the measurement provisions until fiscal year 2009. We are assessing the potential impact that the recognition provision of SFAS 158 may have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Based on the evaluation to date, we do not believe the adoption of the measurement date provisions of SFAS 158 will have a material impact on our financial statements. In February 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Including an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 115, or SFAS 159. SFAS 159 permits entities to choose to measure many financial instruments and certain other items at fair value. 76 Table of Contents SFAS 159 is effective for us beginning in the first quarter of 2009. We are currently assessing the potential impact SFAS 159 may have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. 
