CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2012-11-21


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview In fiscal year 2012, total revenues increased 8% over fiscal year 2011. Gross margin decreased 1.1 percentage points in fiscal year 2012 from fiscal year 2011 primarily due to decreases in Oncology Systems and SIP gross margins, although these were partially offset by an increase in X-ray Products gross margin. Net earnings from continuing operations per diluted share increased 9% in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011. During fiscal year 2012, we repurchased 4.4 million shares of VMS common stock. Net orders increased 6% in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011. Growth in net orders from Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and Varian Particle Therapy ( VPT ) was partially offset by a decrease in SIP net orders. Including $146 million in VPT backlog, our backlog at the end of fiscal year 2012 was 12% higher than at the end of fiscal year 2011. We do not know what impact the Affordable Care Act will have on long-term growth or demand for our products and services. The Affordable Care Act imposes a new medical device excise tax of 2.3% on sales or uses of taxable medical devices after December 31, 2012. Many of the hardware and software products we sell are considered taxable medical devices. Generally, we do not expect that our service contracts will be considered taxable and there are excise tax exceptions for export sales and for sales for further manufacture. We are also allowed to reduce the amount on which the tax is based for our cost of freight and installation. The medical device excise tax is likely to have a negative impact on our gross margin percentage. We are focused on enhancing our operational performance through productivity initiatives. As part of this effort, we expect to recognize a restructuring charge in the first half of fiscal year 2013. We have classified Research Instruments as a discontinued operation for all periods presented in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings. As of September 30, 2011, we had no remaining obligations related to Research Instruments, which was previously included in the Other category. Unless otherwise stated, the discussion in this MD&A pertains to our continuing operations. Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufacturers, sells and services hardware and software products for treating cancer with conventional radiotherapy, (including IMRT, IGRT, and volumetric modulated arc therapy), stereotactic radiotherapy, SBRT, SRS, and brachytherapy. We have recently seen a greater percentage of Oncology Systems net orders and revenues coming from emerging markets within our international region, such as China, Thailand, South Korea and Russia, which typically demand lower-priced products compared to developed markets. We expect that this shift in geographic mix of net orders and revenues will generally continue and may negatively impact Oncology Systems gross margin. In the past, we have seen our customers decision-making process complicated by the uncertainties surrounding reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery in the United States, such as we experienced in 2012 with the reductions to reimbursement rates for radiation therapy proposed by CMS. In October 2011, we acquired Calypso, a supplier of specialized products and software for real-time tumor tracking and motion management during radiosurgery and radiotherapy. In April 2012, we entered into a strategic global partnership with Siemens through which, among other things, we represent Siemens diagnostic imaging products to radiation oncology clinics initially in most international markets and, since November 2012, in North America. Siemens, in turn, represents our equipment and software products for radiotherapy and radiosurgery within its offerings to its healthcare customers in agreed upon regions. Furthermore, we and Siemens are working on developing interfaces to enable our ARIA software to connect with Siemens linear accelerators and imaging systems, as well as exploring opportunities to co-develop new imaging and treatment solutions. 57 Table of Contents Oncology Systems net orders increased 7%, or 8% on a constant currency basis, in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 reflecting increased net orders in both the international region and North America. In fiscal year 2012, Oncology Systems total revenues rose 8% over fiscal year 2011, with a 4% increase in North America and a 13% increase in the international region. The service contract business and software products were significant to contributors of growth in Oncology Systems net orders and revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011. Oncology Systems gross margin decreased 1.7 percentage points in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to a decrease in product gross margin percentage partially offset by an increase in service gross margin percentage. Through September 28, 2012, we had received orders for more than 645 TrueBeam systems since its introduction in the second quarter of fiscal year 2010 and had about 330 systems installed or in progress. X-Ray Products . Our X-ray Products business segment designs, manufactures, sells and services x-ray imaging components for use in a range of applications, including radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, special procedures, CT and industrial applications. In April 2012, we acquired InfiMed, Inc. ( InfiMed ), a supplier of hardware and software for processing diagnostic X-ray images. Our success in our X-ray Products business depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. We are currently in the process of introducing multiple new products which we believe will help sustain the growth of our X-ray Products business. In addition, changes in access to diagnostic radiology or the reimbursement rates associated with diagnostic radiology as a result of the Affordable Care Act and similar state proposals, or otherwise, could affect demand for our products in our X-ray Products business. In fiscal year 2012, both X-ray Products net orders and revenues increased 5% over the fiscal year 2011. Although our X-Ray Products business experienced softer demand from major customers during fiscal year 2012, this business saw new products introduced in the second half of fiscal year 2012 begin to contribute to growth in net orders and revenues in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2012. X-ray Products gross margin for the fiscal year 2012 increased 1.9% over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to improved quality costs for our flat panel products and a greater proportion of higher margin products. Other . The Other category is comprised of: (i) SIP, which designs, manufactures, sells and services Linatron x-ray accelerators, imaging processing software and image detection products (including IntellX TM ) for security and inspection purposes, (ii) our VPT business, which designs, develops, manufactures, sells and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy treatments, and (iii) the operations of the GTC, our scientific research facility. Net orders in the Other category increased $15 million in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to VPT recording two proton therapy systems orders, compared to one in fiscal year 2011. One proton therapy system will be installed at the PTC St. Petersburg Center of Nuclear Medicine of the International Institute of Biological Systems in Russia and the other will be installed at the King Fahd Medical Center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The increase in VPT net orders in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was partially offset by a decline in SIP net orders. Revenues in our Other category increased 18% in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011, primarily due to an increase in SIP revenues. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Item 1A, Risk Factors. We discuss our results of operations below. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other 58 Table of Contents factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of loss contingencies, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain, and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, see Item 1A, Risk Factors. Revenue Recognition We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. The allocation of consideration in a multiple element arrangement is affected by the determination of whether any software deliverables that function together with other hardware components to deliver the hardware products essential functionality are considered as non-software products for purpose of revenue recognition. The allocation of consideration to each non-software deliverable is based on the assumptions we use to establish its selling price, which are based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of selling price, if it exists, otherwise, third-party evidence of selling price, if it exists, and if not on estimated selling prices. In addition, the allocation of consideration to each software deliverable in a multiple element arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether VSOE of its fair value exists in these arrangements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the amounts allocated to each element could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment, the readiness of customers facilities for installation or is subject to customer acceptance. If shipments or installations are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. In addition, revenues related to certain highly customized image detection systems, proton therapy systems and proton therapy system commissioning contracts are recognized in accordance with contract accounting. For contracts in which we can estimate contract costs with reasonable dependability, we recognize contract revenues under the percentage-of-completion method. Revenues recognized under the percentage-of-completion method are based on contract costs incurred to date compared with total estimated contract costs. Changes in estimates of total contract revenue, total contract cost or the extent of progress towards completion are recognized in the period in which the changes in estimates are identified. Estimated losses on contracts are recognized in the period in which the loss is identified. In circumstances in which the final outcome of a contract cannot be precisely estimated but a loss on the contract is not expected, we recognize revenues under the percentage-of-completion method based on a zero profit margin until more precise estimates can be made. If and when we can make more precise estimates, revenues and costs of revenues are adjusted in the same period. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. 59 Table of Contents Share-based Compensation Expense We value our stock options granted and the option component of the shares of VMS common stock purchased under the employee stock purchase plan using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We value our performance units using the Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant under both the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected terms of share-based awards and the expected price volatilities of shares of VMS common stock and peer companies that are used to assess certain performance targets over the expected term of the awards, and the dividend yield of VMS. The expected term of our stock options is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We determined the expected term of stock options based on the demographic grouping of employees and retirement eligibility. We used a combination of historical and implied volatility, or blended volatility, in deriving the expected volatility assumption for our stock options. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility is derived based on traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the term of the exchange-traded options to the expected terms of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options on VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we could not rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected terms of the stock options we grant. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected terms of the stock options we grant and the implied volatility of exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock. In determining the grant date fair value of our performance units, historical volatilities of shares of VMS common stock, as well as the shares of common stock of peer companies, were used to assess certain performance targets. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock awards. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate, as well as the probability that certain performance conditions that affect the vesting of performance units will be achieved, and recognize expense only for those awards expected to vest. If the actual forfeiture rate and/or the actual number of performance units that vest based on achievement of performance conditions are materially different from our estimates, the share-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Except for government tenders, group purchases and orders with letters of credit in Oncology Systems and SIP, and orders in our X-ray Products business, our payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable 60 Table of Contents aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and on order and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The majority of businesses that we have acquired have not had significant identified tangible assets and, as a result, we have typically allocated a significant portion of the purchase price to intangible assets and goodwill. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to these intangibles or to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. The allocation of the purchase price from business acquisitions to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. In addition, the allocation of the purchase price of the acquired businesses to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for those cash flows. Should conditions differ from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. In accordance with Accounting Standard Codification ( ASC ) 350, we evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill against the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. Based on the most recent annual goodwill impairment testing that we performed in fiscal year 2012 for each of our four reporting units with goodwill (Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, SIP and VPT), the fair value of each such reporting unit was substantially in excess of its carrying value. We will continue to make assessments of impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually 12 months, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of 61 Table of Contents sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Loss Contingencies From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters, both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of its business or otherwise. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. However, such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. If actual liabilities significantly exceed the estimates made, our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows could be materially adversely affected. In addition, we are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations. In connection with our past and present operations and facilities, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts. Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review these accrued balances quarterly. If we were required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. Defined Benefit Pension and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans We sponsor five defined benefit pension plans in Germany, Japan, Switzerland (where we have two defined benefit pension plans) and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. In fiscal year 2012, the Company terminated one pension plan in Germany upon the death of the last participant in the plan. Although we do not have any defined benefit pension plans in the United States, we sponsor a post-retirement benefit plan that provides healthcare benefits to certain eligible retirees. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expenses and liabilities related to those plans for which the benefits are actuarially determined, such as our defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of future compensation increases and rate of healthcare cost increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expenses and liabilities. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plan expenses we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans in all countries are based primarily on the yields of a universe of high quality corporate bonds in each applicable country or the spot rate of high quality AA-rated corporate bonds, 62 Table of Contents with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. A change in the discount rate will cause the present value of benefit obligations to change in the opposite direction. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency rate fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. ASC 820 establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 3, Fair Value of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Each level of input has different levels of subjectivity and difficulty involved in determining fair value. The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts are calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services. One year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which mature in 13 months or less, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty credit default swap rates (for net assets) or our borrowing rate (for net liabilities). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact on the valuation of our derivative instruments, as well as on our result of operations. There were no transfers of assets or liabilities between fair value measurement levels during fiscal years 2012, 2011 and 2010. Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. The provisions in ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes contain a two-step approach to recognizing, derecognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition, derecognition and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. A tax benefit should be recognized in the first period in which it meets the more likely than not recognition threshold, and conversely, a tax benefit previously recognized should be derecognized in the first period in which new information results in a change in judgment in which the position fails to meet the recognition threshold. A benefit not previously recognized would be recognized when the tax position is effectively settled through examination, negotiation or litigation with tax authorities, or when the statute of limitations for the relevant taxing authority to examine and challenge the position has expired. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for taxes on earnings. Generally, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in the applicable tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. 63 Table of Contents Our foreign earnings are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our foreign subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our foreign countries, or a change in the mix of foreign countries among particular tax jurisdictions could increase or decrease our effective tax rate. Our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2012 was the 52-week period ended on September 28, 2012. Fiscal year 2011 was the 52-week period ended on September 30, 2011 and fiscal year 2010 was the 52 week period ended on October 1, 2010. Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal years 2012, 2011 and 2010. As indicated above, the operating results of Research Instruments have been segregated and presented as a discontinued operation in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings for all periods. Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2012, 2011 and 2010 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Product $ 2,098 6 % $ 1,971 9 % $ 1,814 Service Contracts and Other 709 13 % 626 15 % 543 Total Revenues $ 2,807 8 % $ 2,597 10 % $ 2,357 Product as a percentage of total revenues 75 % 76 % 77 % Service Contracts and Other as a percentage of total revenues 25 % 24 % 23 % Revenues by region North America $ 1,223 5 % $ 1,170 16 % $ 1,012 Europe 842 7 % 788 5 % 747 Asia 602 12 % 537 5 % 513 Rest of world 140 36 % 102 20 % 85 Total International(1) 1,584 11 % 1,427 6 % 1,345 Total $ 2,807 8 % $ 2,597 10 % $ 2,357 North America as a percentage of total revenues 44 % 45 % 43 % International as a percentage of total revenues 56 % 55 % 57 % (1) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. The increase in total revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was due to revenue growth in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and SIP, partially offset by a slight decrease in VPT revenues. Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 due to revenue growth in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and VPT, partially offset by a decrease in SIP revenues. The increase in product revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was due to revenue growth in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, VPT and SIP. Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and VPT 64 Table of Contents contributed to the growth in product revenues in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010, although these increases were partially offset by a decline in SIP product revenues. Product revenues grew faster between fiscal year 2010 and fiscal year 2011 than between fiscal year 2011 and fiscal year 2012, primarily due to slower X-ray Products product revenue growth in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011. Service contracts and other revenues increased in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to an increase in Oncology Systems service contract revenues and, to a lesser extent, an increase in SIP service contracts and other revenues, although these increases were partially offset by a small decline in VPT service contract revenues. Service contract and other revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 due to an increase in Oncology Systems service contract revenues and, to a lesser extent, an increase in SIP service contract and other revenues, partially offset by a decline in VPT service contract revenues. Service contracts and other revenues grew more slowly between fiscal year 2012 and fiscal year 2011 than between fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 primarily due to slower growth in Oncology Systems service contract revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011. The increase in total North American revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was due to North American revenues increases in Oncology Systems, SIP and VPT, partially offset by a decrease in North American revenues in X-ray Products. The increase in North American revenues in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was due to increases in revenues in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, VPT and SIP. All international regions contributed to the growth in international revenues in fiscal years 2012 and 2011 over their respective prior fiscal years. The increase in international revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to increases in international revenues in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products, which increases were partially offset by declines in international revenues in SIP and VPT. The U.S. dollar strengthened against the Euro and weakened against the Japanese yen in fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011 such that the differences in currency exchange rates largely offset each other when international revenues were measured in U.S. dollars. International revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 due to increases in international revenues in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products, although these increases were partially offset by declines in international revenues in SIP and VPT. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010, which favorably affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Product $ 1,502 6 % $ 1,416 5 % $ 1,343 Service Contracts(1) 687 13 % 606 17 % 519 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,189 8 % $ 2,022 9 % $ 1,862 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 69 % 70 % 72 % Service Contracts as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 31 % 30 % 28 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 78 % 78 % 79 % (1) Revenues from service contracts represent revenues from fixed-term service contracts and labor cost services. This excludes revenues from spare parts sold by our service department. Oncology Systems product revenues increased in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to increases in revenues from sales of our high energy linear accelerators and from sales of our software products, as well as revenues from sales of tumor tracking products offered by the recently acquired 65 Table of Contents Calypso. Oncology Systems product revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 primarily due to increases in revenues from sales of our linear accelerators and, to a lesser extent, from sales of our software products. The increases in Oncology Systems service contract revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 and in fiscal 2011 over fiscal year 2010 were primarily driven by increased customer adoption of service contracts as our products become more sophisticated and by the increased number of customers as the installed base of our products continues to grow. Since service contract revenues grew faster than product revenues from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2011 and from fiscal year 2011 to fiscal year 2012, service contract revenues also increased as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues in each fiscal year. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 North America $ 1,005 4 % $ 971 13 % $ 860 Europe 690 6 % 650 6 % 614 Asia 359 18 % 303 (2 %) 309 Rest of world 135 38 % 98 24 % 79 Total International 1,184 13 % 1,051 5 % 1,002 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,189 8 % $ 2,022 9 % $ 1,862 North America as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 46 % 48 % 46 % International as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 54 % 52 % 54 % The international region represented more than half of total Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal years 2012, 2011 and 2010. In fiscal year 2012, the increase in Oncology Systems international revenues over fiscal year 2011 was primarily attributable to increases in revenues from sales of our high energy linear accelerators and service contracts in all international regions. The U.S. dollar strengthened against the Euro and weakened against the Japanese yen in fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011 such that the differences in currency exchange rates largely offset each other when Oncology Systems international revenues were measured in U.S. dollars. Oncology Systems North American revenues increased in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to an increase in revenues from our service contracts and our software products, as well as revenues from sales of tumor tracking products offered by the recently acquired Calypso. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in North American revenues from sales of our high energy linear accelerators. In fiscal year 2011, Oncology Systems revenues grew over fiscal year 2010 in all international regions, except for Asia, where a supplemental government spending program resulted in high Japanese revenues in fiscal year 2010. The increase in Oncology Systems international revenues in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to an increase in service contract revenues in all international regions, as well as an increase in product revenues from sales of our software products in all international regions, that was partially offset by decreased product revenues from our high energy linear accelerators in Asia. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010 which favorably affected our Oncology Systems international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. North American Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over the fiscal year 2010 primarily due to increases in revenues from sales of our high energy linear accelerators and an increase in service contract revenues, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from our software products. 66 Table of Contents Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the North American and international regions (and among countries in the international region) are impacted by regional influences, which recently have included the implementation and termination of government economic stimulus programs, the pace of economic recovery and actual or anticipated recession, the European sovereign debt and banking crises, different technology adoption cycles consistent with the net order patterns and, in the United States, uncertainty created by healthcare reform, including the excise tax on the sale of most medical devices that will go into effect at the beginning of the second quarter of fiscal year 2013 and actual and proposed reductions in Medicare reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery. See further discussion of net orders under Net Orders. Additionally, we are now seeing a greater percentage of Oncology Systems net orders and revenues come from the emerging markets within our international region, which typically have purchased less complex, lower-priced products compared to more developed markets and which usually have stiffer price competition. We expect this shift to generally continue. X-ray Products Revenues Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 North America $ 130 (6 %) $ 137 7 % $ 128 Europe 120 24 % 97 43 % 68 Asia 238 3 % 231 15 % 201 Rest of world 5 10 % 4 (30 %) 6 Total International 363 9 % 332 21 % 275 Total X-ray Products $ 493 5 % $ 469 16 % $ 403 North America as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 26 % 29 % 32 % International as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 74 % 71 % 68 % X-ray Products revenues as a percentage of total revenues 18 % 18 % 17 % The increase in X-ray Products international revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was partially offset by a decrease in X-ray Products North American revenues. In the international region, the increase in X-ray Products revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to increased revenues from sales of our flat panel products in all international regions and increased revenues from sales of our X-ray tube products in Europe, partially offset by decreased revenues from sales of our X-ray tube products in Asia and the rest of the world region. Revenues from sales of image processing tools offered by the recently acquired InfiMed also contributed to the increase in international X-ray Products revenues in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011. In North America, the decrease in X-ray Products revenues in fiscal year 2012 from fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to a decrease in revenues from sales of our flat panel products, and to a lesser extent, a decrease in revenues from sales of our x-ray tube products, which were partially offset by the inclusion in fiscal year 2012 of revenues from sales of image processing tools offered by InfiMed. Both the international region and North America contributed to the increase in X-ray Products revenues in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. Increased sales of our flat panel products in all international regions and increased sales of our x-ray tube products in Asia and Europe contributed to the increase in the international revenues, while increased sales of our flat panel products that was partially offset by a slight decline in sales of our x-ray tube products accounted for the increase in North American revenues. 67 Table of Contents The differences in currency exchange rates between the U.S. dollar and foreign currencies between fiscal year 2011 and fiscal year 2012, as well as between fiscal year 2010 and fiscal year 2011, did not have a material impact on X-ray Products international revenue growth because sales transactions in the X-ray Products business are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Product $ 103 22 % $ 85 26 % $ 68 Service Contracts and Other 22 6 % 21 (14 %) 24 Total Other $ 125 18 % $ 106 16 % $ 92 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 4 % 4 % 4 % Revenues in the Other category, which is comprised of SIP, VPT and GTC, increased in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to increases in SIP product and service revenues. VPT revenues did not increase or decrease significantly in fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011. In fiscal year 2012, VPT continued to recognize revenues for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project as construction of the proton therapy equipment progressed. Revenues in the Other category increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 because of an increase in VPT revenues primarily associated with product revenues recognized for the proton therapy system for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project, partially offset by a decrease in product revenues in our SIP business as a result of slower deployment of products for security and inspection systems. In fiscal year 2011, we recognized revenue of $33 million for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project. We signed the equipment purchase agreement with CPTC for this project in April 2010 and we did not book this order until September 2011 when the financing was completed. The $33 million revenue we recognized represented progress made on this project in fiscal year 2011 from the date the equipment purchase agreement was signed. Gross Margin Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Dollar by segment Oncology Systems $ 957 4 % $ 917 10 % $ 837 X-ray Products 212 10 % 193 19 % 162 Other 27 7 % 26 (4 %) 27 Gross margin $ 1,196 5 % $ 1,136 11 % $ 1,026 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 43.7 % 45.4 % 44.9 % X-ray Products 43.1 % 41.2 % 40.3 % Total Company 42.6 % 43.7 % 43.5 % The decrease in total Company gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2012 from fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to decreases in Oncology Systems and SIP gross margins, partially offset by an increase in X-ray Products gross margin. The increase in total Company gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increases in gross margins in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and SIP. In addition, total Company gross margin percentage was negatively impacted in fiscal year 2012 and fiscal year 2011 by the recognition of revenues relating to the Scripps Proton Therapy Center with a zero profit margin. Total product gross margin was 39.6% in fiscal year 2012, compared to 41.6% in fiscal year 2011 and 41.8% in fiscal year 2010. Total service contracts and other gross margin 68 Table of Contents was 51.6% in fiscal year 2012, compared to 50.6% in fiscal year 2011 and 49.2% in fiscal year 2010. The Affordable Care Act imposes a new medical device excise tax of 2.3% on sales or uses of taxable medical devices after December 31, 2012. Many of the hardware and software products we sell are considered taxable medical devices. Generally, we do not expect that our service contracts will be considered taxable and there are excise tax exceptions for export sales and for sales for further manufacture. We are also allowed to reduce the amount on which the tax is based for our cost of freight and installation. The medical device excise tax is likely to have a negative impact on our gross margin percentage. Oncology Systems gross margin decreased 1.7 percentage points in fiscal year 2012 from fiscal year 2011 due to a decrease in product gross margin, partially offset by an increase in service contract and other gross margin. Oncology Systems product gross margin decreased to 39.6% in fiscal year 2012 from 42.8% in fiscal year 2011 primarily due to a geographic shift of product revenues away from developed markets to emerging markets, which typically have purchased less complex, lower-priced products compared to developed markets. Our Oncology Systems product gross margins for fiscal year 2012 were further impacted by stiffer pricing pressure in our international region, particularly in the higher-growth emerging markets. Improved installation, warranty and factory costs in fiscal years 2012 from fiscal year 2011 partially offset these increases. Oncology Systems service contract and other gross margin was 52.6% in fiscal year 2012, compared to 51.4% in fiscal year 2011. The increases in service contract gross margin were primarily due to higher service contract volume (which lowered the costs per contract) and cost control measures in fiscal year 2012. In addition, the U.S. dollar strengthened against the Euro and weakened against the Japanese yen in fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011, such that the differences in currency exchange rates largely offset each other when Oncology Systems gross margin was measured in U.S. dollars. We believe the shift of Oncology Systems revenues towards emerging markets will generally continue and may negatively impact Oncology Systems gross margin. Oncology Systems gross margin in fiscal year 2011 increased 0.5 percentage point over fiscal year 2010 primarily due to increases in both service contract and other gross margin and product gross margin. Oncology Systems service contract and other gross margin was 51.4% in fiscal year 2011, compared to 51.0% in fiscal year 2010. The increase in service contract and other gross margin was primarily due to higher service contract volume partially offset by higher product retrofit costs. Oncology Systems product gross margin increased to 42.8% in fiscal year 2011 from 42.6% in fiscal year 2010, primarily due to higher proportion of product revenues from our TrueBeam system (which carries higher gross margins compared with our other linear accelerators) in fiscal year 2011 than fiscal year 2010. X-ray Products gross margin increased 1.9 percentage points in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to improved quality costs for our flat panel products and higher margin products representing a greater proportion of X-ray Products sales in fiscal year 2012 than fiscal year 2011. X-ray Products gross margin improved 0.9 percentage point in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 primarily due to higher sales volume, and flat panel products (which carry higher gross margins) representing a greater proportion of sales in fiscal year 2011 than fiscal year 2010 as well as lower costs of quality for our x-ray tube products. The decrease in SIP gross margin in fiscal year 2012 from fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to lower margin products representing a greater proportion of SIP sales in fiscal year 2012 than fiscal year 2011. The improvement in SIP gross margin in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to higher margin products representing a greater proportion of SIP sales in fiscal year 2011 than fiscal year 2010. 69 Table of Contents Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Research and development $ 186 9 % $ 171 9 % $ 157 As a percentage of total revenues 7 % 7 % 7 % The $15 million increase in research and development expenses in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to increases in expenses of $9 million in Oncology Systems, $3 million in X-ray Products and $2 million in the Other category. The increase in Oncology Systems was primarily due to incremental research and development expenses for the recently acquired Calypso, partially offset by a $3 million favorable currency translation impact, as foreign currency denominated research and development expenses for Oncology Systems were translated into U.S. dollars. The $3 million increase in X-ray Products was mainly due to higher development expenses for flat panel products, as well as incremental research and development expenses for the recently acquired InfiMed. The $2 million increase in the Other category was primarily due to an increase in expenses for development projects in VPT, partially offset by a decrease in research expenses in SIP. The $14 million increase in research and development expenses in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increases in expenses of $6 million in Oncology Systems, $5 million in X-ray Products, $3 million in the Other category and Corporate. The $6 million increase in Oncology Systems was mainly due to a $5 million unfavorable currency translation impact, as foreign currency denominated research and development expenses for Oncology Systems were translated into weaker U.S. dollars, as well as an increase in material costs and consulting expenses for product development. The $5 million increase in X-ray Products was attributable primarily to higher development expenses for flat panel and x-ray tube products. The $3 million increase in the Other category and Corporate was primarily due to an increase in expenses for development projects in VPT, partially offset by a decrease in research expenses in SIP. Selling, General and Administrative Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Selling, general and administrative $ 417 11 % $ 377 13 % $ 335 As a percentage of total revenues 15 % 15 % 14 % The $40 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $15 million net increase in employee-related costs, in part for increased headcount to support our growing sales, marketing and other business activities particularly the in international region; (b) an $8 million increase in bad debt expense to increase the allowance for doubtful accounts related to a limited number of customers; (c) a $6 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses associated with the recently acquired Calypso and InfiMed; (d) a $5 million net increase in legal expenses relating to ongoing litigation; (e) a $4 million decrease in the income recognized on our equity investment in dpiX Holding LLC and (f) a $2 million increase in restructuring charge primarily for a workforce reduction in North America that accompanied the realignment of resources to support sales and marketing activities in emerging market countries. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $4 million in contingent liability charge in fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011. The $42 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $14 million net increase in employee-related costs that reflected increased headcount to support our growing business activities; (b) a $10 million net increase in legal expenses and contingent liabilities;(c) unfavorable foreign currency impact of $8 million as the foreign currency denominated selling, general and administrative expenses of our foreign operations 70 Table of Contents were translated into weaker U.S. dollars; (d) a $5 million increase in depreciation and facility expenses primarily related to a Palo Alto, California facility that was placed in service in the first quarter of fiscal year 2011; (e) a loss of $1 million in fiscal year 2011, compared to a gain of $1 million in fiscal year 2010, for hedging balance sheet exposures from our various foreign subsidiaries and business units; (f) a $2 million increase in operating expenses associated with required information technology infrastructure improvements to support our growing business activities; and (g) a $2 million increase in bad debt expense. These increases were partially offset by: (i) income of $4 million, versus a loss of $1 million in fiscal year 2011, recognized on our equity investment in dpiX Holding and (ii) the inclusion in fiscal year 2010 of $3 million related to an October 2009 reduction in force. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Interest income (expense), net $ 1.9 614 % $ 0.3 120 % $ (1.3 ) The net increase in interest income, net of interest expense, in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to interest income generated from our loan to CPTC, the commitment for which was executed in September 2011. This increase was partially offset by an increase in interest expense associated with increased borrowing from our credit facilities in fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011. The net increase in interest income, net, in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to lower interest expenses associated with lower levels of long-term debt in fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2012 Change 2011 Change 2010 Effective tax rate 28.3 % -2.3 % 30.6 % -0.4 % 31.0 % The decrease in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2012 from fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to a shift in the geographic mix of earnings, partially offset by a smaller net benefit for discrete items in fiscal year 2012 related to the prior period. These discrete items were primarily related to the release of certain liabilities for uncertain tax positions, including the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions and the favorable resolution of several income tax audits. The slight decrease in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to an increase in the benefit from discrete items in fiscal year 2011, including a greater release of liabilities for uncertain tax positions as a result of settlements with taxing authorities and the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions, partially offset by a decrease in the benefit from the foreign rate differential in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. We expect our future effective tax rate may fluctuate due to changes in geographic mix of earnings, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities and changes in tax laws or interpretations of those laws. For example, recent proposals would make significant changes to U.S. taxation of U.S.-based multinational corporations. Although we cannot predict whether or in what form Congress would enact any such proposals, legislation of this type could have an adverse impact on our effective tax rate. We also expect that our effective tax rate may experience fluctuation from period to period under the provisions in ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. See Note 14, Taxes on Earnings of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 71 Table of Contents Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Net earnings per diluted share $ 3.76 9 % $ 3.44 16 % $ 2.96 The increases in net earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 resulted from (i) an increase in total revenues, (ii) a decrease in effective tax rate and (iii) a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to stock repurchases. These positive impacts on net earnings were partially offset by a decrease in gross margin percentage and a $3 million restructuring charge in fiscal year 2012 primarily for a workforce reduction in North America that accompanies the realignment of resources to support sales and marketing activities in emerging markets. The increase in net earnings from continuing operations per diluted share in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 resulted from (i) an increase in total revenues, (ii) an improvement in gross margin percentage, (iii) a decrease in effective tax rate and (iv) a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due mainly to the various accelerated stock repurchase programs that were executed in fiscal year 2011. Net Orders Total Net Orders (by segment and region) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2012 % Change 2011 % Change 2010 Oncology Systems: North America $ 1,091 5 % $ 1,038 5 % $ 985 Total International 1,309 8 % 1,211 11 % 1,091 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,400 7 % $ 2,249 8 % $ 2,076 X-ray Products: North America $ 141 0 % $ 140 22 % $ 115 Total International 365 7 % 343 13 % 304 Total X-ray Products $ 506 5 % $ 483 15 % $ 419 Other: $ 216 7 % $ 201 100 % $ 0 Total Net Orders $ 3,122 6 % $ 2,933 18 % $ 2,495 Oncology Systems net orders grew 7% in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011, compared to 8% in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. On a constant currency basis, Oncology Systems net orders grew 8% in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011, compared to 6% in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. Both the international region and North America contributed to the growth in Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal years 2012 and 2011 over the respective prior fiscal years. The increase in international Oncology Systems net orders was primarily due to growth in orders for our service contracts in all international regions , as well as increased orders for our linear accelerators and our software products in Asia and Europe. When measured in constant currency, international Oncology Systems net orders grew 10% in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011. The growth in North American Oncology Systems net orders was primarily due to the continued growth in orders for our service contracts, as well as increased orders for our software products and tumor tracking products offered by recently acquired Calypso, which increases were partially offset by a decrease in orders for our high energy linear accelerators. The growth in international Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increased orders for our high energy linear accelerators in Europe and the rest of the world region, partially offset by a decline in orders for our high energy linear accelerators in Asia, where a supplemental spending program in Japan contributed to very high order levels in the first half of fiscal 72 Table of Contents year 2010. Growth in orders for our service contracts and software upgrades in all international regions also contributed to the growth in international Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. When measured in constant currency, international Oncology Systems net orders grew 6% in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. The growth in North American Oncology Systems net orders in the fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010, helped in part by strong net orders growth in Canada, was primarily due to increased orders for our high energy linear accelerators and software upgrades, as well as growth in orders for our service contracts. The trailing 12 months growth in net orders for Oncology Systems for the three immediately prior fiscal quarters ends were: a 6% total increase, with a 1% increase in North America and an 11% increase for the international region, as of June 29, 2012; an 8% total increase, with flat net orders in North America and a 16% increase for the international region, as of March 30, 2012; an 8% total increase, with a 1% decrease in North America and a 17% increase for the international region, as of December 30, 2011. We expect that Oncology Systems net orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations, even with an overall shift of orders towards the international region and emerging markets. In addition, the availability of government programs that stimulate the purchase of healthcare products, such as the one in place in 2010 in Japan, and, in the United States, uncertainty created by healthcare reform and actual and proposed reductions in Medicare reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery have in the past affected and could in the future affect the demand for our Oncology Systems products and/or revenues recognized from period to period, and could therefore make it difficult to compare our financial results. X-ray Products net orders grew 5% in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011, compared to 15% in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. X-ray Products net orders in North America were flat in fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011. North American net order increases in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 attributable to our flat panel products and our image processing tools offered by the recently acquired InfiMed were offset by a decrease in net orders for our x-ray tube products. In the international region, the increase in X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was primarily due to increased orders for our flat panel products in all international regions and increased orders for our x-ray tube products in Europe, as well as orders for image processing tools offered by the recently acquired InfiMed in Europe and Asia. These increases were partially offset by lower orders for our x-ray tube products in Asia and rest of the world region in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011. The increase in X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to an increase in both North American and international net orders. Increased demand for both the x-ray tube products and the flat panel products contributed the increase in North American X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. The increase in international X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increased orders for x-ray tube products in Asia and Europe and increased orders for flat panel products in Europe, partially offset by a decline in net orders for flat panel products in Asia. Net orders in the Other category increased $15 million in fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 primarily due to VPT recording two proton therapy system orders, compared to recording one proton therapy system order in fiscal year 2011. In fiscal year 2012, VPT recorded a $50 million order to supply a proton therapy system for a two-room proton therapy center at the PTC St. Petersburg Center of Nuclear Medicine of the International Institute of Biological Systems in Russia. In addition, we recorded a $77 million order (of which $73 million was allocated to VPT and the remaining amount allocated to Oncology Systems) to supply a proton therapy system and two TrueBeam linear accelerators for a five-room proton therapy center at the King Fahd Medical Center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. In fiscal year 2011, VPT recorded an $88 million order from CPTC for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center. The increase in VPT net orders for fiscal year 2012 over fiscal year 2011 was partially offset by a decline in SIP net orders. The decline in SIP net orders was primarily due to SIP booking a $21 million one-time order from U.S. Customs and Border Protection for five of our IntellX cargo screening systems in fiscal year 2011. 73 Table of Contents Net orders in the Other category increased $201 million in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010 with VPT recording the $88 million order from CPTC for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project in fiscal year 2011 and cancelling the $62 million proton therapy system order from Skandion Kliniken in fiscal year 2010. The increase in net orders in the Other category in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was also attributable to a $51 million increase in net orders in SIP primarily due to increased orders for Linatron x-ray accelerators for cargo screening and border protection and a $21 million one-time order from U.S. Customs and Border Protection for five of our IntellX cargo screening systems. Orders in any period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products or acceptance schedules. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as orders for software or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from recording the order to completion of installation and acceptance than hardware or older products. Because an order for a proton therapy system can be relatively large, an order in one fiscal period will cause our net orders to vary significantly, making comparisons between fiscal periods more difficult. Orders and revenues for our SIP products have been and may continue to be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with us or with our OEM customers over a short period of time and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. Furthermore, bid awards in the VPT and SIP businesses may be subject to challenge by third parties, which can make these orders more unpredictable than other products. Discontinued Operations In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, we approved a plan to sell Research Instruments in order to focus our efforts on the development of the proton therapy systems portion of the ACCEL business. The sale of Research Instruments was completed in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009. Research Instruments has been classified as a discontinued operation in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings for all periods presented. In fiscal year 2010, we recognized a loss of $7.1 million for additional cost to settle one Research Instruments customer contract and estimated costs to complete and settle the other Research Instruments customer contract. In fiscal year 2011, we recognized a loss of $9.7 million for additional costs to settle the remaining customer contract. These contracts had been accounted for under the percentage-of-completion method, under which revenues and costs of sales are adjusted to reflect changes in estimated costs to complete the contracts. Including the additional loss recognized for these contracts, the total losses from discontinued operations for fiscal years 2011 and 2010 were $9.7 million and $7.1 million, less applicable income tax of zero for both years, respectively. Total revenues of Research Instruments, reported in discontinued operations, for fiscal years 2011 and 2010 were zero and $(3.6) million, respectively. As of September 30, 2011, we had no remaining obligations related to this discontinued operation. In fiscal year 2012, we did not recognize any income or losses and did not have any revenues from discontinued operations. See Note 19, Discontinued Operations to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion. Backlog Including the $146 million VPT backlog, our backlog at September 28, 2012 was $2.8 billion, which was an increase of 12% over the backlog at September 30, 2011. Our Oncology Systems backlog at September 28, 2012 was 9% higher than the backlog at September 30, 2011, which reflected a 13% increase for the international region and a 7% increase for North America. 74 Table of Contents Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses or make other investments or loans, repurchase shares of VMS common stock, and fund continuing operations and capital expenditures. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases and interest income. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. Because Research Instruments cash flows were not material for any period presented, we have not segregated them from continuing operations on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and the discussion herein. Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: (In millions) September 28, 2012 September 30, 2011 Increase Cash and cash equivalents $ 705 $ 564 $ 141 Our cash and cash equivalents increased $141 million from $564 million at September 30, 2011 to $705 million at September 28, 2012. The increase in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2012 was due primarily to $493 million of cash generated from operating activities, $60 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases, $9 million of cash provided by the excess tax benefits from share-based compensation, and $9 million of cash received from repayment of note receivable from dpiX LLC. These increases were partially offset by aggregate payments of $257 million of cash for the repurchase of shares of VMS common stock, $61 million of cash for purchases of property, plant, and equipment, $31 million of cash used to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC for financing the construction and startup operations of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center, $28 million of cash used for acquisitions (primarily Calypso and InfiMed), $26 million of cash used in net payments under our credit facilities, $10 million used to satisfy employee tax withholding requirements for employees who tendered VMS stock upon vesting of restricted common stock and restricted stock units, and $10 million of cash used in repayment of long-term debt. In addition, foreign currency exchange rate changes in fiscal year 2012 increased cash and cash equivalents by $4 million. At September 28, 2012, we had approximately $50 million or 7%, of total cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $655 million, or 93%, of total cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of September 28, 2012, most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. dollars and were primarily held as bank deposits. We have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, permitted VMS stock repurchases, acquisitions and other lawful corporate purposes. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2012 2011 2010 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 493 $ 472 $ 460 Investing activities (122 ) (118 ) (75 ) Financing activities (234 ) (311 ) (422 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 4 1 3 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 141 $ 44 $ (34 ) 75 Table of Contents Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2012, 2011 and 2010 were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $493 million in fiscal year 2012, compared to $472 million in fiscal year 2011 and $460 million in fiscal year 2010. The $21 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2012 compared to fiscal year 2011was driven primarily by an increase of $28 million in net earnings and a net change of $5 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items), partially offset by a decrease in non-cash items of $12 million. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2012 were accounts receivable, advance payments from customers, prepaid expenses and other current assets, and inventories as follows: Accounts receivable increased $87 million due to higher revenues and timing of collections. Advance payments from customers increased by $81 million due to receipts of down payments for Oncology System and VPT orders for which revenues have not been recognized during fiscal year 2012. Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased by $47 million primarily due to guaranteed prepayments made under a commercial agreement for products that we resell, as well as timing of expense payments. Inventories increased by $42 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2013 mainly in Oncology Systems and VPT. The $12 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010 was driven primarily by an increase of $39 million in net earnings and an increase in non-cash items of $5 million, partially offset by a net change of $32 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items). The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2011 were accounts receivable, inventories, accounts payable and advance payments from customers as follows: Accounts receivable increased $42 million due to higher revenues and timing of collections. Inventories increased by $42 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2012 mainly in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products. Accounts payable increased by $36 million due to timing of vendor payments, increased purchases due to the overall growth of our operations and payment due for settlement of a contract. Advance payments from customers increased by $23 million due to increased orders. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments, product installation or customer acceptance, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. See Item 1A, Risk Factors. Investing activities used $122 million of net cash in fiscal year 2012, compared to $118 million of net cash in fiscal year 2011 and $75 million in fiscal year 2010. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment was $61 million in fiscal year 2012, compared to $71 million in fiscal year 2011, and $68 million in fiscal year 2010. During fiscal year 2012, we used $31 million to fund a portion of our loan commitment to CPTC and paid $28 million for business acquisitions (primarily Calypso and InfiMed). In fiscal year 2012, we received $9 million of cash from dpiX LLC for the repayment of note receivable. During fiscal year 2011, we used $19 million for loans 76 Table of Contents to CPTC, paid $15 million to Augmenix for a minority equity interest plus an exclusive option to purchase the remaining equity interest of Augmenix and paid cash of $8 million for the acquisition of all of the outstanding capital stock of a supplier of devices for delivery of brachytherapy treatment. Financing activities used net cash of $234 million in fiscal year 2012, compared to $311 million in fiscal year 2011, and $422 million in fiscal year 2010. In fiscal year 2012, we used $257 million for the repurchases of VMS common stock. In fiscal year 2011, we paid an aggregate of $611 million in connection with three accelerated share repurchase agreements and for shares repurchased in the open market. In fiscal year 2010, we paid an aggregate of $520 million in connection with an accelerated share repurchase agreement and for shares repurchased in the open market. In fiscal years 2012, 2011, and 2010, we used $10 million, $7 million, and $9 million, respectively, to repay bank borrowings. Cash used for financing activities in fiscal years 2012, 2011, and 2010 also includes $10 million, $15 million, and $8 million (the value of withheld shares), respectively, for tendered VMS common stock to satisfy employee tax withholding requirements upon vesting of restricted common stock and restricted stock units. These uses were partially offset by cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $60 million, $138 million, and $84 million in fiscal years 2012, 2011, and 2010 respectively, as well as cash provided by excess tax benefits from share-based compensation of $9 million in fiscal year 2012, $23 million in fiscal year 2011, and $15 million in fiscal year 2010. In fiscal year 2012, we repaid a net amount of $26 million to our credit facilities. In fiscal years 2011 and 2010 we borrowed a net amount of $161 million and $16 million, respectively, from our credit facilities. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 2.7% of revenues in fiscal year 2013. As further described under Contractual Obligations, we had loaned $49.7 million to CPTC as of September 28, 2012 and we expect CPTC to continue to draw down the loan facility, under which we have committed to loan up to $115.3 million to CPTC, during the construction and initial operation period of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center through fiscal year 2014. We had a $300 million credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. ( BofA ) during the first half of fiscal year 2012 (the Amended BofA Credit Facility ). The Amended BofA Credit Facility terminated on April 27, 2012, and was replaced with the 2012 Credit Facility as described below. On April 27, 2012, we entered into a five-year credit agreement with certain lenders and BofA as administrative agent (the 2012 Credit Facility ). The 2012 Credit Facility was arranged by Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated and enables us to borrow and have outstanding at any given time up to a maximum of $300 million. The 2012 Credit Facility includes a $50 million sub-facility for the issuance of letters of credit and permits swing line loans of up to $25 million. We also have the right to increase the aggregate commitments under the 2012 Credit Facility by up to $200 million, provided that the lenders are willing to provide increased commitments and certain other conditions are met. The 2012 Credit Facility is secured, subject to certain limitations on the amount secured, by a pledge of stock of certain of VMS present and future subsidiaries that are deemed to be material subsidiaries. As of September 28, 2012, VMS had pledged 65% of the voting shares that it holds in Varian Medical Systems Nederland Holdings B.V., a wholly owned subsidiary. All hedging or treasury management obligations we enter into by VMS with a lender of the 2012 Credit Facility are also secured by the stock pledges. The 2012 Credit Facility must be guaranteed by certain of VMS material domestic subsidiaries under certain circumstances. As of September 28, 2012, the 2012 Credit Facility was not guaranteed by any VMS subsidiary. The 2012 Credit Facility may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, permitted share repurchases, permitted acquisitions and other lawful corporate purposes. The 2012 Credit Facility contains provisions that limit our ability to pay cash dividends. 77 Table of Contents Borrowings under the 2012 Credit Facility accrue interest either (i) based on a Eurodollar rate (as defined in the credit agreement), plus a margin of 1.25% to 1.5% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA ) or (ii) based upon a base rate of the highest of (a) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (b) BofA announced prime rate or (c) the Eurodollar rate plus 1%, plus a margin of 0.25% to 0.5% based on the same leverage ratio, depending on our instructions. We also must pay a commitment fee on the unused portion of the 2012 Credit Facility at a rate from 0.25% to 0.30% based on the same leverage ratio. Swing line loans under the 2012 Credit Facility bear interest at the base rate plus the then applicable margin for base rate loans. We may prepay, reduce or terminate the commitments without penalty. At September 28, 2012, a total of $155 million was outstanding under the 2012 Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 1.47%. No letters of credit or swing line loans were outstanding at that date. The credit agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants applicable to us that are typical for credit facilities of this type, and that are subject to materiality and other qualifications, carve-outs, baskets and exceptions. We have also agreed to maintain certain financial covenants, including (i) a maximum consolidated leverage ratio, involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA, and (ii) a minimum cash flow coverage. We were in compliance with all covenants under the 2012 Credit Facility for all periods presented within these consolidated financial statements in which it was in existence. In addition, VMS Japanese subsidiary ( VMS KK ) has an unsecured uncommitted credit agreement with Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation that enables VMS KK to borrow and have outstanding at any given time a maximum of 3 billion Japanese yen (the Sumitomo Credit Facility ). The Sumitomo Credit Facility will expire on February 28, 2013. Borrowings under the Sumitomo Credit Facility accrue interest based on the basic loan rate announced by the Bank of Japan plus a margin of 0.5% per annum. As of September 28, 2012, there was no outstanding balance under the Sumitomo Credit Facility. See Note 8, Credit Facilities to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion regarding our credit facilities. The following table provides additional information regarding our short-term borrowings: Fourth Quarter of Fiscal Year 2012 Fiscal Year (Dollars in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Amount outstanding (at end of period) $ 155 $ 155 $ 181 $ 20 Weighted average interest rate (at end of period) 1.47 % 1.47 % 1.05 % 1.51 % Average amount outstanding (during period) 175 172 60 18 Weighted average interest rate (during period) 1.53 % 1.29 % 2.07 % 1.52 % Maximum month-end amount outstanding during period $ 205 $ 205 $ 239 $ 177 Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes, repurchase VMS common stock and fund our loan commitment to CPTC. Total debt as a percentage of total capital decreased to 9.6% at September 28, 2012 from 13.7% at September 30, 2011 primarily due to decreased borrowings under our credit facilities. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities increased to 1.76 to 1 at September 28, 2012 from 1.65 to 1 at September 30, 2011. 78 Table of Contents Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable DSO were 85 days at September 28, 2012 compared to 80 days at September 30, 2011. Excluding VPT, DSO were 80 days at September 28, 2012 compared to 80 days at September 30, 2011. Our accounts receivable and DSO are impacted by a number of factors, primarily including: the timing of product shipments, collections performance, payment terms, the mix of revenues from different regions and the continued sovereign debt and banking crises in Europe. As of September 28, 2012, approximately 3% of our accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with remaining terms of more than one year. Stock Repurchase Program During fiscal years 2012, 2011 and 2010, we repurchased 4,433,718 shares, 9,028,033 shares and 9,788,249 shares, respectively, of VMS common stock under various authorizations by VMS Board of Directors. The repurchased shares include shares of VMS common stock repurchased under various accelerated share repurchase agreements. Aggregate cash payments in connection with the various accelerated share repurchase agreements (as further discussed below) and for shares repurchased in the open market totaled $257 million, $611 million and $520 million in fiscal years 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. All shares that were repurchased have been retired. On August 24, 2010, we executed an accelerated share repurchase agreement with BofA (the August 2010 Repurchase Agreement ). Pursuant to the August 2010 Repurchase Agreement, we initially paid to BofA $225 million and BofA delivered 3,888,249 shares of VMS common stock, representing approximately 90% of the shares expected to be repurchased. Under the terms of the August 2010 Repurchase Agreement, the specific number of shares that we ultimately repurchased was to be based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, less a discount, such that we might be entitled to receive additional shares of VMS common stock from BofA or we might be required to deliver VMS shares or, at our option, make a cash payment to BofA. The repurchase period ended on February 23, 2011 and we made a cash payment of $26.1 million in March 2011 to settle the August 2010 Repurchase Agreement. On February 23, 2011, we entered into a substantially identical accelerated share repurchase agreement with BofA (the February 2011 Repurchase Agreement ). Pursuant to the February 2011 Repurchase Agreement, we paid to BofA $280 million and BofA delivered 3,547,474 shares of VMS common stock, representing approximately 85% of the shares expected to be repurchased. Under the terms of the February 2011 Repurchase Agreement, the specific number of shares that we ultimately repurchased was to be based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, less a discount. In June 2011, BofA accelerated the end of the repurchase period and we received an additional 630,921 shares of VMS common stock, with a then market value of approximately $41.3 million, upon the settlement of the February 2011 Repurchase Agreement. On August 25, 2011, we entered into another accelerated share repurchase agreement with BofA (the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement ). Pursuant to the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement, we paid to BofA $250 million and BofA delivered 3,849,638 shares of VMS common stock, representing approximately 85% of the shares expected to be repurchased. Under the terms of the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement, the specific number of shares that we ultimately repurchased was to be based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, less a discount. The repurchase period ended in February 2012 and we received an additional 375,449 shares of VMS common stock, with a then market value of approximately $25 million, upon the settlement of the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement. In February 2011, the VMS Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of 12 million shares of VMS common stock through the end of fiscal year 2012. As of September 28, 2012, the remaining 3,000,000 shares available for repurchase under the February 2011 authorization expired. In August 2012, the VMS 79 Table of Contents Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of 8,000,000 shares of VMS common stock from September 29, 2012 through December 31, 2013. Stock repurchases under the August 2012 authorization may be made in open market, in privately negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchase programs) or under Rule 10b5-1 share repurchase plans, and may be made from time to time or in one or more blocks. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of September 28, 2012 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Fiscal Year 2013 Fiscal Years 2014 - 2015 Fiscal Years 2016 - 2017 Beyond Total Short-term borrowings(1) $ 155.0 $ $ $ $ 155.0 Long term debt(2) 6.3 6.3 Interest obligation on long term debt 0.4 0.3 0.7 Loan facility to CPTC(3) 42.0 23.6 65.6 Operating leases(4) 18.4 24.4 14.7 6.5 64.0 Purchase commitments(5) 28.0 28.0 Defined benefit pension plans(6) 11.1 11.1 Post-retirement benefit plan(7) 0.5 1.0 1.0 2.1 4.6 Total(8) $ 255.4 $ 55.6 $ 15.7 $ 8.6 $ 335.3 (1) As of September 28, 2012, short-term borrowings in this amount were outstanding under the 2012 Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 1.47%. See a detailed discussion of our credit facilities in Note 8, Credit Facilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Long-term debt, including current maturities, decreased $9.8 million from September 30, 2011 due to principal repayments. The fixed interest rate on the outstanding debt on this date was 6.70%. For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 7, Long-term Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (3) As further described in Note 16, Variable Interest Entity of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we participate, through our Swiss subsidiary, in a $165 million loan facility to CPTC, under which we committed to loan up to $115.3 million, to finance the construction and startup operations of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center. As of September 28, 2012, we had loaned $49.7 million to CPTC and we expect CPTC to continue to draw down this facility during the construction and initial operation period as of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center through fiscal year 2014. The amounts and timing of loan drawdown may change due to changes in construction progress and other factors. We expect to use cash held abroad to meet funding requirements under this loan facility. We may sell all or a portion of our participation in this loan facility before the end of the drawdown period in 2014. Upon the sale of all or a portion of this facility, we will not be required to make further loan advances for the portion of the facility that is sold. (4) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases as of September 28, 2012. (5) As further described in Note 10, Commitments and Contingencies, under a commercial agreement, we agreed to make guaranteed prepayments to a third party for orders of their products that the Company will resell to end user customers. (6) As further described in Note 11, Retirement Plans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 28, 2012, our defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $38.5 million. Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and 80 Table of Contents other economic and demographic assumptions the potential for changes in legislation in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund its defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (7) As further described in Note 11, Retirement Plans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 28, 2012, our post-retirement benefit plan had an estimated total benefit obligation of $5.6 million. Due to changes in health care cost trend rates, mortality rates of plan participants, and the potential for us to change the type of healthcare plans offered or the level of contributions from plan participants, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund our post-retirement benefit plan beyond fiscal year 2022. (8) The following items are not included in the table above: Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of September 28, 2012, our total liability for uncertain tax positions was $44.2 million, of which we anticipate a payment of $3.6 million in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of the reminder of future payments related to uncertain tax positions; therefore, the liability for uncertain tax positions has been excluded from the table above. See a detailed discussion in Note 14, Taxes on Earnings of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As further described in Note 10, Commitments and Contingencies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 28, 2012, we accrued $11.8 million for environmental remediation liabilities. The amount accrued represents estimates of anticipated future costs and the timing and amount of actual future environmental remediation costs may vary as the scope of our obligations become more clearly defined. In connection with the acquisition of businesses, we entered into agreements which include provisions to make additional consideration payments upon the achievement of certain milestones by the acquired businesses. As of September 28, 2012, we have accrued $8.8 million for potential contingent considerations under these agreements. In April 2012, we entered into a strategic global partnership with Siemens through which, among other things, we and Siemens will collaborate to develop interfaces that will enable our ARIA oncology information system software to connect with Siemens linear accelerators and imaging systems. Under the agreement establishing this collaboration, we committed to make certain payments, including up to $10 million in fixed fees and $20 million in license fees, in the event that certain product development milestones are achieved. We must pay for additional licenses beyond the minimum quantities set forth in the agreement. We expect that these interfaces will be commercialized as part of our ARIA oncology information system offering to customers. As of September 28, 2012, no amount related to achievement of product development milestones was payable under this agreement. Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 10, Commitments and Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Acquisition-Related Commitments/Obligations When we acquired ACCEL in January 2007, ACCEL was involved in a contract-related lawsuit, which we settled by agreeing to perform certain commissioning services for a proton therapy system. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2010, we entered into a new contract (the New Contract ) to perform certain 81 Table of Contents additional services for the same party for a fixed price. The balance of the loss accrual related the New Contract was 0.9 million as of September 28, 2012. If the actual costs exceed the estimated amount or if the estimated loss otherwise increases, the variances will be recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings in the periods in which these variances arise. Other Matters From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters both inside and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. See Note 10 , Commitments and Contingencies Other Matters of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The terms of these indemnification arrangements are generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is unlimited. As of September 28, 2012, we have not incurred any significant costs since the Spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In December 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) amended ASC 210, Balance Sheet. This amendment enhances disclosure requirements about the nature of an entity right to offset and related arrangements associated with its financial instruments and derivative instruments. The amendment requires the disclosure of the gross amounts subject to rights of set-off, the amounts offset in accordance with the accounting standards followed, and the related net exposure. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2014. The adoption of this amendment concerns disclosure only and we do not expect it to have an impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. In September 2011, the FASB amended ASC 350, Intangibles Goodwill and Other. This amendment is intended to simplify how an entity tests goodwill for impairment and will allow an entity to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill impairment test. An entity no longer will be required to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit unless the entity determines, based on a qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the reporting unit fair value is less than its carrying amount. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2013. We do not expect this amendment to have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In June 2011, the FASB amended ASC 220, Presentation of Comprehensive Income. This amendment will require companies to present the components of net income and other comprehensive income either 82 Table of Contents as one continuous statement or as two consecutive statements. It eliminates the option to present components of other comprehensive income as part of the statement of changes in stockholders equity. In December 2011, the FASB issued another amendment which defers indefinitely this amendment to the extent it relates to the presentation of reclassification adjustments. The amended guidance, which must be applied retroactively, will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2013. The adoption of this amendment concerns disclosure only and we do not expect it to have an impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. 
