CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-11-23


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview In fiscal year 2010, net earnings per diluted share from continuing operations increased 12% from fiscal year 2009. Operating earnings, as a percentage of revenues, increased in fiscal year 2010 from the prior fiscal year. Reflecting weak net orders in fiscal year 2009, total revenues from continuing operations grew 6% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. Demand for new products, particularly our TrueBeam TM systems in Oncology Systems and our radiographic flat panels in X-ray Products, drove net order growth. Net orders increased 5% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, which included a now-cancelled $62 million proton therapy system order from Skandion Kliniken. Excluding the proton system order, net orders in fiscal year 2010 grew 10% over fiscal year 2009. Backlog at the end of fiscal year 2010 was 7% higher than at the end of the prior fiscal year. During fiscal year 2010, we used $498 million to repurchase 9.8 million shares of VMS common stock. In fiscal year 2010, we believe we successfully navigated within a tough environment and, by the end of the fiscal year, there is greater clarity on the uncertainties created by the economic downturn on hospital budgets, the healthcare reform in the United States and, for fiscal year 2011, the reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery at free-standing clinics in the United States. Effective in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, we classified Research Instruments as a discontinued operation for all periods presented in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings. Including a $0.05 loss from these discontinued operations, net earnings in fiscal year 2010 were $2.91 per diluted share. Research Instruments was previously included in the Other category. Unless otherwise stated, the discussion in this MD&A pertains to our continuing operations. Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufacturers, sells and services hardware and software products for radiation treatment of cancer with conventional radiotherapy, IMRT, IGRT, VMAT (an advanced form of IMRT), stereotactic radiotherapy, stereotactic radiosurgery and brachytherapy. In the second quarter of fiscal year 2010, we introduced the TrueBeam system for image-guided radiotherapy and radiosurgery. This product line is a fully-integrated system designed from the ground up to treat a moving target with higher speed and accuracy. Including a small portion of TrueBeam orders representing upgrades from other linear accelerators already in our backlog, through October 1, 2010, we had received orders for more than 125 TrueBeam systems since its introduction, a majority of which came from North America. We believe TrueBeam will be a valuable tool for clinicians in the fight against cancer and we expect it will stimulate stronger demand for our surgical products, as well as faster replacement of older systems in our installed base. Our ability to successfully introduce and commercialize new product lines, such as TrueBeam, without disrupting the ongoing demand for our existing product lines is important and failure to do so may have a negative impact on revenues and net earnings. Oncology Systems net orders increased 10%, or 8% on a constant currency basis, in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 with growth from both the international and North American regions. Increased demand for our linear accelerators (driven by demand for the new TrueBeam system and, to a lesser extent, the UNIQUE low-energy linear accelerator) and our software products contributed to the growth in total Oncology Systems net orders, as did continued growth in demand for our service contracts. As of fiscal year end 2010, Oncology Systems had reported three consecutive quarters of double-digit net order growth worldwide and two consecutive quarters of double-digit net order growth in North America over the year earlier periods. Continuing growth in demand for our Oncology Systems products depend in part on the strength and sustainability of an economic recovery in the United States. Following weak North American net orders in fiscal year 2009, Oncology Systems recorded an 11% decrease in North American revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 but a 21% increase in international revenues. Oncology Systems total revenues rose 4% in the aggregate primarily because of continued growth in service contract revenues. Oncology Systems gross margin in fiscal year 2010 54 Table of Contents improved from fiscal year 2009 as an increase in service contract gross margin more than offset a decrease in product gross margin. X-Ray Products . Our X-ray Products business segment, designs, manufactures and sells: (i) x-ray tubes for use in a range of applications including CT scanning, radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, special procedures and industrial applications; and (ii) flat panel detectors for filmless x-ray imaging. In fiscal year 2010, X-ray Products reported record net orders, revenues and operating earnings. Net orders and revenues increased 24% and 22%, respectively, in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, reflecting a recovery in the global imaging equipment industry. Both the flat panel (including the radiographic flat panels) and the x-ray tube product lines contributed to the increase in net orders and revenues. X-ray Products gross margin improved in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to a product mix shift towards a higher proportion of higher margin products and higher sales volume. Our success in our X-ray Products business depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. In addition, changes in access to diagnostic radiology or the reimbursement rates associated with diagnostic radiology as a result of the Affordable Health Care for America Act and similar state proposals will likely affect demand for our products. Other. The Other category is comprised of: (i) SIP, which designs, manufactures, sells and services Linatron x-ray accelerators, imaging processing software and image detection products (including IntellX TM ) for security and inspection, (ii) our Varian Particle Therapy business, which designs, develops, manufactures, sells and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy treatments, and (iii) the operations of the GTC, our scientific research facility. Net orders in the Other category declined in fiscal year 2010 from fiscal year 2009 primarily because we recorded the now-cancelled $62 million proton therapy system order from Skandion Kliniken in the prior fiscal year, and to a lesser extent, because of a decrease in SIP net orders as this business was negatively impacted by bid award challenges among competitors for a large government project in North America. Total revenues in the Other category increased 8% primarily due to an increase in service revenues from Varian Particle Therapy related to the commissioning of a proton therapy system, partially offset by a decrease in SIP revenues. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Item 1A, Risk Factors. . We discuss our results of operations below. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of environmental remediation liabilities, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, 55 Table of Contents often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain; and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, see Item 1A, Risk Factors. Revenue Recognition We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. At the beginning of the second quarter of fiscal year 2010, we elected to early adopt the amended software revenue guidance and amended multiple deliverable revenue arrangement guidance on a prospective basis as of the beginning of fiscal year 2010 and have applied the amended guidance for revenue arrangements originating or materially modified after October 2, 2009. Under the amended guidance, the allocation of consideration in a multiple element arrangement is affected by the determination of whether any software deliverables that function together with other hardware components to deliver the hardware products essential functionality is considered as non-software products for purpose of revenue recognition. The allocation of consideration to each non-software deliverable is based on the assumptions we use to establish its selling price, which are based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of selling price, if it exists, otherwise, third-party evidence of selling price, if it exists, and if not on estimated selling prices. In addition, the allocation of consideration to each software deliverable in a multiple element arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether VSOE of its fair value exists in these arrangements. Under the prior authoritative guidance, the allocation of consideration to each deliverable in a multiple deliverable arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether objective and reliable evidence of fair value existed for hardware deliverables and VSOE of the fair value existed for software deliverables in these arrangements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the amounts allocated to each element could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment and is subject to customer acceptance and the readiness of customers facilities. If shipments are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. In addition, revenues related to certain proton therapy commissioning service contracts and highly customized image detection systems are recognized under the percentage-of-completion method. Under the percentage-of-completion method of accounting, sales and gross profit are recognized as work is performed, based on the relationship between actual costs incurred and total estimated costs at the completion of the contract. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. If a loss is expected on a contract under the percentage-of-completion method or completed contract method, the estimated loss would be charged to cost of sales in the period the loss is identified. Share-based Compensation Expense We value our stock options granted and the option component of the shares purchased under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected term of stock awards and the expected price volatility of VMS stock over the expected term of the awards. 56 Table of Contents The expected term is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We determined the expected term of stock options based on the demographic grouping of employees and retirement eligibility. We used a combination of historical and implied volatility, or blended volatility, in deriving the expected volatility assumption. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility is derived based on traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the term of the exchange-traded options to the expected terms of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options on VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we could not rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected terms of the stock options we grant. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected terms of the stock options we grant and the implied volatility of exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock options. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Except for government tenders, group purchases and orders with letters of credit in Oncology Systems, SIP and Varian Particle Therapy, and orders in our X-ray Products business, our payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The majority of 57 Table of Contents businesses that we have acquired have not had significant identified tangible assets and, as a result, we have typically allocated a significant portion of the purchase price to intangible assets and goodwill. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to these intangibles or to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. The allocation of the purchase price from business acquisitions to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. In addition, the allocation of the purchase price of the acquired businesses to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for those cash flows. Should conditions differ from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. In accordance with Accounting Standard Codification ( ASC ) 350, we evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs or circumstances changes that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill against the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. Based on the most recent annual goodwill impairment testing that we performed in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2010 for each of our four reporting units with goodwill (Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, SIP and Varian Particle Therapy), the fair value of each such reporting unit was substantially in excess of its carrying value. We will continue to make assessments of impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of our fiscal years or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually twelve months, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Environmental Matters We are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations and in connection with past operations. In connection with past operations, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts . Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review 58 Table of Contents these accrued balances quarterly. Were we required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. Defined Benefit Pension and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans We sponsor five defined benefit pension plans in Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. In July 2007, we made changes to the defined benefit pension plan in the United Kingdom by terminating the accrual of additional benefits for existing participants and suspending the enrollment of new participants. Although we do not have any defined benefit pension plans in the United States, we sponsor a post-retirement benefit plan that provides healthcare benefits to certain eligible retirees. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expenses and liabilities related to those plans for which the benefits are actuarially determined, such as our defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of future compensation increases and rate of healthcare cost increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expenses and liabilities. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plan expense we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans in all countries are based primarily on the yields of a universe of high quality corporate bonds in each country or the spot rate of high quality AA-rated corporate bonds, with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. In countries where the corporate bond market is not sufficiently representative of the time period at longer durations, the discount rate also takes into account the yield of long-term government bonds corresponding to the duration of the benefit obligations and the difference between the yield curve on high quality corporate fixed-income investments and government fixed-income investments. A change in the discount rate will cause the present value of benefit obligations to change in the opposite direction. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. ASC 820 establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 3, Fair Value Measurements of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Each level of input has different levels of subjectivity and difficulty involved in determining fair value. The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts are calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services. One year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which mature in less than 12 months, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty (for net asset) or our discount rate (for net liability). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact to the valuation of our derivative instruments, as well as on our result of operations. 59 Table of Contents Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. The provisions in ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes contain a two-step approach to recognizing, derecognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition, derecognition and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. A tax benefit should be recognized in the first period in which it meets the more likely than not recognition threshold, and conversely, a tax benefit previously recognized should be derecognized in the first period in which new information results in a change in judgment in which the position fails to meet the recognition threshold. A benefit not previously recognized would be recognized when the tax position is effectively settled through examination, negotiation or litigation with tax authorities, or when the statute of limitations for the relevant taxing authority to examine and challenge the position has expired. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for taxes on earnings. Generally, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in the applicable tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. Earnings derived from our international regions are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our international subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our international regions, or a change in the mix of international regions among particular tax jurisdictions, could increase our effective tax rate. Also, our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2010 was the 52-week period ended on October 1, 2010. Fiscal year 2009 was the 53-week period ended on October 2, 2009 and fiscal year 2008 was the 52-week period ended on September 26, 2008. Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008. As indicated above, the operating results of Research Instruments have been segregated and presented as a discontinued operation in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings for all periods. 60 Table of Contents Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2010, 2009 and 2008 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Product $ 1,814 3 % $ 1,767 5 % $ 1,690 Service Contracts and Other 543 21 % 447 18 % 380 Total Revenues $ 2,357 6 % $ 2,214 7 % $ 2,070 Product as a percentage of total revenues 77 % 80 % 82 % Service Contracts and Other as a percentage of total revenues 23 % 20 % 18 % Revenues by region North America $ 1,012 (9 )% $ 1,111 11 % $ 1,003 Europe 747 21 % 620 0 % 619 Asia 513 24 % 412 18 % 349 Rest of world 85 19 % 71 (28 )% 99 Total International(1) 1,345 22 % 1,103 3 % 1,067 Total $ 2,357 6 % $ 2,214 7 % $ 2,070 North America as a percentage of total revenues 43 % 50 % 48 % International as a percentage of total revenues 57 % 50 % 52 % (1) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, as increased revenues in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and Varian Particle Therapy were partially offset by a decrease in SIP revenues. Total revenues also increased in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 primarily due to the revenue growth in both our Oncology Systems and X-ray Products business segments, which again was partially offset by a decline in SIP revenues. In fiscal year 2010, the increase in product revenues over fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to an increase in product revenues from X-ray Products, which was mostly offset by the decreases in product revenues from Oncology Systems and SIP. In fiscal year 2009, growth in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products product revenues over fiscal year 2008 was partially offset by a decline in SIP product revenue. Product revenues grew more slowly from fiscal year 2009 to fiscal year 2010 as compared to fiscal year 2008 to fiscal year 2009, primarily because of the decrease in Oncology Systems product revenues in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009. Oncology Systems service contracts revenues were the primary contributor to the growth in service contracts and other revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 and in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008, although, to a lesser extent, Varian Particle Therapy and SIP also contributed to the increases in service contracts and other revenues. Service contracts and other revenues grew faster in fiscal year 2010 over 2009 compared to fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 primarily due to the faster growth in Oncology Systems service contract revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. North American revenues decreased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 as the decline in North American revenues from Oncology Systems and SIP more than offset the increase in X-ray Products North American revenues. Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and SIP contributed to the growth in North American revenues in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, SIP and Varian Particle Therapy all contributed to the growth in international revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. Europe, with revenue growth from all businesses, and Asia, with revenue growth primarily from Oncology Systems and X-ray Products, 61 Table of Contents contributed to the bulk of the growth in international revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. In the rest of the world region, the increase in Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was partially offset by a decrease in X-ray Products revenues. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, which favorably affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. In fiscal year 2009, the increase in international revenue over fiscal year 2008 was due to growth in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products international revenues, which was partially offset by a decrease in SIP international revenues. For Asia, Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and SIP all contributed to the fiscal year 2009 revenue growth over fiscal year 2008, while the growth in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products European revenues was offset by a decline in SIP European revenues. Oncology Systems and X-ray Products experienced revenue declines in the rest of the world region. The overall stronger U.S. dollar in fiscal year 2009 against foreign currencies compared to fiscal year 2008 negatively affected our international revenues in fiscal year 2009 when measured in U.S. dollars. Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Product $ 1,343 (1 )% $ 1,363 5 % $ 1,302 Service Contracts(1) 519 19 % 435 17 % 370 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,862 4 % $ 1,798 8 % $ 1,672 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 72 % 76 % 78 % Service Contracts as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 28 % 24 % 22 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 79 % 81 % 81 % (1) Revenues from service contracts represent revenues from fixed-term service contracts and labor cost services. This excludes revenues from spare parts sold by our service department. Oncology Systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily as a result of decreased revenues from sales of our linear accelerators, partially offset by increased revenues from sales of our brachytherapy products. For fiscal year 2009, the increase in Oncology Systems product revenues over fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to the increase in revenues from sales of our software products. The increases in service contract revenues, in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 and in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 were primarily driven by increased customer adoption of service contracts as our products become more sophisticated and by increased number of customers as the installed base of our products continues to grow. Since service contract revenues grew faster than product revenues from fiscal year 2008 to fiscal year 2009 and from fiscal year 2009 to fiscal year 2010, service contract revenues also increased as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues in each year. 62 Table of Contents Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, which favorably affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. In fiscal year 2009, the stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies compared to fiscal year 2008 negatively affected Oncology Systems international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 North America $ 860 (11 )% $ 970 12 % $ 866 Europe 614 17 % 524 1 % 517 Asia 309 27 % 242 21 % 200 Rest of world 79 28 % 62 (31 )% 89 Total International 1,002 21 % 828 3 % 806 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,862 4 % $ 1,798 8 % $ 1,672 North America as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 46 % 54 % 52 % International as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 54 % 46 % 48 % In fiscal year 2010, the international region drove the growth in Oncology Systems revenues over fiscal year 2009 and represented more than half of total Oncology Systems revenues. All international regions contributed to the increase in international Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. The increase in international Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 reflected higher product revenue driven by increased sales across most product lines, as well as an increase in service contract revenues. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, which favorably affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. Except for the rest of the world region, all of our international regions contributed to the Oncology Systems revenues growth in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. The increase in revenues from sales of our software products and the increase in service contract revenues in Asia and Europe were significantly offset by the decline in sales of our linear accelerators in the rest of the world region and Europe. The overall stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 also negatively affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. Due to decreases in sales in most product lines, North American Oncology Systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, although the decrease was partially offset by increased service contract revenues. In fiscal year 2009, the increase in North American Oncology Systems revenues over fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to an increase in revenues from sales of our software products and our linear accelerators, as well as an increase in service contract revenues. Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the international and North American regions is a historical pattern reflecting regional influences such as effects of the recession, uncertainty created by healthcare reform and reductions in Medicare reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery in the United States, and different technology adoption cycles that are consistent with the net order patterns discussed more fully under Net Orders. 63 Table of Contents X-ray Products Revenues Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 North America $ 128 16 % $ 110 3 % $ 107 Europe 68 37 % 49 9 % 45 Asia 201 24 % 162 14 % 143 Rest of world 6 (36 )% 10 (2 )% 10 Total International 275 24 % 221 12 % 198 Total X-ray Products $ 403 22 % $ 331 9 % $ 305 North America as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 32 % 33 % 35 % International as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 68 % 67 % 65 % X-ray Products revenues as a percentage of total revenues 17 % 15 % 15 % X-ray Products revenues grew 22% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, compared to revenue growth of 9% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008, as we saw signs in 2010 of recovery in the global imaging equipment industry. This business segment grew faster in both the international region and North America in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 than in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. The increase in X-ray Products international revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to increased revenues from sales of our flat panel products in Europe and Asia and increased revenues from sales of our x-ray tube products in Asia. The increase in X-ray Products North American revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was due to increased revenues from sales of our flat panel products, partially offset by a decline in revenues from sales of our x-ray tube products. For fiscal year 2009, the growth in X-ray Products revenues was primarily driven by increased international revenues and, to a lesser extent, increased North American revenues. The increase in international revenues in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to increased revenues from sales of our flat panel detectors, including our radiographic flat panels, in Europe and Asia, as well as increased revenues from sales of x-ray tubes in Asia. Revenue growth in North America in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was largely due to the growth in revenues from sales of our x-ray tubes, while revenues from sales of our flat panel products decreased slightly notwithstanding increased revenues from sales of our radiographic flat panels. Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Product $ 68 (7 )% $ 73 (13 )% $ 83 Service Contracts and Other 24 99 % 12 24 % 10 Total Other $ 92 8 % $ 85 (9 )% $ 93 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 4 % 4 % 4 % Revenues in our Other category, which is comprised of SIP, Varian Particle Therapy and GTC, increased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to an increase in Varian Particle Therapy service revenues related to the commissioning of a proton therapy system, partially offset by a decrease in SIP revenues from decreased sales of our Linatron products. Revenues in our Other category decreased in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 primarily due to declines in product revenues in our SIP business as a result of slower deployment of products for security and inspection systems. 64 Table of Contents Gross Margin Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Dollar by segment Oncology Systems $ 837 4 % $ 806 12 % $ 723 X-ray Products 162 25 % 130 9 % 120 Other 27 8 % 25 (30 )% 35 Gross margin $ 1,026 7 % $ 961 9 % $ 878 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 44.9 % 44.8 % 43.2 % X-ray Products 40.3 % 39.3 % 39.3 % Total Company 43.5 % 43.4 % 42.4 % In fiscal year 2010, total company gross margin percentage increased slightly over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to the improvement in X-ray Products and Oncology Systems gross margins, while the gross margin percentage for the Other category remained relatively flat. The increase in total company gross margin percentage for fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to the improvement in Oncology Systems gross margin, which was partially offset by the decreases in gross margins in the Other category while X-ray Product gross margin remained flat. The decrease in gross margin in the Other category in fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to the decrease in Varian Particle Therapy gross margin resulting from higher estimated costs for completion of contractual commitments associated with the acquisition of ACCEL, which is discussed in more details in Acquisition-Related Commitments/Obligations. Total product gross margin was 41.8% in fiscal year 2010, compared to 42.6% in fiscal year 2009 and 41.7% in fiscal year 2008. Total service contracts and other gross margin was 49.2% in fiscal year 2010, compared to 46.4% in fiscal year 2009 and 45.5% in fiscal year 2008. In fiscal year 2010, Oncology Systems gross margin increased over fiscal year 2009 due to an increase in Oncology Systems service contract gross margin that was mostly offset by a decline in Oncology Systems product gross margin. Oncology Systems product gross margin was 42.6% in fiscal year 2010, compared to 43.7% in fiscal year 2009, primarily due to the geographic mix shift towards a higher proportion of international revenues, which typically have lower margins than revenues from North America, partially offset by a product mix shift toward a greater proportion of higher margin software products. Oncology Systems service contract gross margin was 51.0% in fiscal year 2010, compared to 48.3% in fiscal year 2009. The increase in Oncology Systems service contract gross margin in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was mainly due to higher service contract volume, cost control initiatives and lower costs associated with quality. Improvements in both product gross margin and service contract gross margin contributed to the increases in Oncology Systems gross margins in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. Oncology Systems product gross margin was 43.7% in fiscal year 2009 compared to 42.4% in fiscal year 2008 primarily due to product mix shift toward higher margin software products. Oncology Systems service contract gross margin was 48.3% in fiscal year 2009, compared to 46.1% in fiscal year 2008, primarily due to cost control initiatives and higher volume in fiscal year 2009. X-ray Products gross margin increased 1.0 percentage point in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to product mix shift toward higher margin products and higher sales volume. X-ray Products gross margin remained relatively flat in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008, with a gross margin improvement in x-ray tubes offset by a decrease in flat panel gross margin due to higher start up costs and quality costs for the new radiographic flat panels. Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Research and development $ 157 6 % $ 147 9 % $ 136 As a percentage of total revenues 7 % 7 % 7 % 65 Table of Contents The $10 million increase in research and development expense for fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was driven by increased expenses of $6 million in the Other category, $2 million in Oncology Systems and $2 million in X-ray Products. The $6 million increase in the Other category was primarily due to an increase in labor expenses, material costs and consulting expenses for research and development projects in Varian Particle Therapy and SIP. The $2 million increase in Oncology Systems was primarily attributable to an unfavorable impact when foreign-currency-denominated research and development expenses for Oncology Systems were translated into U.S. dollars in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, when the U.S. dollar was relatively stronger against foreign currencies. The $2 million increase in X-ray Products was mainly due to higher development expenses for x-ray tube products. The $11 million increase in research and development expense for fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was driven by increased expenses of $6 million in Oncology Systems, $4 million in the Other category and $1 million in X-ray Products. The $6 million increase in Oncology Systems was primarily attributable to an increase in employee headcount, material costs and consulting expenses for product development, although these expenses were partially offset by a $4 million favorable impact, when foreign-currency-denominated research and development expenses for Oncology Systems were translated into U.S. dollars in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 when the U.S. dollar was relatively weaker against foreign currencies. The $4 million increase in the Other category was primarily due to higher expense for development projects in Varian Particle Therapy and SIP. The $1 million increase in X-ray Products was mainly for development projects for both x-ray tubes and flat panel products. Selling, General and Administrative Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Selling, general and administrative $ 335 (1 )% $ 339 5 % $ 323 As a percentage of total revenues 14 % 15 % 16 % Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, primarily due to cost control initiatives. As a percentage of total revenues, selling, general and administrative expenses in fiscal year 2010 decreased one-percentage point from fiscal year 2009. The $4 million decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $6 million decrease in accruals for contingent liabilities in the ordinary course of business; (b) a $5 million net decrease in certain commission and product promotion expenses for our Oncology Systems products and (c) a $5 million decrease in information technology expenses primarily due to the completion of the implementation of our enterprise resource planning system in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009. These decreases were partially offset by: (i) a $4 million increase in employee-related costs primarily related to increased accrued bonuses; (ii) a $3 million expense associated with reduction in force during fiscal year 2010; (iii) a $2 million decrease in net gain from hedging balance sheet exposures from our various foreign subsidiaries and business units; (iv) a $2 million increase in insurance expenses and (v) an unfavorable impact of $2 million when the foreign currency denominated selling, general and administrative expenses of our foreign operations were translated into U.S. dollars in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, when the U.S. dollar was relatively stronger against foreign currencies. The $16 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $7 million increase in fees for certain commission arrangements and product promotions which were primarily tied to growth in Oncology Systems revenues; (b) a $5 million increase in depreciation expenses for our enterprise resource planning system that was placed in service in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009; (c) a $4 million increase in accruals for contingent liabilities in the ordinary course of business and (d) a $3 million net increase in employee-related costs that reflected increased headcount to support our growing business activities partially offset 66 Table of Contents by a reduction in accrued bonuses and other cost control measures. These items were partially offset by a favorable impact of $5 million as the foreign currency denominated selling, general and administrative expenses of our foreign operations were translated into U.S. dollars in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008, when the U.S. dollar was relatively weaker against foreign currencies. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Interest income (expense), net $ (1.3 ) (357 )% $ 0.5 (92 )% $ 6.6 In fiscal year 2010, the net increase in interest expense, net of interest income, over fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to the lower average interest rates earned on our cash and cash equivalents. In fiscal year 2009, the decrease in interest income, net of interest expense, over fiscal year 2008 was attributable to the lower average interest rates earned on our cash and cash equivalents. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2010 Change 2009 Change 2008 Effective tax rate 31 % 1 % 30 % (1 )% 31 % The increase in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2010 from fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to a decrease in the benefit from discrete items in fiscal year 2010, including a smaller release of liabilities for uncertain tax positions as a result of settlements with taxing authorities and the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions, partially offset by an increase in the benefit from the foreign rate differential in fiscal year 2010. The decrease in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to a net benefit from discrete items, primarily the release of certain liabilities for uncertain tax positions, including the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions and the favorable resolution of several income tax audits, partially offset by a decrease in the benefit of the foreign tax rate differential. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. Our future effective tax rate could be adversely affected by having lower earnings than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory rates and higher earnings than anticipated in countries where we have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, and by changes in tax laws or interpretations of those laws. For example, recent proposals would make significant changes U.S. taxation of U.S.-based multinational corporations. Although we cannot predict whether or in what form Congress would enact any such proposals, legislation of this type could have an adverse impact on our effective tax rate. We also expect that our effective tax rate may experience increased fluctuation from period to period under the provisions in ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. See Note 13, Income Taxes of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Net earnings per diluted share $ 2.96 12 % $ 2.65 15 % $ 2.31 The increase in earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 resulted from (i) an increase in total revenues, (ii) an improvement in gross margin, (iii) a decrease in our operating expenses 67 Table of Contents as a percent of revenues and (iv) a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to stock repurchases partially offset by an increase in effective tax rate. The increase in earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 resulted from (i) an increase in total revenues; (ii) an improvement in gross margin, (iii) leverage in our operating expenses, (iv) a reduction in our effective tax rate and (v) a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to stock repurchases and lower stock prices. Net Orders Total Net Orders (by segment and region) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2010 % Change 2009 % Change 2008 Oncology Systems: North America $ 985 4 % $ 949 (7 )% $ 1,020 Total International 1,091 16 % 942 11 % 851 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,076 10 % $ 1,891 1 % $ 1,871 X-ray Products: North America $ 115 3 % $ 111 (15 )% $ 131 Total International 304 33 % 228 11 % 206 Total X-ray Products $ 419 24 % $ 339 1 % $ 337 Other: $ 0 (100 )% $ 151 59 % $ 94 Total Net Orders $ 2,495 5 % $ 2,381 3 % $ 2,302 Total net orders in fiscal year 2010 increased 5%, or 4% on a constant currency basis, from fiscal year 2009 which included the $62 million proton therapy system order from Skandion Kliniken (as described further below). Net order increases from Oncology Systems and X-ray Products were partially offset by net order decreases from Varian Particle Therapy and SIP. Including the $62 million proton therapy system order in Varian Particle Therapy, total net orders for fiscal year 2009 increased 3%, or 5% on a constant currency basis, over fiscal year 2008, with slight increases in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products net orders and a decline in SIP net orders. Beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2011, to avoid potentially confusing comparisons created by large and variable orders for our Varian Particle Therapy products, we will report orders by business rather than for the total company. Oncology Systems net orders grew 10% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, compared to a 1% growth in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. On a constant currency basis, Oncology Systems net orders grew 8% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, compared to 4% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. Oncology Systems North American net orders increased 4% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, with growth in net orders in the second half of the fiscal year more than offsetting the net order decline in the first half of the fiscal year. Increased demand for our linear accelerators, driven by the new TrueBeam system, as well as increased demand for our service contracts, including software service agreements, were the primarily contributors to the Oncology Systems North American net order increase in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. Oncology Systems international net orders increased 16%, or 13% on a constant currency basis, in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to increased demand for our linear accelerators (including the TrueBeam system and UNIQUE) and our software products, in Europe and Asia, as well as growth in demand for our service contracts in all international regions. The overall weaker U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 favorably impacted Oncology Systems international net orders when measured in U.S. dollars. For fiscal year 2009, the growth in Oncology Systems international net orders over fiscal year 2008 was significantly offset by the net order decrease in North America as this region was impacted by the 68 Table of Contents recession, the uncertainty created by the prospects of healthcare reform and uncertainty in late fiscal year 2009 about the then proposed reduction in Medicare reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery at free-standing clinics and for physician reimbursement for radiation oncology. In North America, Oncology Systems experienced net order declines in most of its product lines in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 while this region continued to experience growth in demand for service contracts. All international regions contributed to the growth in international Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. Growth in our service contracts, as well as growth in demand for our software products in all international regions and our high energy linear accelerators in Europe and Asia, contributed to fiscal year 2009 growth in international Oncology Systems net orders over fiscal year 2008. The overall stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 negatively impacted Oncology Systems international net orders when measured in U.S. dollars. When measured in constant currency, international Oncology Systems net orders grew 16% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. The trailing 12 months growth in net orders for Oncology Systems for the three immediately prior fiscal quarters ends were: a 3% total increase, with a 10% decrease in North America and an 18% increase for the international region, as of July 2, 2010; flat for total net orders, with a 14% decrease in North America and an 18% increase for the international region, as of April 2, 2010; a 1% total decrease, with an 11% decrease in North America and an 11% increase for the international region, as of January 1, 2010; Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems net orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations. X-ray Products net orders grew 24% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, compared to 1% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. The growth in X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increased demand for flat panel products, especially our radiographic flat panels, in North America, Europe and Asia, as well as increased demand for our x-ray tubes products in Asia. In fiscal year 2009, the increase in net orders over fiscal year 2008 for our flat panel detectors (including our radiographic imaging panels) was significantly offset by the decrease in net orders for x-ray tubes. Net orders in the Other category declined $151 million in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily because Varian Particle Therapy booked the now-cancelled $62 million proton therapy system order from Skandion Kliniken in fiscal year 2009 but did not book a proton therapy order in fiscal year 2010. SIP also experienced a decrease in net orders in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 as this business was negatively impacted by bid award challenges among competitors for a large government project in North America. We booked the order from Skandion Kliniken in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009 when Skandion Kliniken awarded us a contract to deliver and install a proton therapy system in Sweden following a public tender process, which was subsequently challenged by a competitor. After the Swedish court ruled in December 2009 that the tender should be recommenced, Skandion Kliniken cancelled the award with us in January 2010. In accordance with our order booking policy, we removed this order from our backlog in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010. In July 2010, Skandion Kliniken announced the award of the re-tender for its proton therapy facility to a competitor and we, along with another bidder, are currently challenging this award. For our Varian Particle Therapy business, we recognize orders when construction of the related proton therapy treatment center is reasonably expected to start within two years. Also, we only recognize orders for Varian Particle Therapy products with contingencies if we deem the contingencies perfunctory or if we publicly disclose the existence and nature of material contingencies. However, orders will not be recognized if there are major financing contingencies or customer board approval contingencies pending. As the U.S economy stabilizes and uncertainty regarding healthcare reform and reimbursement rates subsides, we could experience a temporary increase in orders due to pent-up demand of customers, which in turn could increase the volatility of our orders and revenues. Orders in any period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, 69 Table of Contents acceptance schedules and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as software products or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance than hardware or older products. Discontinued Operations In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, we approved a plan to sell Research Instruments to focus the business that we acquired from ACCEL exclusively on the development of our Varian Particle Therapy business. The sale of Research Instruments was completed in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009. Research Instruments has been classified as a discontinued operation in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings for all periods presented. Research Instruments was previously included in the Other category. In fiscal year 2010, we recognized an additional loss of $7.1 million for additional cost to settle one customer contract and estimated costs to complete and settle the other customer contract, both of which were related to the sale of Research Instruments. These contracts had been accounted for under the percentage-of-completion method, under which revenues and costs of sales are adjusted to reflect changes in estimated costs to complete the contracts. The percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates. If the estimated loss to complete or settle the remaining contract increases, the variance will be recognized in the periods these variances arise. Including the additional loss recognized for the two contracts, total losses of Research Instruments for fiscal year 2010 was $7.1 million, less applicable income tax of zero. Loss reported in discontinued operations for fiscal years 2009 and 2008 was $12.5 million and $15.8 million, respectively, less applicable income tax of zero. In fiscal year 2009, loss in discontinued operations included a loss of $8.1 million on the disposal of Research Instruments. In fiscal year 2008, loss from discontinued operations included goodwill impairment and impairment of long-lived assets related to Research Instruments. Total revenues of Research Instruments, reported in discontinued operations, for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 were $(3.6) million, $9.8 million and $35.2 million, respectively. See Note 15, Discontinued Operations to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion. Backlog At October 1, 2010, our backlog (including the cancellation of the $62 million proton therapy system order from Skandion Kliniken) was $2.2 billion, which is an increase of 7% over the backlog at October 2, 2009. Our Oncology Systems backlog at October 1, 2010 was 12% higher than the backlog at October 2, 2009, which reflects a 13% increase for the international regions and an 11% increase for North America. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses, repurchase VMS stock, and fund continuing operations. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases (although no purchases under our employee stock purchase plan were made during fiscal year 2010) and interest income. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. Because Research Instruments cash flows were not material for any period presented, we have not segregated them from continuing operations on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and the discussion herein. Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: (In millions) October 1, 2010 October 2, 2009 Decrease Cash and cash equivalents $ 520 $ 554 $ (34 ) 70 Table of Contents Our cash and cash equivalents decreased $34 million from $554 million at October 2, 2009 to $520 million at October 1, 2010. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2010 was due primarily to: $498 million used for the repurchase of VMS common stock, $68 million of capital expenditures, $23 million used for an equity forward contract related to an accelerated VMS common stock repurchase agreement, $9 million used for the repayment of bank borrowings and $8 million for tendered VMS common stock used to satisfy employee tax withholding requirements upon vesting of restricted common stock and restricted stock units. These decreases were partially offset by $460 million of cash generated from operating activities, $84 million of cash provided by stock option exercises, $16 million of cash provided by net borrowings under our credit facility and $15 million of cash provided by the excess tax benefits from share-based compensation. In addition, foreign currency exchange rate changes in fiscal year 2010 increased cash and cash equivalents by $3 million. At October 1, 2010, we had approximately $39 million or 8%, of total cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $481 million, or 92%, of total cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of October 1, 2010, most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. dollars and were primarily held as bank deposits. Because our cash levels in the United States are relatively low, we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, stock repurchases, acquisitions and other corporate purposes. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2010 2009 2008 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 460 $ 305 $ 372 Investing activities (75 ) (78 ) (88 ) Financing activities (422 ) (71 ) (142 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 3 1 (8 ) Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ (34 ) $ 157 $ 134 Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $460 million in fiscal year 2010, compared to $305 million and $372 million in fiscal years 2009 and 2008, respectively. The $155 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 was driven primarily by a net change of $63 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items), an increase in non-cash items of $51 million and an increase of $41 million in net earnings. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2010 were inventories and advance payments from customers as follows: Inventories increased by $53 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2011 in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and Varian Particle Therapy. Advance payments from customers increased by $49 million due to increased orders, as well as receipt of a down payment for a proton therapy system not yet recognized in Net Orders as of the end of the third quarter. The $67 million decrease in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 was driven primarily by a net change of $93 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and a decrease in non-cash items of $14 million, partially offset by an increase of $40 million in net earnings. 71 Table of Contents The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2009 were accounts receivable, inventories, other long-term liabilities, accrued expenses and advance payments from customers as follows: Accounts receivable increased $86 million due to higher revenues and an increase in DSO from the end of fiscal year 2008. Inventories increased by $40 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2010 in all of our businesses. Other long-term liabilities decreased by $22 million primarily due to a decrease in long-term income taxes payable as a result of the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions and the favorable resolution of several income tax audits. Accrued expenses increased $47 million primarily due to an increase in income taxes payable. Advance payments from customers increased by $22 million due to an increase in volume of our Oncology Systems service contracts. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments and customer acceptance, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. See Item 1A, Risk Factors. Investing activities used $75 million of net cash in fiscal year 2010, $78 million in fiscal year 2009 and $88 million in fiscal year 2008. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment was $68 million in fiscal year 2010, compared to $63 million and $81 million in fiscal years 2009 and 2008, respectively. In fiscal year 2009, we made an additional net loan advance of $6 million to dpiX. In fiscal year 2008, we also invested $8 million in a privately held company. Financing activities used net cash of $422 million in fiscal year 2010 compared to $71 million and $142 million in fiscal years 2009 and 2008, respectively. In fiscal year 2010, we used $498 million for the repurchases of common stock, compared to $101 million in fiscal year 2009 and $262 million in fiscal year 2008. In fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, we used $9 million, $8 million and $9 million, respectively, to repay bank borrowings. In fiscal year 2010, we also used $23 million for an equity forward contract related to an accelerated VMS common stock repurchase agreement. In fiscal year 2008, we also used $41 million to repay borrowings under our credit facilities. Cash used for financing activities in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 also includes $8 million, $3 million and $1 million (the value of withheld shares), respectively, for tendered VMS common stock to satisfy employee tax withholding requirements upon vesting of restricted common stock and restricted stock units. These uses were partially offset by cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $84 million, $28 million and $129 million in fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008 respectively, as well as cash provided by excess tax benefits from share-based compensation of $15 million in fiscal year 2010, $10 million in fiscal year 2009 and $42 million in fiscal year 2008. In fiscal years 2010 and 2009, we also borrowed $16 million and $4 million, respectively, in net cash from our credit facilities. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 3.0% of revenues in fiscal year 2011. We have a $225 million credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. ( BofA ), which was amended and restated in November 2008 and then again amended in July 2009 and in August 2010. This credit facility, as amended to date, is referred to as the Amended BofA Credit Facility. A portion of the Amended BofA Credit Facility is collateralized with a pledge of stock of certain of VMS present and future 72 Table of Contents subsidiaries that are deemed to be material subsidiaries. As of October 1, 2010, VMS has pledged to BofA 65% of the voting shares that it holds in Varian Medical Systems Nederland B.V., a wholly-owned subsidiary. Under the Amended BofA Credit Facility, VMS Japanese subsidiary ( VMS KK ) can borrow up to 2.7 billion Japanese Yen as part of the overall credit facility (the Japanese Line of Credit ). At any time amounts are outstanding under the Japanese Line of Credit, the full borrowing capacity is deemed committed for use in Japan and therefore the maximum amount VMS can otherwise borrow under the Amended BofA Credit Facility will be reduced by $35 million to $190 million. VMS guarantees the payment of the outstanding balance under the Japanese Line of Credit. The Amended BofA Credit Facility may be used for: working capital; capital expenditures; permitted acquisitions; and other lawful corporate purposes. Borrowings under the Japanese Line of Credit can be used by VMS KK for refinancing certain intercompany debts, working capital, capital expenditures and other lawful corporate purposes. Borrowings under the Amended BofA Credit Facility (outside of the Japanese Line of Credit) accrue interest either: (i) based on LIBOR plus a margin of 1.25% to 1.50% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA )- or (ii) based upon a base rate of either the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or BofA announced prime rate, whichever is greater, minus a margin of 0.5% to 0% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA (depending upon our instructions to BofA). We may select borrowing periods of one, two, three or six months for advances based on the LIBOR rate. Interest rates on advances based on the base rate are adjustable daily. Under the Amended BofA Credit Facility, we pay commitment fees at an annual rate of 0.2% to 0.3% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA. Borrowings under the Japanese Line of Credit accrue interest at the basic loan rate announced by the Bank of Japan plus a margin of 1.25% to 1.50% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA. The Amended BofA Credit Facility, as well as the Japanese Line of Credit, will expire on November 10, 2011, if not extended by mutual agreement of VMS and BofA,. As of October 1, 2010, $20 million was outstanding under the Amended BofA Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 1.51% and none of which was outstanding under the Japanese Line of Credit. During fiscal year 2010, the amount outstanding under the Amended BofA Credit Facility (including the Japanese Line of Credit) reached approximately $177 million, which was primarily used to finance an accelerated share repurchase agreement executed in August 2010 (described further below under Stock Repurchase Program. ) The Amended BofA Credit Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for facilities of this type. We have also agreed to maintain certain financial covenants relating to: (i) leverage ratios involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA; (ii) liquidity; and (iii) consolidated assets. As of October 1, 2010, we were in compliance with all covenants. See also Note 7 Credit Facility to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion regarding the Amended BofA Credit Facility. Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for the next 12 months. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes and repurchase VMS common stock. Total debt as a percentage of total capital increased to 3.3% at October 1, 2010 from 2.7% at October 2, 2009. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities decreased to 1.86 to 1 at October 1, 2010 from 1.99 to 1 at October 2, 2009. 73 Table of Contents Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable DSO were 82 days at October 1, 2010 compared to 81 days at October 2, 2009 Our accounts receivable and DSO are impacted by a number of factors, including primarily: the timing of product shipments, collections performance, payment terms, and the mix of revenues from different regions. As of October 1, 2010, less than 1% of our accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with extended payment terms of more than one year. Stock Repurchase Program During fiscal years 2010, 2009 and 2008, we paid $498 million, $101 million and $262 million, respectively, to repurchase 9,788,249 shares, 2,248,000 shares and 5,110,000 shares, respectively, of VMS common stock under various authorizations by VMS Board of Directors. Shares may be repurchased in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions or under Rule 10b5-1 share repurchase plans and may be made from time to time in one or more large blocks. The fiscal year 2010 repurchase amounts include shares of VMS common stock repurchased under an accelerated share repurchase agreement executed on August 24, 2010 with BofA (the Repurchase Agreement ). Pursuant to the Repurchase Agreement, we paid to BofA $225 million and BofA delivered 3,888,249 shares of VMS common stock, representing approximately 90% of the shares to be repurchased based on the closing price of VMS common stock of $52.08 on August 24, 2010. The specific number of shares that we ultimately will repurchase under the Repurchase Agreement will be based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, less a discount. The repurchase period will end on February 23, 2011, provided that BofA has the right to accelerate the end of the repurchase period beginning on December 20, 2010. At the completion of the repurchase period, depending on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, we may be entitled to receive additional shares of VMS common stock from BofA or we may be required to deliver VMS shares or, at our option, make a cash payment to BofA. The remaining $22.5 million, representing approximately 10% of the cash payment to BofA, was recorded as an equity forward contract, which was included in Capital in excess of par value in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at October 1, 2010. All shares that have been repurchased have been retired. An authorization expired on December 31, 2009 with 6,050,000 shares available for repurchase. As of October 1, 2010, 4,461,751 shares of VMS common stock remained available for repurchase under an authorization that expires on September 30, 2011. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of October 1, 2010 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Fiscal Year 2011 Fiscal Years 2012 - 2013 Fiscal Years 2014 - 2015 Beyond Total Short-term borrowings(1) $ 20.0 $ $ $ $ 20.0 Long term debt(2) 5.5 11.6 6.3 23.4 Interest obligation on long term debt 1.5 1.3 0.3 3.1 Operating leases(3) 14.5 17.8 9.5 4.4 46.2 Defined benefit pension plans(4) 6.6 6.6 Post-retirement benefit plan(5) 0.5 1.0 1.0 2.5 5.0 Total(6) $ 48.6 $ 31.7 $ 17.1 $ 6.9 $ 104.3 (1) Short-term borrowings were outstanding under the Amended BofA Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 1.51%. See a detailed discussion of our credit facilities in Note 7, Credit Facility of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 74 Table of Contents (2) Long-term debt, including current maturities, decreased $9 million from October 2, 2009 due to principal repayments. The fixed interest rates on the outstanding debt on this date ranged from 6.70% to 7.58% with a weighted average interest rate of 6.89%. As of October 1, 2010, land and buildings with a carrying amount of $13.1 million were pledged as collateral against certain loans we assumed related to purchases of land and buildings in Las Vegas. For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 6, Long-term Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (3) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases as of October 1, 2010. (4) As further described in Note 10, Retirement Plans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of October 1, 2010, our defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $28.0 million. Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and other economic and demographic assumptions the potential for changes in legislation in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund its defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (5) As further described in Note 10, Retirement Plans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of October 1, 2010, our post-retirement benefit plan had an estimated total benefit obligation of $5.9 million. Due to changes in health care cost trend rates, mortality rates of plan participants, and the potential for us to change the type of health care plans offered or the level of contributions from plan participants, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund its post-retirement benefit plan beyond fiscal year 2020. (6) The following items are not included in the table above: Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of October 1, 2010, our liability for uncertain tax positions was $56.8 million and we do not anticipate payment of these amounts in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of future payments related to uncertain tax positions; therefore, the liability for uncertain tax positions has been excluded from the table above. See a detailed discussion in Note 13, Taxes on Earnings of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In February 2009, we agreed to loan an aggregate amount of $14 million to dpiX. As of October 1, 2010, we had loaned $8.8 million to dpiX and had outstanding commitment to loan an additional $5.2 million under this agreement. We do not know the timing of the funding of the remaining $5.2 million. See detailed discussion in Note 5, Related Party Transactions of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As further described in Note 9, Commitment and Contingencies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of October 1, 2010, we accrued $13.5 million for environmental remediation liabilities. The amount accrued represents estimates of anticipated future costs and the timing and amount of actual future environmental remediation costs may vary as the scope of our obligations become more clearly defined. As discussed above under Share Repurchase Program, we entered into the Repurchase Agreement with BofA to repurchase $225 million of VMS common stock on August 24, 2010. As of October, we received 3,888,249 shares of VMS common stock under the Repurchase Agreement. The specific number of shares that we ultimately will repurchase under the Repurchase Agreement will be based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, which will end between December 20, 2010 and February 23, 2011. We may be entitled to receive additional shares of VMS common stock from BofA or we may be required, at its option, to deliver VMS shares or make a cash payment to BofA. 75 Table of Contents Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 9 , Commitments and Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Acquisition-Related Commitments/Obligations When we acquired ACCEL in January 2007, ACCEL was involved in a contract-related lawsuit, which we settled by agreeing to perform certain services for a fixed price contract (the Fixed Price Contract ). As of October 2, 2009, we had a loss accrual of 7.6 million in relation to the Fixed Price Contract. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2010, we entered into a new contract (the New Contract ) to perform certain services for a fixed price and we recorded a loss accrual of 0.9 million in connection with the New Contract. As of October 1, 2010, the balance of the loss accrual related to this contingency (the New Contract) was 0.3 million. If the actual costs related to the contingency exceed the estimated amount or if the estimated loss increases, the variances will be recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings in the periods in which these variances arise. Other Matters From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters both in and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. While we cannot assure you as to the ultimate outcome of any legal proceeding or other loss contingency involving us, management does not believe any pending matter will be resolved in a manner that would have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, it is possible that a legal or other proceeding brought against us could have an impact of this nature. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The terms of these indemnification arrangements are generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is unlimited. As of October 1, 2010, we have not incurred any significant costs since the Spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In December 2008, the FASB issued new guidance under Accounting Standards Codification ( ASC ) 715-20, which provides guidance on an employer disclosure about plan assets of a defined benefit 76 Table of Contents pension or other post-retirement plan and requires employers to disclose information about fair value measurements of plan assets. The new guidance under ASC 715-20 was effective for us as of the end of fiscal year 2010. The adoption of the new guidance concerns disclosure did not have an impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. In June 2009, the FASB issued the consolidation guidance for variable-interest entities to replace the quantitative-based risks and rewards calculation for determining which enterprise, if any, has a controlling financial interest in a variable-interest entity with an approach focused on identifying which enterprise has the power to direct the activities of a variable-interest entity that most significantly impact the entity economic performance. The new guidance will be effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2011. We do not expect the adoption of the new guidance will have a material impact on our existing consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In March 2010, the FASB issued the guidance related to the Milestone Method of Revenue Recognition ( ASU 2010-17 ), which recognizes the milestone method as an acceptable revenue recognition method for substantive milestones in research or development transaction. ASU 2010-17 is effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2011, with early adoption permitted. We do not expect the adoption of the new guidance will have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In July 2010, the FASB issued ASU 2010-20 to provide guidance to enhance disclosures related to the credit quality of a company financing receivables portfolio and the associated allowance for credit losses. Pursuant to this accounting guidance, a company is required to provide a greater level of disaggregated information about its allowance for credit loss with the objective of facilitating users evaluation of the nature of credit risk inherent in the company portfolio of financing receivables, how that risk is analyzed and assessed in arriving at the allowance for credit losses, and the changes and reasons for those changes in the allowance for credit losses. The revised disclosures as of the end of the reporting period will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal year 2011, and the revised disclosures related to activities during the reporting period will be effective for us beginning in the second quarter of fiscal year 2011. We are currently evaluating the impact of this accounting update on its financial statement disclosures. 
