CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-11-25


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview In fiscal year 2009, our net earnings per diluted share from continuing operations increased 15% from fiscal year 2008 to $2.65. Total revenues from continuing operations grew 7% and gross margin improved by one percentage point in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 results. Including an approximately $62 million proton therapy system order from Skandion Kliniken in the fiscal fourth quarter, our net orders from continuing operations for fiscal year 2009 grew 3% over fiscal year 2008. The Company encountered a challenging business environment in North America and both of our business segments, as well as SIP, experienced declines in net orders in this region in fiscal year 2009. Backlog at the end of fiscal year 2009 increased 9% from the end of the prior fiscal year to $2.1 billion. In September 2008, we approved a plan to sell Research Instruments in order to focus the business acquired from ACCEL exclusively on the development of our proton therapy business, now operating as Varian Particle Therapy. The sale of Research Instruments was completed in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009. Research Instruments is classified as a discontinued operation for all periods presented and we have segregated the net assets and operating results of Research Instruments from continuing operations in our Consolidated Balance Sheets and in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings. Unless otherwise stated, the discussion below pertains to our continuing operations. Research Instruments was previously included in the Other category. The Research Instruments business reduced total net earnings per diluted share for fiscal year 2009 by $0.10 to $2.55. Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufacturers, sells and services hardware and software products for radiation treatment of cancer with conventional radiotherapy, IMRT, IGRT, VMAT (a special form of IMRT), stereotactic radiotherapy, stereotactic radiosurgery and brachytherapy. In fiscal year 2009, Oncology Systems experienced the effects of a recession that has shrunk customer capital equipment budgets, slowed decision making and made financing more expensive and time consuming. This business was also negatively impacted by the uncertainty created by the prospects of healthcare reform in the United States; as well as the added uncertainty in late fiscal year 2009 about the proposed reduction in Medicare reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery at free-standing clinics in the United States, and for physician reimbursement for radiation oncology. While the final enacted reimbursement rate reductions for 2010, which were announced by CMS on October 30, 2009, were much more modest for radiotherapy than originally proposed, we believe that the confusion and uncertainty created by the proposal was one of the major factors impacting our net orders in late fiscal year 2009, particularly from free-standing radiotherapy clinics (which we believe currently represents approximately 10% to 15% of Oncology Systems business). While we benefited from pre-recession capital equipment budgets in the first half of fiscal year 2009, we experienced the effects of smaller capital budgets established by many health care providers in the second half of the fiscal year. We expect that uncertainty in North American radiation therapy capital spending will persist so long as the economic downturn continues and until that there is greater clarity on healthcare reform and that the North American market is likely to remain very challenging at least for the first half of fiscal year 2010. In fiscal year 2009, Oncology Systems net orders increased 1% compared to fiscal year 2008, with North American net orders decreasing 7% and international net orders, which were negatively affected by the strengthening of the U.S. dollar, growing 11%. Oncology Systems revenues increased 8% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 with North American revenues increasing 12% and international revenues, which were negatively affected by the strengthening of the U.S. dollar, growing by 3%. A product mix shift toward higher margin software products, as well as an improvement in service contract gross margin, contributed to a 1.6 percentage-point improvement in Oncology Systems gross margin in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008. As of the end of fiscal year 2009, we had more than 270 installations of our RapidArc TM products since we introduced these products in the second quarter of fiscal year 2008. 55 Table of Contents Our success in Oncology Systems largely depends upon our ability to retain leadership in technological innovation, the reliability and cost effectiveness of our products, the efficacy of our treatment technology and external influences. Factors affecting the adoption rate of new technologies (such as VMAT) could include their more-widely demonstrated efficacy and our ability to efficiently introduce and install our new technologies and products. Additional factors could include customer training on the use of our new technologies or related products and our ability to educate customers about the cost effectiveness of our new technologies. External influences could include the current economic environment, the current state of healthcare reform, significant changes to Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and brachytherapy procedures and radiosurgery in the United States, the financial strength of our customers, consolidation among our customers, currency exchange rates, and government budgeting and tendering cycles. In recent years, we have seen the purchasing cycle lengthening as a result of the more complex decision-making process associated with larger dollar value transactions for more sophisticated IGRT and surgical equipment, and other technical advances. With the current worldwide economic downturn, it has become and may continue to be more difficult to accurately forecast and plan future business activities. We have seen customers decision-making process further complicated and lengthened, especially in the United States, as the downturn causes hospitals, clinics and research institutions to more closely scrutinize and prioritize their capital spending in light of tightened capital budgets, tougher credit requirements and the general constriction in credit availability. In addition, we believe that the current economic downturn has caused customers to delay requested delivery dates. Because our product revenues are influenced by the timing of product shipments, which are tied to customer-requested delivery dates, these delivery delays have increased the average order to revenue conversion cycle in the United States. We cannot predict the duration of the economic slowdown or the timing or strength of a subsequent economic recovery, in general or specifically in the healthcare industry. If the healthcare market significantly deteriorates due to the general economic downturn, our business, financial condition and results of operations will likely be materially and adversely affected. We have also seen our customers decision-making process complicated by the uncertainty surrounding the recent proposed reduction in Medicare reimbursement rates, as described above, and uncertainty about the shape and scope of U.S. healthcare reform legislation. Any significant cuts in these reimbursement rates, or other rates for radiotherapy, radiosurgery, brachytherapy or proton therapy, could have a material adverse effect on our revenues and results of operations. Overall, the U.S. dollar was stronger against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2009 than it was in fiscal year 2008, which made our pricing less competitive and contributed to slower growth in our international net orders and revenues. However, the U.S. dollar has subsequently weakened, which could make our product pricing more competitive in the local currencies of our international customers. The fluctuation of the U.S dollar against foreign currencies also impacts our international revenues and net orders when measured in U.S. dollars. Fluctuation in the strength of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies may result in greater fluctuation in our Oncology Systems net orders and revenues. X-Ray Products . Our X-ray Products business segment, designs, manufactures and sells: (i) x-ray tubes for use in a range of applications including CT scanning, radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, special procedures and industrial applications; and (ii) flat panel digital image detectors for filmless x-ray imaging, which is for radiography an alternative to image intensifier tubes for fluoroscopy and x-ray film and CR systems. Impacted by customer inventory reduction efforts in response to a slowdown in the imaging equipment market, X-ray Products saw net order declines in the second and third quarters of fiscal year 2009 versus the same periods in the previous year. However, this business segment reported a 1% net order growth for the full fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. Even with weak net orders, X-ray Products revenues increased 9% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. Our radiographic flat panels were a key contributor to net order and revenue growth for X-ray Products in fiscal year 2009. Compared to the 56 Table of Contents prior fiscal year, the flat panel product line represented a higher percentage of total X-ray Products net orders and revenues in fiscal year 2009. Our success in our X-ray Products business depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. The general worldwide economic downturn has made and may continue to make it difficult for our OEM customers, our vendors and us to accurately forecast and plan future business activities. The current market for new X-ray imaging equipment appears to be weak, and certain product lines, such as dental and veterinary, have been hit particularly hard in the recession. If the markets for our customers products significantly deteriorate due to the general economic downturn, our business and results of operations may be adversely affected. In recent years, we have also seen dramatic reductions in Medicare reimbursements for diagnostic radiology. We believe reductions in Medicare reimbursement rates have reduced demand for medical x-ray imaging equipment, such as CT scanners, which have negatively impacted demand for our x-ray tube products in the United States. Other. The Other category is comprised of SIP, the Varian Particle Therapy business, and the operations of the GTC. SIP designs, manufactures, sells and services Linatron x-ray accelerators, imaging processing software and image detection products (including IntellX) for security and inspection purposes, such as cargo screening at ports and borders and nondestructive examination in a variety of applications. Generally, we sell our SIP products to OEMs who incorporate them into their inspection systems. In fiscal year 2009, we saw our SIP customers postpone some purchasing decisions as budgets were put on hold or reallocated during the current economic downturn. Use of our SIP technology in security cargo screening and border protection is still in its early stages but we believe demand for SIP products will be driven by cargo screening and border protection needs, as well as by the needs of customs agencies to verify the content of shipments for assessing duties and taxes. As a result, this business is heavily influenced by U.S. and foreign governmental policies on national and homeland security, border protection and customs revenue activities and therefore depends on government budgets and appropriations and is subject to political change. In addition, this business depends on the success of our OEM customers. Orders and revenues for our SIP products have been and may continue to be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders with us or our OEM customers over a short period of time and then may not place any orders for a long time period thereafter. Our Varian Particle Therapy business develops, designs, manufactures and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy, another form of external beam radiotherapy using proton beams for the treatment of cancer. Although proton therapy has been in clinical use for more than four decades, it has not been widely deployed due to the cost of the technology and limited cost effectiveness. We are investing substantial resources to commercialize this advanced proton technology and to build this new business. In the second quarter of fiscal year 2009, we met the CE mark requirements that permit us to market our proton therapy systems within the EEA and patient treatments started on our proton therapy system that is installed at the Rinecker Proton Therapy Center in Munich, Germany. Proton therapy facilities are large scale construction projects that are time consuming and involve significant customer investment and perhaps complex project financing. Consequently, this business is the most vulnerable to the general worldwide economic downturn and contraction in the credit markets. In addition, the customers decision-making cycle is very long and orders for proton therapy systems generally involve many contingencies. Under our current practice, we will only recognize proton therapy system orders with contingencies if we deem the contingencies perfunctory or if we publicly disclose the existence and nature of material contingencies. 57 Table of Contents In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009, Skandion Kliniken awarded us, in a competitive bidding situation, an approximately $62 million contract to deliver and install a proton therapy system in Sweden and we have included this contract in net orders. However, one of the unsuccessful bidders has filed a formal appeal of the award. Skandion Kliniken is actively opposing this appeal and we believe it will be resolved in Skandion Kliniken favor. Additionally, the order is contingent on Skandion Kliniken execution of a contract for the construction of the proton therapy facility, which we also believe will occur. As this is the first proton therapy system to be delivered by Varian Particle Therapy we acquired ACCEL, the profitability of this contract is uncertain. We plan to start recognizing revenues in accordance with contract accounting when we commence working on this project. As Varian Particle Therapy is a relatively new business that offers highly customized proton therapy systems, we plan to evaluate revenue recognition for sales of proton therapy systems and related services on a contract by contract basis. GTC, our scientific research facility, continues to invest in developing technologies that enhance our current businesses or may lead to new business areas, including next generation digital x-ray imaging technology, volumetric and functional imaging, and improved x-ray sources and technology for security and cargo screening applications. In addition, GTC is developing technologies and products that are designed to improve disease management by more precise targeting of radiation, as well as by employing targeted energy and molecular agents to enhance the effectiveness and broaden the application of radiation therapy. Including the large Skandion Kliniken order to deliver and install a proton therapy system, net orders in the Other category increased 59% in fiscal year 2009 over the prior fiscal year. Revenues in the Other category decreased 9% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. In fiscal year 2009, SIP net orders and revenues decreased over fiscal year 2008 as government postponed purchasing decisions for and delayed deployments of products for security and inspection systems. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Risk Factors contained in Item 1A. We discuss our results of operations below. Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include share-based compensation expense, revenue recognition, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of environmental remediation liabilities, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain; and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, also refer to the Risk Factors in Item 1A. 58 Table of Contents Revenue Recognition We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of the proceeds received from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, the determination of whether any undelivered elements are essential to the functionality of the delivered elements and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. In addition, the amount of product revenues we recognize is affected by our judgments as to whether objective and reliable evidence of fair value exists for hardware products and vendor-specific objective evidence of the fair value for software products in arrangements with multiple elements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the ability to establish objective and reliable evidence of fair value or vendor-specific objective evidence of the fair value for those elements could affect the timing of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment and is subject to customer acceptance and the readiness of customers facilities. If shipments are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. In addition, revenues related to our highly customized image detection systems are recognized under the percentage-of-completion method. Under the percentage-of-completion method of accounting, sales and gross profit are recognized as work is performed, based on the relationship between actual costs incurred and total estimated costs at the completion of the contract. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. If a loss is expected on a contract under the percentage-of-completion method or completed contract method, the estimated loss would be charged to cost of sales in the period the loss is identified. Share-based Compensation Expense We value our share-based payment awards granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected term of stock awards and the expected price volatility of VMS stock over the expected term of the awards. The expected term is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We determined the expected term of stock options based on the demographic grouping of employees and retirement eligibility. We used a combination of historical and implied volatility, or blended volatility, in deriving the expected volatility assumption. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility was derived based on six-month traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the six-month term of the exchange-traded options to the expected lives of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options on VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we could rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS six-month exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is 59 Table of Contents different from the expected lives of the stock options we grant. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected lives of the stock options we granted and the implied volatility of six-month exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock going forward. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock options. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Our payment terms usually require payment of: a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer, and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The majority of businesses that we have acquired have not had significant identified tangible assets and, as a result, we have typically allocated a significant portion of the purchase price to intangible assets and goodwill. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to these intangibles or to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. The allocation of the purchase price from business acquisitions to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. In addition, the allocation of the purchase price of the acquired businesses to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for these cash flows. Should conditions differ from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. In accordance with ASC 350, we evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs or circumstances changes that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including 60 Table of Contents the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill against the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. We will continue to make assessments of impairment on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of our fiscal years or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually twelve months, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Environmental Matters We are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations and in connection with past operations. In connection with past operations, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts . Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review these accrued balances quarterly. Were we required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. Defined Benefit Pension and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans We sponsor six defined benefit pension plans in Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. In fiscal year 2009, we terminated one pension plan in Germany as a result of the sale of Research Instruments. In July 2007, we made changes to the defined benefit pension plan in the United Kingdom by terminating the accrual of additional benefits for existing participants and suspending the enrollment of new participants. We also sponsor a post-retirement benefit plan that provides healthcare benefits to certain eligible retirees in the United States. We do not have any defined benefit pension plans in the United States. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expense and liability related to those plans for which the benefit is actuarially determined, such as our defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans. These factors include assumptions about: the discount rate; expected return on plan assets; rate of future compensation increases; and rate of healthcare cost increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expense and liability. The actuarial 61 Table of Contents assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plan expense we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans in all countries are based primarily on the yields of a universe of high quality corporate bonds in each country or the spot rate of high quality AA-rated corporate bonds, with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. In countries where the corporate bond market is not sufficiently representative of the time period at longer durations, the discount rate also takes into account the yield of long-term government bonds corresponding to the duration of the benefit obligations and the difference between the yield curve on high quality corporate fixed-income investments and government fixed-income investment. A change in the discount rate will cause the present value of benefit obligations to change in the opposite direction. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. ASC 820 establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 3, Fair Value Measurements to Consolidated Financial Statements). Each level of input has different levels of subjectivity and difficulty involved in determining fair value. The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts are calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The following values are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services: forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities. One year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which have maturity terms less than 12 months, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty (for net asset) or our discount rate (for net liability). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact to the valuation of our derivative instruments, as well as on our result of operations. Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. Effective as of the beginning of fiscal year 2008, we adopted the provisions in ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, which contains a two-step approach to recognizing, derecognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition, derecognition, and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. A tax benefit should be recognized in the first period in 62 Table of Contents which it meets the more likely than not recognition threshold, and conversely, a tax benefit previously recognized should be derecognized in the first period in which new information results in a change in judgment in which the position fails to meet the recognition threshold. A benefit not previously recognized would be recognized when the tax position is effectively settled through examination, negotiation or litigation with tax authorities, or when the statute of limitations for the relevant taxing authority to examine and challenge the position has expired. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for taxes on earnings. In addition, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in certain tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. Earnings derived from our international regions are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our international subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our international regions, or a change in the mix of international regions among particular tax jurisdictions, could increase our effective tax rate. Also, our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2009 comprised the 53-week period ended on October 2, 2009. Fiscal year 2008 comprised the 52-week period ended on September 26, 2008 and fiscal year 2007 was the 52-week period ended on September 28, 2007. Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007. As indicated above, the operating results of Research Instruments have been segregated and presented as a discontinued operation for all periods. 63 Table of Contents Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2009, 2008 and 2007 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Product $ 1,767 5 % $ 1,690 17 % $ 1,448 Service Contracts and Other 447 18 % 380 24 % 307 Total Revenues $ 2,214 7 % $ 2,070 18 % $ 1,755 Product as a percentage of total revenues 80 % 82 % 82 % Service Contracts and Other as a percentage of total revenues 20 % 18 % 18 % Revenues by region North America $ 1,111 11 % $ 1,003 16 % $ 865 Europe 620 0 % 619 17 % 529 Asia 412 18 % 349 24 % 281 Rest of world 71 (28 )% 99 24 % 80 Total International(1) 1,103 3 % 1,067 20 % 890 Total $ 2,214 7 % $ 2,070 18 % $ 1,755 North America as a percentage of total revenues 50 % 48 % 49 % International as a percentage of total revenues 50 % 52 % 51 % (1) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. Total revenues, as well as product revenues, increased in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 primarily due to the revenue growth in both of our Oncology Systems and X-ray Products business segments partially offset by a decline in SIP revenues. Both of these business segments, as well as SIP, contributed to the growth in total revenues and product revenues in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. Product revenues grew more slowly in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 than fiscal year 2008 grew over fiscal year 2007, primarily due to the slower growth in Oncology Systems product revenues. Oncology Systems service contracts revenues were the primary contributor to the growth in service contracts and other revenues in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 and in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. Service contracts and other revenues grew more slowly in fiscal years 2009 over 2008 compared to fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 primarily due to the slower growth in Oncology Systems service contract revenues. In North America, both of our business segments and SIP contributed to the revenue growth in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 and in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. In the international region, the growth in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products international revenues in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was partially offset by the decrease in SIP international revenues. For fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008, both of our business segments and SIP saw revenue growth in Asia and both of our business segments experienced revenue decline in the rest of the world region. During fiscal year 2009, revenue growth in Europe in both of our business segments was offset by the decline in SIP revenues. The overall stronger U.S. dollar in fiscal year 2009 against foreign currencies compared to fiscal year 2008 negatively affected our international revenues in fiscal year 2009 when measured in U.S. dollars. In fiscal year 2008, both business segments and SIP contributed to the revenue growth over fiscal year 2007 in all international regions. The overall weaker U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 benefited our international revenues in fiscal year 2008 when measured in U.S. dollars. Since fiscal year 2007, international revenues have represented half or more of our worldwide revenues. 64 Table of Contents Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Product $ 1,363 5 % $ 1,302 14 % $ 1,145 Service Contracts(1) 435 17 % 370 26 % 295 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,798 8 % $ 1,672 16 % $ 1,440 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 76 % 78 % 80 % Service Contracts as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 24 % 22 % 20 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 81 % 81 % 82 % (1) Revenues from service contracts represent revenues from fixed-term service contracts and labor cost services. This excludes revenues from spare parts sold by our service department. The increase in revenues from sales of our software products (including our RapidArc products) was the primary contributor to the increase in Oncology Systems product revenues for fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. In fiscal year 2008, the increase in Oncology Systems product revenues over fiscal year 2007 was primarily driven by increased sales of our high energy linear accelerators, our software products (including our RapidArc products) and our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI), partially offset by a decline in sales of IMRT-upgrades that reflected the slowdown in demand for IMRT-upgrade products after several years of rapid adoption of IMRT technology. The increases in service contract revenues in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 and in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 were primarily driven by increased customer adoption of service contracts as the sophistication of our products and the installed base of our products continue to increase. Since service contract revenues grew faster than product revenues from fiscal year 2007 to fiscal year 2008 and from fiscal year 2008 to fiscal year 2009, service contract revenues also increased as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues in the same time periods. In fiscal year 2009, the stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies compared to fiscal year 2008 negatively affected Oncology Systems international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars, contributing to the slower growth in product and service revenues in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. In fiscal year 2008, the weaker U.S. dollar against foreign currencies compared to fiscal year 2007 favorably affected Oncology Systems international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 North America $ 970 12 % $ 866 15 % $ 754 Europe 524 1 % 517 14 % 454 Asia 242 21 % 200 25 % 160 Rest of world 62 (31 )% 89 24 % 72 Total International 828 3 % 806 18 % 686 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,798 8 % $ 1,672 16 % $ 1,440 North America as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 54 % 52 % 52 % International as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 46 % 48 % 48 % 65 Table of Contents The slower Oncology Systems revenue growth rate in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008, as compared with the growth rate in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007, was primarily due to the weaker net order growth in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 and, to a lesser extent, delays in customer requested delivery dates in fiscal year 2009, which we believe were caused primarily by the current economic downturn. Except for the rest of the world region, all of our geographic regions contributed to the Oncology Systems revenues growth in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. For fiscal year 2009, North American revenues grew by 12% and international revenues increased 3% over fiscal year 2008. The increase in North American revenues was primarily due to an increase in sales of our software products (including our RapidArc products) and our linear accelerators, as well as an increase in service contract revenues. The increase in sales of our software products (including our RapidArc products) and the increase in service contract revenues in Asia and Europe were significantly offset by the decline in sales of our linear accelerators in the rest of the world region and Europe. The stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 also negatively affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. All of our geographic regions contributed to the Oncology Systems revenues growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. For fiscal year 2008, the growth in international and North American revenues over fiscal year 2007 were due to increases in sales of our high energy linear accelerators, our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI) and our software products (including our RapidArc products) in all regions, as well as an increase in service contracts revenues. The weaker U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 favorably affected our international revenues in fiscal year 2008 when measured in U.S. dollars. These increases in both international revenues and North American revenues were partially offset by decreases in sales of IMRT-upgrades, reflecting the slowdown in demand for IMRT-upgrade products after several years of rapid adoption of IMRT technology. Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the international and North American regions is a historical pattern reflecting different technology adoption cycles and demand cycles that are consistent with the net order patterns discussed more fully under Net Orders. Oncology Systems revenues also continue to be influenced by the timing of product shipments in accordance with planned customer-requested delivery dates, and have been impacted by the effects of the recession, uncertainty created by the prospects of healthcare reform in the United States, and added uncertainty in late fiscal year 2009 about the proposed reduction in Medicare reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery at free-standing clinics in the United States and for physician reimbursement for radiation oncology. X-ray Products Revenues Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 North America $ 110 3 % $ 107 12 % $ 96 Europe 49 9 % 45 28 % 35 Asia 162 14 % 143 21 % 119 Rest of world 10 (2 )% 10 21 % 8 Total International 221 12 % 198 22 % 162 Total X-ray Products $ 331 9 % $ 305 19 % $ 258 North America as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 33 % 35 % 37 % International as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 67 % 65 % 63 % X-ray Products revenues as a percentage of total revenues 15 % 15 % 15 % 66 Table of Contents X-ray Products revenues grew more slowly in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 as compared to the growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 primarily as a result of our customers reducing inventory levels in response to a slowdown in the imaging equipment market, particularly in the dental and veterinary markets. For fiscal year 2009, X-ray Products revenue grew 9% over fiscal year 2008 due primarily to the growth in international revenues and, to a lesser extent, the growth in North American revenues. The increase in international revenues in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to increased sales of our flat panel detectors, including our radiographic flat panels, in Europe and Asia, as well as increased sales of x-ray tubes in Asia compared to fiscal year 2008. Revenue growth in North America in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was largely due to the growth in sales of our x-ray tubes, while sales of our flat panel products decreased slightly notwithstanding growth from our radiographic flat panels. All of our geographic regions contributed to the increase in X-ray Products revenues in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. The growth in X-ray Products revenues in both the international and in North American regions in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 reflects increased sales of our flat panel detectors and, to a lesser extent, increased sales of our x-ray tubes in international regions. The general worldwide economic downturn we have seen since 2008 has made and may continue to make it difficult for our OEM customers to accurately forecast and plan future business activities, and we saw our x-ray business impacted in fiscal year 2009 by inventory reduction efforts at some of these customers. The current market for new X-ray imaging equipment appears to be weak, and certain product lines, such as dental and veterinary, have been hit particularly hard in the recession. If the markets for our customers products significantly deteriorate due to the general economic downturn, our X-ray Products business may be adversely affected. In recent years, we have also seen dramatic reductions in Medicare reimbursements for diagnostic radiology. We believe reductions in these Medicare reimbursement rates have reduced demand for medical x-ray imaging equipment, such as CT scanners, which have negatively impacted demand for our x-ray tube products. Also, because we sell our x-ray products to a limited number of OEM customers and many of them are also our competitors with in-house x-ray tube manufacturing operations, we could experience the loss of, or reduction in purchasing volume by, one or more of these customers as they lower external sourcing costs in this economic downturn. Such a loss or reduction could have a material adverse effect on our X-ray Products business. Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Product $ 73 (13 )% $ 83 84 % $ 45 Service Contracts and Other 12 24 % 10 (21 )% 12 Total Other $ 85 (9 )% $ 93 62 % $ 57 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 4 % 4 % 3 % Revenues in our Other category, which is comprised of SIP, Varian Particle Therapy and GTC, decreased in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 primarily due to declines in product revenues in our SIP business as a result of slower deployment of products for security and inspection systems. Revenues in the Other category in fiscal year 2008 increased over fiscal year 2007 primarily due to growth in product revenues in our SIP business. The higher product revenues from SIP were attributable to increased sales of our Linatron x-ray accelerators and image detection products to OEM customers for cargo screening and border protection. 67 Table of Contents Gross Margin Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Dollar by segment Oncology Systems $ 806 12 % $ 723 19 % $ 609 X-ray Products 130 9 % 120 16 % 104 Other 25 (30 )% 35 71 % 20 Gross margin $ 961 9 % $ 878 20 % $ 733 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 44.8 % 43.2 % 42.3 % X-ray Products 39.3 % 39.3 % 40.2 % Total Company 43.4 % 42.4 % 41.8 % The increase in total company gross margin percentage for fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to the improvement in Oncology System gross margin, which was partially offset by the decreases in gross margins in the Other category while X-ray Product gross margin remained flat. The decrease in gross margin in the Other category in fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to the decrease in Varian Particle Therapy gross margin resulting from higher estimated costs for completion of contractual commitments associated with the acquisition of ACCEL, which is discussed in more details in Acquisition-Related Commitments/Obligations. In fiscal year 2008, total gross margin improved by 0.6 percentage points compared with fiscal year 2007, primarily due to the increase in gross margin for Oncology Systems and SIP, partially offset by the decline in gross margin for X-ray Products. Total product gross margin was 42.6% in fiscal year 2009, compared to 41.7% in fiscal year 2008 and 41.1% in fiscal year 2007. Total service contracts and other gross margin was 46.4% in fiscal year 2009, compared to 45.5% in fiscal year 2008 and 44.9% in fiscal years 2007. Improvements in both product gross margin and service contract gross margin contributed to the increases in Oncology Systems gross margins in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 and in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. Oncology Systems product gross margin was 43.7% in fiscal year 2009, compared to 42.4% in fiscal year 2008 and 41.4% in fiscal year 2007. The increase in Oncology Systems product gross margin in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to product mix shift toward higher margin software products. The increase in Oncology Systems product gross margin in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to higher sales volume and product mix shift toward higher margin products. Service contract gross margin was 48.3% in fiscal year 2009, compared to 46.1% in fiscal year 2008 and 45.7% in fiscal year 2007. The increase in Oncology Systems service contract gross margin in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was primarily due to cost control initiatives and higher volume in fiscal year 2009. The increase in Oncology Systems service contract gross margin in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to higher contract volumes and growth in higher margin software maintenance contracts. X-ray Products gross margin remained relatively flat in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008, with a gross margin improvement in x-ray tubes, offset by a decrease in flat panel gross margin due to higher start up costs and quality costs for the new radiographic flat panels. The X-ray Products gross margin decrease of 0.9 percentage points in fiscal year 2008 from fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to increased raw material costs and quality costs for x-ray tube products and increased raw material costs for flat panel products, although these increases were partially offset by the product mix shift toward a greater proportion of flat panel detectors which generally carry higher margin than x-ray tube products. 68 Table of Contents Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Research and development $ 147 9 % $ 136 16 % $ 117 As a percentage of total revenues 7 % 7 % 7 % The $11 million increase in research and development expense for fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 was driven by increased expenses of $6 million in Oncology Systems, $4 million in the Other category and $1 million in X-ray Products. The $6 million increase in Oncology Systems was attributable primarily to an increase in employee headcount, material costs and consulting expenses for product development, although these expenses were partially offset by a $4 million favorable currency translation impact, due to the relatively strong U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008, when foreign currency denominated research and development expenses for Oncology Systems were translated into U.S. dollars. The $4 million increase in the Other category was primarily due to higher expense for development projects in Varian Particle Therapy and SIP. The $1 million increase in X-ray Products was mainly for development projects for both x-ray tubes and flat panel products. The $19 million increase in research and development expense for fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was driven by a $14 million increase in Oncology Systems and a $5 million increase in the Other category. The $14 million increase in research and development expenses in Oncology Systems for fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 was attributable primarily to a $15 million increase in employee headcount, materials costs and consulting expenses for development of our next generation linear accelerator products. Because of the relative weakness of the U.S. dollar in fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007, research and development expenses in our foreign Oncology Systems operations were impacted by a $5 million unfavorable currency impact as they were translated into U.S. dollars. A reduction in $5 million in expenses related to other product development projects partially offset these effects. The $5 million increase in the Other category primarily reflected a $3 million increase in research and development expenses for x-ray accelerator products in SIP. Selling, General and Administrative Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Selling, general and administrative $ 339 5 % $ 323 16 % $ 277 As a percentage of total revenues 15 % 16 % 16 % The $16 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $7 million increase in fees for certain commission arrangements and product promotions which were primarily tied to growth in Oncology Systems revenues; (b) a $5 million increase in depreciation expenses for our enterprise resource planning system that was placed in service in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009; (c) a $4 million increase in expenses primarily related to accruals for contingent liabilities in the ordinary course of business and (d) a $3 million net increase in employee-related costs due to an increase in headcount to support our growing business activities, was partially offset by a reduction in accrued bonuses and other cost control measures. These items were partially offset by favorable foreign currency impact of $5 million as the foreign currency denominated selling, general and administrative expenses of our foreign operations were translated into stronger U.S. dollars. The $46 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2008 compared to the same period in fiscal year 2007 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $16 million increase in expenses resulting from an increase in employee- related costs and headcount to support our growing business activities; (b) a $7 million unfavorable foreign currency impact as the selling, general and administrative 69 Table of Contents expenses of our foreign operations were translated into U.S. dollars; (c) a $7 million increase in fees for certain commission arrangements and product promotions which were tied to growth in Oncology Systems revenues; (d) a $7 million increase in expenses primarily related to accruals for contingent liabilities in the ordinary course of business and (e) a $6 million increase in operating expenses associated with Varian Particle Therapy, Bio-Imaging Research, Inc. ( BIR ) and Pan-Pacific, Inc. (each of which were acquired through acquisition) and (f) a loss of $1 million from hedging balance sheet exposures from our various foreign subsidiaries and business units compared to a gain of $4 million in fiscal year 2007. These increases were partially offset by the receipt of a $5 million payment related to resolution of a gain contingency. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Interest income, net $ 0.5 (92 )% $ 6.6 (10 )% $ 7.4 The decrease in interest income, net, in fiscal year 2009, compared to fiscal year 2008, was attributable to the lower average interest rates earned on our cash and cash equivalents. The decrease in interest income, net, in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was attributable to increased borrowings in fiscal year 2008 and lower average interest rate earned on our cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2008 than in fiscal year 2007. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2009 Change 2008 Change 2007 Effective tax rate 30 % (1 )% 31 % 1 % 30 % The decrease in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2009 from the prior fiscal year was primarily due to a net benefit from discrete items, primarily the release of certain liabilities for uncertain tax positions, including the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions and the favorable resolution of several income tax audits, partially offset by a decrease in the benefit of the foreign tax rate differential. The increase in the effective tax rate in fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 was primarily because the earlier period included a greater tax benefit realized from the federal research and development credit. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2007 included the benefit of the federal research and development credit for the full year plus the benefit of a retroactive reinstatement of the credit, which had previously expired on December 31, 2005. By comparison, the federal research and development credit was in effect for only one quarter during fiscal year 2008. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. Our future effective tax rate could be adversely affected by having lower earnings than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory rates and higher earnings than anticipated in countries where we have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, and by changes in tax laws or interpretations of those laws. For example, recent proposals would make significant changes to U.S. taxation of U.S.-based multinational corporations. Although we cannot predict whether or in what form Congress would enact any such proposals, legislation of this type could have an adverse impact on our effective tax rate. We also expect that our effective tax rate may experience increased fluctuation from period to period under the provisions in ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. Please refer to further discussion in Note 13 Income Taxes of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 70 Table of Contents Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Net earnings per diluted share $ 2.65 15 % $ 2.31 24 % $ 1.86 The increase in earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 resulted from (i) an increase in total revenues; (ii) an improvement in gross margin, (iii) leverage in our operating expenses, (iv) a reduction in our effective tax rate and (v) a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock due to stock repurchases and lower stock prices compared to fiscal year 2008. The increase in earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 resulted from (i) an increase in total revenues, (ii) an improvement in our gross margin (iii) leverage in our operating expenses and (iv) a reduction in outstanding shares of common stock due to stock repurchases. Net Orders Total Net Orders (by segment and region) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2009 % Change 2008 % Change 2007 Oncology Systems: North America $ 949 (7 )% $ 1,020 13 % $ 905 Total International 942 11 % 851 16 % 731 Total Oncology Systems $ 1,891 1 % $ 1,871 14 % $ 1,636 X-ray Products: North America $ 111 (15 )% $ 131 28 % $ 102 Total International 228 11 % 206 21 % 171 Total X-ray Products $ 339 1 % $ 337 24 % $ 273 Other: $ 151 59 % $ 94 (7 )% $ 101 Total Net Orders $ 2,381 3 % $ 2,302 15 % $ 2,010 Including an approximately $62 million order from Skandion Kliniken to deliver and install a proton therapy system, total net orders for fiscal year 2009 increased 3% over fiscal year 2008, with slight increases in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products net orders and a decline in SIP net orders. Total net orders grew in fiscal year 2008 from fiscal year 2007 primarily due to the net order growth in Oncology Systems and, to a lesser extent, net order growth in X-ray Products and SIP, partially offset by a decline in Varian Particle Therapy net orders. Net order growth in Oncology Systems slowed to 1% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008, compared to 14% growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. For fiscal year 2009, the growth in Oncology Systems international net orders over fiscal year 2008 was significantly offset by the net order decrease in North America as this region was impacted by the recession, the uncertainty created by the prospects of healthcare reform and the added uncertainty in late fiscal year 2009 about the proposed reduction in Medicare reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery at free-standing clinics and for physician reimbursement for radiation oncology. In North America, Oncology Systems experienced net order declines in most of its product lines in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 while this region continued to experience growth in demand for service contracts. All international regions contributed to the growth in international Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. Growth in our service contracts, as well as growth in demand for our software products in all international regions and our high energy linear accelerators in Europe and Asia, contributed to the fiscal year 2009 growth in international Oncology Systems net orders over fiscal year 2008. The stronger U.S. dollar 71 Table of Contents against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 negatively impacted Oncology Systems international net orders when measured in U.S. dollars. When measured in constant currency, international Oncology Systems net orders grew 16% in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008. North American Oncology Systems net orders grew 13% in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 primarily driven by the increase in demand for our software products (including our RapidArc products which was introduced in the second quarter of fiscal year 2008) and our high energy linear accelerators, as well as growth in demand for our service contracts. All international regions contributed to the 16% net order growth in the international region in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. The increase in international net orders in fiscal year 2008 over the prior fiscal year was primarily due to growth in demand for our software products (including our RapidArc products which was introduced in the second quarter of fiscal year 2008) and our high energy linear accelerators, as well as growth in demand for our accessory products that enable IGRT (including our OBI). Growth in demand for our service contracts also contributed to Oncology Systems net order growth in the international region. In addition, international Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2008 were favorably impacted by the weaker U.S. dollar against foreign currencies compared to most of fiscal year 2007. When measured in constant currency, the international Oncology Systems growth rate for fiscal year 2008 was 8%, with increases in all regions. The trailing 12 months growth in net orders for Oncology Systems for the last three fiscal quarters were: an 8% total increase, with a 5% increase in North America and a 13% increase for international regions, as of July 3, 2009; a 12% total increase, with a 10% increase in North America and a 14% increase for international regions, as of April 3, 2009; and a 13% total increase, with a 12% increase in North America and a 14% increase for international regions, as of January 2, 2009. Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems net orders will continue to experience regional fluctuations. Impacted by customer inventory reduction efforts in response to a slowdown in the imaging equipment market, X-ray Products saw net order declines in the second and third quarter of fiscal year 2009 versus the same periods in the previous year. However, this business segment reported 1% net order growth for the full fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008, compared to 24% growth in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007. In fiscal year 2009, the increase in net orders over fiscal year 2008 for our flat panel detectors (including our radiographic imaging panels) was significantly offset by the decrease in net orders for x-ray tubes. The increase in X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 was primarily due to increased demand for our flat panel detectors and, to a lesser extent, increased demand for our x-ray tube products. Net orders in the Other category, comprised of SIP, Varian Particle Therapy and GTC, increased significantly in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 primarily due to a significant order in Varian Particle Therapy partially offset by a decrease in SIP net orders. In fiscal year 2009, Skandion Kliniken awarded us, in a competitive bidding situation, an approximately $62 million contract to deliver and install a proton therapy system in Sweden and we have included this contract in net orders. However, one of the unsuccessful bidders has filed a formal appeal of the award. Skandion Kliniken is actively opposing this appeal and we believe it will be resolved in Skandion Kliniken favor. Additionally, the order is contingent on Skandion Kliniken execution of a contract for the construction of the proton therapy facility, which we also believe will occur. The decline in SIP net orders in fiscal year 2009 over fiscal year 2008 is largely due to government postponements of several large proposals for port and border security systems. Net orders in the Other category decreased 7% in fiscal year 2008 over fiscal year 2007 primarily due to a decrease in net orders for Varian Particle Therapy services partially offset by an increase in SIP net orders. As previously stated, orders for our SIP products may be unpredictable as governmental agencies may place large orders over a short period of time and then may not place any orders for a long time 72 Table of Contents thereafter. However, as budgets are put on hold or reallocated during the economic downturn, customers have postponed their purchasing decisions. Also, proton therapy has not been widely deployed due to the cost of the technology and limited cost effectiveness. Due to the large scale of the related construction projects, the complexity of project financing and the resulting longer customer decision cycles when compared with our Oncology Systems business, we expect great variability in the demand for proton therapy products. This business may also be the most vulnerable to general economic turmoil and contraction in credit markets. In any given period, orders growth in either North America or international regions, or both, could fluctuate because of the high dollar amount of individual orders. In addition, our net orders have been and may continue to be impacted by the current general economic downturn, which has shrunk capital equipment budgets, slowed decision-making, made financing for large equipment purchases more expensive and more time consuming, and made it difficult for our customers to accurately forecast and plan future business activities; as well as by uncertainty created by the prospects of healthcare reform in the United States. As the economy recovers and there is greater clarity on the impact of healthcare reform, we could experience a temporary increase in orders due to pent-up demand of customers, which in turn could increase the volatility of our orders and revenues. Orders in any quarter or period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on: the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedules; and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as software products or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance. Thus, as the overall mix of net orders includes a greater proportion of these types of products, the average time period within which orders convert into revenues could lengthen and our revenue in a specific period could be lower as a result. Discontinued Operations In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, we approved a plan to sell Research Instruments to focus the business that we acquired from ACCEL exclusively on the development of our Varian Particle Therapy business. The sale of Research Instruments was completed in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009. Research Instruments has been classified as a discontinued operation and we have segregated the net assets and operating results of Research Instruments from continuing operations in our Consolidated Balance Sheets and in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings for all periods presented. Research Instruments was previously included in the Other category. For fiscal year 2009, revenues from Research Instruments were $9.8 million, compared to revenues of $35.2 million in fiscal year 2008 and $21.6 million in fiscal year 2007. Net loss from Research Instruments in fiscal year 2009 was $12.5 million (including a loss on the disposal of Research Instruments of $8.1 million), compared to a net loss of $15.8 million in fiscal year 2008 and a net loss of $3.4 million in fiscal year 2007. See Note 16, Discontinued Operations to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion. Backlog At October 2, 2009, including the $62 million proton therapy system order, our backlog was $2.1 billion, which is an increase of 9% over the backlog at September 26, 2008. With respect to our Oncology Systems segment, our backlog at October 2, 2009 increased 5% over the backlog at September 26, 2008, which reflects a 15% increase for the international regions and no increase for North America. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses and fund continuing operations. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases and 73 Table of Contents interest income. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. Because Research Instruments cash flows were not material for any period presented, we have not segregated them from continuing operations on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and the discussion herein. Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: (In millions) October 2, 2009 September 26, 2008 Increase Cash and cash equivalents $ 554 $ 397 $ 157 Our cash and cash equivalents increased $157 million from $397 million at September 26, 2008 to $554 million at October 2, 2009. The increase in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2009 was due primarily to: $305 million of cash generated from operating activities, $28 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and employee stock purchases, $10 million of cash provided by the excess tax benefits from share-based compensation and $4 million of cash provided by net borrowings under our credit facilities. These increases were partially offset by $101 million used for the repurchase of VMS common stock, $63 million of capital expenditures, $8 million used for the repayment of bank borrowings, $6 million used for the net loan advance to dpiX LLC ( dpiX ), $3 million used for a business acquisition and $3 million used to satisfy employee tax withholding obligations upon vesting of our restricted common stock. In addition, exchange rate changes in fiscal year 2009 increased cash and cash equivalents by $1 million. At October 2, 2009, we had approximately $92 million or 17%, of total cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $462 million, or 83%, of total cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of October 2, 2009, most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. dollars. Because our cash levels in the United States are relatively low, we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other corporate purposes. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2009 2008 2007 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 305 $ 372 $ 300 Investing activities (78 ) (88 ) (56 ) Financing activities (71 ) (142 ) (240 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 1 (8 ) (13 ) Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 157 $ 134 $ (9 ) Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $305 million in fiscal year 2009, compared to $372 million and $300 million in fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively. The $67 million decrease in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2009 compared to fiscal year 2008 was driven primarily by a net change of $93 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and a decrease in non-cash items of $14 million, partially offset by an increase of $40 million in net earnings. 74 Table of Contents The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2009 were accounts receivable, inventories, other long-term liabilities, accrued expenses and advance payments from customers as follows: Accounts receivable increased $86 million due to higher revenues and an increase in DSO from the end of fiscal year 2008. Inventories increased by $40 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2010 in all of our businesses. Other long-term liabilities decreased by $22 million primarily due to a decrease in long-term income taxes payable as a result of the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions and the favorable resolution of several income tax audits. Accrued expenses increased $47 million primarily due to an increase in income taxes payable. Advance payments from customers increased by $22 million due to an increase in volume of our Oncology Systems service contracts. The $72 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2008 compared to fiscal year 2007 was primarily driven by an increase of $40 million in net earnings, a net change of $22 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items) and an increase in non-cash items of $10 million. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2008 were deferred revenues, advance payments from customers, accounts receivable, inventories and prepaid expenses and other current assets as follows: Deferred revenues increased by $40 million primarily due to timing of revenue recognized based on customer acceptance of our Oncology Systems products and the increase in Oncology Systems product revenues. Advance payments from customers increased $23 million due to increased orders. Accounts receivables decreased by $22 million due to strong collection performance in fiscal year 2008. Inventories increased by $56 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2009 in all of our businesses. Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased by $37 million primarily due to estimated tax payments made during fiscal year 2008 and the overall growth of our business operations. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments and customer acceptance, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. For additional discussion, please refer to the Risk Factors in Item 1A. Investing activities used $78 million of net cash in fiscal year 2009, $88 million in fiscal year 2008 and $56 million in fiscal year 2007. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment was $63 million in fiscal year 2009, compared to $81 million and $64 million in fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively. In fiscal year 2009, we made an additional net loan advance of $6 million to dpiX. In fiscal year 2008, we also invested $8 million in a privately held company. In fiscal year 2007, we used cash of $27 million to acquire ACCEL and $21 million to acquire BIR. We also made a $4 million earn-out payment to Mitsubishi Electric Co. ( MELCO ) in fiscal year 2007. In fiscal years 2007, we invested $25 million in dpiX Holding for the construction of a manufacturing facility in Colorado. Our net proceeds from maturities of marketable securities were $94 million during fiscal year 2007. We did not hold any marketable securities in fiscal years 2008 and 2009. 75 Table of Contents Financing activities used net cash of $71 million in fiscal year 2009 compared to $142 million and $240 million in fiscal years 2008 and 2007, respectively. In fiscal year 2009, we used $101 million for the repurchases of common stock, compared to $262 million in fiscal year 2008 and $319 million in fiscal year 2007. In fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, we used $8 million, $9 million and $15 million, respectively, to repay bank borrowings. We also used $41 million to repay borrowings under our credit facilities in fiscal year 2008. In fiscal year 2007, we also used $12 million to repurchase the 35% ownership interest in our Japanese subsidiary from MELCO. Cash used for financing activities in fiscal years 2009 and 2008 also includes $3 million and $1 million (the value of withheld shares), respectively, to satisfy employee tax withholding obligations when employees tendered VMS common stock in payment when their restricted common stock vested. These uses were partially offset by cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $28 million, $129 million and $45 million in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 respectively, as well as cash provided by excess tax benefits from share-based compensation of $10 million in fiscal year 2009, $42 million in fiscal year 2008 and $20 million in fiscal year 2007. In fiscal years 2009 and 2007, we also borrowed $4 million and $41 million, respectively, in net cash from our credit facilities. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 3.8% of revenues in fiscal year 2010. We have a $150 million credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. ( BofA ), which was amended and restated in November 2008 and in July 2009. This credit facility, as amended and restated, is referred to as the Amended BofA Credit Facility . The July 2009 amendment to the Amended BofA Credit Facility (the Japanese Line of Credit ) enabled VMS Japanese subsidiary ( VMS KK ) to borrow up to 2.7 billion Japanese Yen. At any time amounts are outstanding under the Japanese Line of Credit, the full borrowing capacity is deemed committed for use in Japan and therefore the maximum amount VMS can otherwise borrow under the Amended BofA Credit Facility will be reduced by $30 million to $120 million. VMS guarantees the payment of the outstanding balance under the Japanese Line of Credit. We collateralized a portion of the Amended BofA Credit Facility with a pledge of stock of certain present and future subsidiaries that are deemed to be material subsidiaries under its terms. As of October 2, 2009, we have pledged to BofA 65% of the voting shares that we hold in Varian Medical Systems Nederland B.V., a wholly-owned subsidiary. The Amended BofA Credit Facility may be used for: working capital; capital expenditures; permitted acquisitions; and other lawful corporate purposes. Borrowings under the Japanese Line of Credit can be used by VMS KK for refinancing certain intercompany debts, working capital, capital expenditures and other lawful corporate purposes. Borrowings under the Amended BofA Credit Facility (outside of the Japanese Line of Credit) accrue interest either: (i) based on LIBOR plus a margin of 1.25% to 1.50% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA ); or (ii) based upon a base rate of either the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or BofA announced prime rate, whichever is greater, minus a margin of 0.5% to 0% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA (depending upon our instructions to BofA). We may select borrowing periods of one, two, three or six months for advances based on the LIBOR rate. Interest rates on advances based on the base rate are adjustable daily. Borrowings under the Japanese Line of Credit accrue interest at the basic loan rate announced by the Bank of Japan plus a margin of 1.25% to 1.50% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA. The Amended BofA Credit Facility will expire, if not extended by mutual agreement of VMS and BofA, on November 10, 2011. The Japanese Line of Credit will expire on November 10, 2010. As of October 2, 2009, there was no outstanding balance under the Amended BofA Credit Facility other than $4.4 million outstanding under the Japanese Line of Credit with a weighted average interest rate of 76 Table of Contents 1.55%. The Amended BofA Credit Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for facilities of this type. We have also agreed to maintain certain financial covenants relating to: (i) leverage ratios involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA; (ii) liquidity; and (iii) consolidated assets. As of October 2, 2009, we were in compliance with all covenants. For further discussion regarding the credit facilities, please refer to Note 7 Credit Facility to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for the next 12 months. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes and repurchase VMS common stock. Total debt as a percentage of total capital decreased to 2.7% at October 2, 2009 from 3.8% at September 26, 2008. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities increased to 1.99 to 1 at October 2, 2009 from 1.81 to 1 at September 26, 2008. Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable DSO were 81 days at October 2, 2009 compared to 74 days at September 26, 2008. Our accounts receivable and DSO are primarily impacted by a number of factors: the timing of product shipments; collections performance; payment terms; and the mix of revenues from different regions. As of October 2, 2009, less than 1% of our accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with extended payment terms of more than one year. Stock Repurchase Program During fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007, we paid $101 million, $262 million and $319 million, respectively, to repurchase 2,248,000 shares, 5,110,000 shares and 7,000,000 shares, respectively, of VMS common stock under various authorizations by our Board of Directors. All shares that have been repurchased have been retired. As of October 2, 2009, 7,300,000 shares of VMS common stock remained available for repurchase under an authorization that expires on December 31, 2009. On November 13, 2009, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional 5,000,000 shares of VMS common stock from January 1, 2010 through December 31, 2010. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of October 2, 2009 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Fiscal Year 2010 Fiscal Years 2011 - 2012 Fiscal Years 2013 - 2014 Beyond Total Short-term borrowings(1) $ 4.4 $ $ $ $ 4.4 Long term debt(2) 9.0 17.1 6.3 32.4 Interest obligation on long term debt 2.1 2.4 0.7 5.2 Operating Leases(3) 15.6 17.9 9.2 4.7 47.4 Defined benefit pension plans(4) 4.2 4.2 Post-retirement benefit plan(5) 0.5 1.1 1.2 2.7 5.5 Other liabilities(6) 16.0 16.0 Loan agreement with dpiX(7) 7.2 7.2 Total(8) $ 59.0 $ 38.5 $ 17.4 $ 7.4 $ 122.3 77 Table of Contents (1) Short-term borrowings were outstanding under the Japanese Line of Credit of the Amended BofA Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 1.55%. See a detailed discussion of our credit facilities in Note 7, Credit Facilities to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Long-term debt, including current maturities, decreased $8 million from September 26, 2008 due to principal repayments. The fixed interest rates on the outstanding debt on this date ranged from 6.70% to 7.58% with a weighted average interest rate of 6.88%. As of October 2, 2009, land and buildings with a carrying amount of $13.7 million were pledged as collateral against certain loans we assumed related to purchases of land and buildings in Las Vegas. For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 6, Long-term Debt to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (3) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases as of October 2, 2009. (4) As further described in Note 10, Retirement Plans to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of October 2, 2009, the Company defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $21.2 million. Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and other economic and demographic assumptions the potential for changes in legislation in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund its defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (5) As further described in Note 10, Retirement Plans to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of October 2, 2009, the Company post-retirement benefit plan had an estimated total benefit obligation of $6.2 million. Due to changes in health care cost trend rates, mortality rates of plan participants, and the potential for the Company to change the type of health care plans offered or the level of contributions from plan participants, the Company is not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund its post-retirement benefit plan beyond fiscal year 2019. (6) In October 2008, we consummated an agreement with VI under which VI will surrender its sublease of a building containing approximately 210,000 square feet of floor space and the related leasehold interest for the land and we agreed to pay VI an aggregate of $21 million in cash and assume the obligations of sublessor under a below-market rate sublease to a third party for a portion of the building. As of October 2, 2009, $5 million had been paid to VI pursuant to our agreement, and the remaining $16 million will be payable in June 2010. (7) In February 2009, we agreed to loan $14 million to dpiX in four separate installments over a period through December 2009. As of October, 2009, we had loaned $6.8 million to dpiX under this loan agreement and we expect to loan the remaining $7.2 million through December 2009. See detailed discussion in Note 5, Related Party Transactions to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (8) Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of October 2, 2009, our liability for uncertain tax positions was $67.8 million and we do not anticipate payment of these amounts in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of future payments related to uncertain tax positions; therefore, the liability for uncertain tax positions has been excluded from the table above. See a detailed discussion in Note 13, Taxes on Earnings to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. 78 Table of Contents Acquisition-Related Commitments/Obligations When we acquired ACCEL in January 2007, the company was involved in a contract-related lawsuit. Subsequent to the acquisition, we settled this lawsuit and agreed to perform certain services under a new contract for a fixed price. From January to September 2007, we gathered information related to the expected cost of satisfying our contractual commitments and completed our assessment as of September 28, 2007. As a result, the final purchase price allocation of ACCEL included a loss accrual related to this contingency of 28.3 million. In the third quarter of fiscal year 2009, we increased the cost estimate to complete our contractual commitments by 4.9 million, which was recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. If the actual costs related to the contingency exceed the estimated amount, or if the estimated loss increases, the variances will be recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in the periods these variances arise. As of October 2, 2009, the balance of the loss accrual related to this contingency was 7.6 million. Other Matters We are involved, from time to time, in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations, arising in the ordinary course of our business. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. While we cannot assure you as to the ultimate outcome of any legal proceeding or other loss contingency involving us, management does not believe any pending matter will be resolved in a manner that would have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, it is possible that a legal or other proceeding brought against us could have an impact of this nature. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The term of these indemnification arrangements is generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these agreements is unlimited. As of October 2, 2009, we have not incurred any significant costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements since we spun off VI and VSEA in 1999. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Generally, the maximum obligation under these indemnifications is not explicitly stated and, as a result, the overall amount of these obligations cannot be reasonably estimated. Recent Accounting Pronouncements On July 1, 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) released the authoritative version of its new ASC as the single source for GAAP, which replaces all previous GAAP accounting standards. While not intended to change GAAP, ASC significantly changes the way in which the accounting literature is organized. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009, we adopted ASC to reference GAAP accounting standards in our consolidated financial statements. 79 Table of Contents In December 2007, the FASB issued new accounting standards for business combinations under ASC 805, which establishes principles and requirements for how an acquirer recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and the goodwill acquired. The new standards also establish disclosure requirements to enable the evaluation of the nature and financial effects of the business combination. In April 2009, the FASB issued additional standards under ASC 805-20 to clarify initial recognition and measurement, subsequent measurement and accounting, and disclosure of assets and liabilities arising from contingencies in a business combination. The new standards related to business combinations under ASC 805 will be effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010. The impact of the adoption of these new standards will depend on the nature and extent of business combinations occurring on or after the beginning of fiscal year 2010. In December 2007, the FASB established new accounting and reporting standards under ASC 810 for ownership interests in subsidiaries held by parties other than the parent, the amount of consolidated net income attributable to the parent and to the noncontrolling interest, changes in a parent ownership interest, and the valuation of retained noncontrolling equity investments when a subsidiary is deconsolidated. The new accounting standards under ASC 810 also establish disclosure requirements that clearly identify and distinguish between the interests of the parent and the interests of the noncontrolling owners. The new standards under ASC 810 will be effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010. We do not expect that the adoption of these new standards under ASC 810 will have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. In November 2008, the FASB ratified an Emerging Issues Task Force ( EITF ) Issue, which clarifies the accounting for certain transactions and impairment considerations involving equity method investments. The new standards, which will be included in ASC 323-10, will be effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010, with early adoption prohibited. We do not expect that the adoption of this new standard will have a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In December 2008, the FASB issued new standards under ASC 715-20, which provides guidance on an employer disclosure about plan assets of a defined benefit pension or other post-retirement plan and requires employers to disclose information about fair value measurements of plan assets. The new standards under ASC 715-20 will be effective for us as of the end of fiscal year 2010. In June 2009, the FASB issued the consolidation guidance for variable-interest entities to replace the quantitative-based risks and rewards calculation for determining which enterprise, if any, has a controlling financial interest in a variable interest entity with an approach focused on identifying which enterprise has the power to direct the activities of a variable interest entity that most significantly impact the entity economic performance. These new standards will be effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2011. We are currently assessing the potential impact, if any, these new standards may have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In August 2009, the FASB issued an update to ASC 820 . This Accounting Standards Update ( ASU ) No. 2009-5, Measuring Liabilities at Fair Value ( ASU 2009-5 ) amends the provisions in ASC 820 related to the fair value measurement of liabilities and clarifies for circumstances in which a quoted price in an active market for the identical liability is not available. ASU 2009-5 is intended to reduce potential ambiguity in financial reporting when measuring the fair value of liabilities. ASU 2009-5 is effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2010. ASU 2009-5 concerns disclosure only and will not have an impact on our consolidated financial position or results of operations. In October 2009, the FASB issued an update to ASC 605. This ASU No. 2009-13, Multiple Deliverable Revenue Arrangements ( ASU 2009-13 ) provides guidance on whether multiple deliverables in a revenue arrangement exist, how the arrangement should be separated, and the consideration allocated. ASU 2009-13 eliminates the requirement to establish the fair value of undelivered products and services and instead provides for separate revenue recognition based upon management estimate of the selling 80 Table of Contents price for an undelivered item when there is no other means to determine the fair value of that undelivered item. ASU 2009-13 is effective prospectively for revenue arrangements entered into or materially modified in fiscal years beginning on or after June 15, 2010. Early adoption is permitted if we elect to adopt ASU No. 2009-14, Certain Revenue Arrangements That Include Software Elements ( ASU 2009-14 ) concurrently. We are currently evaluating the potential impact of ASU 2009-13 on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In October 2009, the FASB issued an update to ASC 985-605. This ASU 2009-14, amends the scope of the software revenue guidance in ASC 985-605 to exclude tangible products containing software components and non-software components that function together to deliver the tangible product essential functionality. ASU 2009-14 is effectively prospectively for revenue arrangements entered into or materially modified in fiscal years beginning on or after June 15, 2010. Early adoption is permitted if we elect to adopt ASU 2009-13 concurrently. We are currently evaluating the potential impact of ASU 2009-14 on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. 
