CIK: 203527
Company Name: VARIAN MEDICAL SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-11-23


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Overview In fiscal year 2011, net earnings per diluted share from continuing operations increased 16% and total revenues increased 10% over fiscal year 2010. Including the effect of revenues recognized for the proton therapy system at the Scripps Proton Therapy Center with a zero profit margin (discussed further below), fiscal year 2011 gross margin improved slightly and operating margin was relatively flat, compared with fiscal year 2010. In fiscal year 2011, diluted weighted average shares outstanding decreased from fiscal year 2010 primarily because we repurchased 9.0 million shares of VMS common stock during the year. Each of Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, SIP and VPT reported growth in net orders in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010. At the end of fiscal year 2011, our backlog increased 15% from the end of fiscal year 2010. Primary uses of cash in fiscal year 2011 included payments for stock repurchases, including amounts paid under accelerated repurchase agreements. In fiscal year 2011, we amended the revolving credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. to increase our borrowing capacity to $300 million. At the end of fiscal year 2011, our cash and cash equivalents were $564 million and our short-term borrowings and long-term debt totaled $198 million. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2011, we recorded the proton therapy system order from CPTC for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center in San Diego, California and began recognizing revenues on this contract. During fiscal year 2011, we committed to loan up to $115 million to CPTC to finance the construction and startup operations of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center, under which commitment we had loaned $19 million as of fiscal year end. Effective in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, we classified Research Instruments as a discontinued operation for all periods presented in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings. Including a $0.08 net loss per diluted share from this discontinued operation, net earnings in fiscal year 2011 were $3.36 per diluted share. As of September 30, 2011, we had no remaining obligations related to Research Instruments, which was previously included in the Other category. Unless otherwise stated, the discussion in this MD&A pertains to our continuing operations. Oncology Systems . Our largest business segment is Oncology Systems, which designs, manufacturers, sells and services hardware and software products for radiation treatment of cancer with conventional radiotherapy, IMRT, IGRT, volumetric modulated arc therapy (an advanced form of IMRT), stereotactic radiotherapy, SRS, SBRT and brachytherapy. Oncology Systems net orders increased 8%, or 6% on a constant currency basis, in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 reflecting increased net orders in both the international region and North America. In fiscal year 2011, Oncology Systems total revenues rose 9% over fiscal year 2010, with a 13% increase in North America and a 5% increase in the international region. The TrueBeam system and the service contract business were significant contributors of growth in Oncology Systems net orders and revenues in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. Oncology Systems gross margin increased 0.5 percentage points in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 due to increases in both service gross margin and higher proportion of product revenues from our TrueBeam system (which carries a higher gross margin than our other linear accelerators). In April 2011, we received approval by the State Food & Drug Administration in China to market and sell our TrueBeam system in China. In the third quarter of fiscal year 2011, we received Shonin approval from the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare to market the TrueBeam system in Japan. Through September 30, 2011, we had received orders for 380 TrueBeam systems since its introduction, a majority of which came from North America. A minority of these orders represented upgrades from other linear accelerators already in our backlog. 56 Table of Contents Demand for our Oncology Systems products is impacted in part by the strength and sustainability of an economic recovery in the United States, stability of sovereign debt in Europe and the level of related austerity measures to control the sovereign debt crisis, as well as the slowdown of economic activities in faster growing regions, such as China. In October 2011, we acquired Calypso, a privately-held supplier of specialized products and software for real-time tumor tracking and motion management during radiosurgery and radiotherapy. The price was $10 million plus potential contingent consideration if certain milestones are achieved. This acquisition enables us to offer real-time, non-ionizing tumor tracking tools for enhancing the precision of cancer treatments. We expect Calypso will have a dilutive effect on our operating earnings in fiscal year 2012. In May 2011, we signed an agreement with Augmenix, a privately-held company that is developing hydrogel products to decrease irradiation of radiation sensitive tissue such as the rectum through creating greater spatial separation between the sensitive tissue ( e.g., rectum) and the treated area ( e.g., prostate) during treatments, under which we paid $15 million to Augmenix for a minority equity interest plus an exclusive option to purchase the remaining equity interest if certain agreed-upon milestones have been met. In March 2011, we acquired a privately-held supplier of devices for delivery of brachytherapy treatment of cancer for approximately $8 million. X-Ray Products . Our X-ray Products business segment, designs, manufactures and sells x-ray tubes and flat panel detectors for use in a range of applications, including radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, special procedures and industrial applications; and x-ray tubes for use in computed tomography ( CT ) scanning. In fiscal year 2011, X-ray Products reported record net orders, revenues and operating earnings. Net orders and revenues increased 15% and 16%, respectively, in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. Both the flat and the x-ray tube product lines contributed to the increase in net orders and revenues. X-ray Products gross margin improved in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 primarily due to higher sales volume, product mix shift towards flat panel products (which carry higher gross margins), as well as lower costs of quality for our x-ray tube products. Our success in our X-ray Products business depends upon our ability to anticipate changes in our markets, the direction of technological innovation and the demands of our customers. In addition, changes in access to diagnostic radiology or the reimbursement rates associated with diagnostic radiology as a result of the Affordable Health Care for America Act and similar state proposals will likely affect demand for our products in our X-ray Products business. Other. The Other category is comprised of: (i) SIP, which designs, manufactures, sells and services Linatron x-ray accelerators, imaging processing software and image detection products (including IntellX TM ) for security and inspection, (ii) our VPT business, which designs, develops, manufactures, sells and services products and systems for delivering proton therapy treatments, and (iii) the operations of the GTC, our scientific research facility. Net orders in the Other category increased $201 million in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010 reflecting both the $88 million order for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project from CPTC in fiscal year 2011 and the cancellation of the $62 million Skandion Kliniken order in fiscal year 2010. The increase in net orders in the Other category in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was also attributable to an increase in net orders in SIP. Revenues in the Other category increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 because of the increase in VPT revenues from the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project, partially offset by a decrease in SIP revenues. See Net Orders and Other Revenues for further discussion of the order and revenues related to the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project. This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the information contained under Item 1A, Risk Factors. We discuss our results of operations below. 57 Table of Contents Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically review our accounting policies, estimates and assumptions and make adjustments when facts and circumstances dictate. In addition to the accounting policies that are more fully described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider the critical accounting policies described below to be affected by critical accounting estimates. Our critical accounting policies that are affected by accounting estimates include revenue recognition, share-based compensation expense, valuation of allowance for doubtful accounts, valuation of inventories, assessment of recoverability of goodwill and intangible assets, valuation of warranty obligations, assessment of environmental remediation liabilities, valuation of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans, valuation of derivative instruments and taxes on earnings. Such accounting policies require us to use judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates and assumptions regarding matters that are inherently uncertain; and actual results could differ materially from these estimates. For a discussion of how these estimates and other factors may affect our business, see Item 1A, Risk Factors. Revenue Recognition We frequently enter into sales arrangements with customers that contain multiple elements or deliverables such as hardware, software and services. Judgments as to the allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the multiple elements of the arrangement, and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are critical with respect to these arrangements to ensure compliance with GAAP. At the beginning of the second quarter of fiscal year 2010, we elected to early adopt the amended software revenue guidance and amended multiple deliverable revenue arrangement guidance on a prospective basis as of the beginning of fiscal year 2010 and have applied the amended guidance for revenue arrangements originating or materially modified after October 2, 2009. Under the amended guidance, the allocation of consideration in a multiple element arrangement is affected by the determination of whether any software deliverables that function together with other hardware components to deliver the hardware products essential functionality is considered as non-software products for purpose of revenue recognition. The allocation of consideration to each non-software deliverable is based on the assumptions we use to establish its selling price, which are based on vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of selling price, if it exists, otherwise, third-party evidence of selling price, if it exists, and if not on estimated selling prices. In addition, the allocation of consideration to each software deliverable in a multiple element arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether VSOE of its fair value exists in these arrangements. Under the prior authoritative guidance, the allocation of consideration to each deliverable in a multiple deliverable arrangement is affected by our judgment as to whether objective and reliable evidence of fair value existed for hardware deliverables and VSOE of the fair value existed for software deliverables in these arrangements. Changes to the elements in an arrangement and the amounts allocated to each element could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognition. Revenue recognition also depends on the timing of shipment and is subject to customer acceptance and the readiness of customers facilities. If shipments are not made on scheduled timelines or if the products are not accepted by the customer in a timely manner, our reported revenues may differ materially from expectations. In addition, revenues related to certain highly customized image detection systems, proton therapy systems and proton therapy system commissioning contracts are recognized in accordance with contract accounting. For contracts in which we can estimate contract costs with reasonable dependability, we 58 Table of Contents recognize contract revenues under the percentage-of-completion method. Revenues recognized under the percentage-of-completion method are based on contract costs incurred to date compared with total estimated contract costs. Changes in estimates of total contract revenue, total contract cost or the extent of progress towards completion are recognized in the period in which the changes in estimates are identified. Estimated losses on contracts are recognized in the period in which the loss is identified. In circumstances in which the final outcome of a contract cannot be precisely estimated but a loss on the contract is not expected, the Company recognizes revenues under the percentage-of-completion method based on a zero profit margin until more precise estimates can be made. If and when the Company can make more precise estimates, revenues and costs of sales are adjusted in the same period. Because the percentage-of-completion method involves considerable use of estimates in determining revenues, costs and profits and in assigning the dollar amounts to relevant accounting periods, and because the estimates must be periodically reviewed and appropriately adjusted, if our estimates prove to be inaccurate or circumstances change over time, we may be forced to adjust revenues or even record a contract loss in later periods. If a loss is expected on a contract under the percentage-of-completion method, the estimated loss would be charged to cost of sales in the period the loss is identified. Share-based Compensation Expense We value our stock options granted and the option component of the shares of VMS common stock purchased under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model is affected by VMS stock price, as well as the input of other subjective assumptions, including the expected term of stock awards and the expected price volatility of VMS stock over the expected term of the awards. The expected term is based on the observed and expected time to post-vesting exercise and post-vesting cancellations of stock options by our employees. We determined the expected term of stock options based on the demographic grouping of employees and retirement eligibility. We used a combination of historical and implied volatility, or blended volatility, in deriving the expected volatility assumption. Blended volatility represents the weighted average of implied volatility and historical volatility. Implied volatility is derived based on traded options on VMS common stock. Implied volatility is weighted in the calculation of blended volatility based on the ratio of the term of the exchange-traded options to the expected terms of the employee stock options. Historical volatility represents the remainder of the weighting. Our decision to incorporate implied volatility was based on our assessment that implied volatility of publicly traded options on VMS common stock is reflective of market conditions and is generally reflective of both historical volatility and expectations of how future volatility will differ from historical volatility. In determining the extent of use of implied volatility, we considered: (i) the volume of market activity of traded options; (ii) the ability to reasonably match the input variables of traded options to those of stock options granted by us, including the date of grant; (iii) the similarity of the exercise prices; and (iv) the length of term of traded options. After considering the above factors, we determined that we could not rely exclusively on implied volatility based on the fact that the term of VMS exchange-traded options is less than one year and that it is different from the expected terms of the stock options we grant. Therefore, we believe a combination of the historical volatility over the expected terms of the stock options we grant and the implied volatility of exchange-traded options best reflects the expected volatility of VMS common stock. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for the term of our stock options. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions in future periods, the compensation expense that we record may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. 59 Table of Contents Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers prior to authorizing shipment for all major sale transactions. Except for government tenders, group purchases and orders with letters of credit in Oncology Systems, SIP and VPT, and orders in our X-ray Products business, our payment terms usually require payment of a small portion of the total amount due when the customer signs the purchase order, a significant amount upon transfer of risk of loss to the customer and the remaining amount upon completion of the installation. On a quarterly basis, we evaluate aged items in the accounts receivable aging report and provide an allowance in an amount we deem adequate for doubtful accounts. If our evaluation of our customers financial conditions does not reflect our future ability to collect outstanding receivables, additional provisions may be needed and our operating results could be negatively affected. Inventories Our inventories include high technology parts and components that are highly specialized in nature and that are subject to rapid technological obsolescence. We have programs to minimize the required inventories on hand and we regularly review inventory quantities on hand and on order and adjust for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on historical usage rates and our estimates of product demand and production. Actual demand may differ from our estimates, in which case we may have understated or overstated the provision required for obsolete and excess inventory, which would have an impact on our operating results. Goodwill and Intangible Assets Goodwill is initially recorded when the purchase price paid for a business acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of the net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. The majority of businesses that we have acquired have not had significant identified tangible assets and, as a result, we have typically allocated a significant portion of the purchase price to intangible assets and goodwill. Our future operating performance will be impacted by the future amortization of these acquired intangible assets and potential impairment charges related to these intangibles or to goodwill if indicators of impairment exist. The allocation of the purchase price from business acquisitions to goodwill and intangible assets could have a significant impact on our future operating results. In addition, the allocation of the purchase price of the acquired businesses to goodwill and intangible assets requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, including estimates of future cash flows expected to be generated by the acquired assets and the appropriate discount rate for those cash flows. Should conditions differ from management estimates at the time of the acquisition, material write-downs of intangible assets and/or goodwill may be required, which would adversely affect our operating results. In accordance with Accounting Standard Codification ( ASC ) 350, we evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs or circumstances changes that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The impairment test for goodwill is a two-step process. Step one consists of a comparison of the fair value of a reporting unit against its carrying amount, including the goodwill allocated to each reporting unit. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on the present value of estimated future cash flows of the reporting units. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit is in excess of its fair value, step two requires the comparison of the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill against the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill. Any excess of the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill over the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill is recorded as an impairment loss. The impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite useful lives, if any, consists of a comparison of fair value to carrying value, with any excess of carrying value over fair value being recorded as an impairment loss. Based on the most recent annual goodwill impairment testing that we performed in fiscal year 2011 for each of our four reporting units with goodwill (Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, SIP and VPT), the fair value of each such reporting unit was substantially in excess of its carrying value. We will continue to make 60 Table of Contents assessments of impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if indicators of potential impairment arise. Warranty Obligations We warrant most of our products for a specific period of time, usually twelve months, against material defects. We provide for the estimated future costs of warranty obligations in cost of revenues when the related revenues are recognized. The accrued warranty costs represent our best estimate at the time of sale of the total costs that we will incur to repair or replace product parts that fail while still under warranty. The amount of accrued estimated warranty costs obligation for established products is primarily based on historical experience as to product failures adjusted for current information on repair costs. For new products, estimates will include historical experience of similar products, as well as reasonable allowance for start-up expenses. Actual warranty costs could differ from the estimated amounts. On a quarterly basis, we review the accrued balances of our warranty obligations and update the historical warranty cost trends, if required. If we were required to accrue additional warranty costs in the future, it would have a negative effect on our operating results. Environmental Matters We are subject to a variety of environmental laws around the world. Those laws regulate multiple aspects of our operations, including the handling, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous substances. They impose costs on our operations and in connection with past operations. In connection with past operations, we record environmental remediation liabilities when we conclude that environmental assessments or remediation efforts are probable and we believe we can reasonably estimate the costs of those efforts . Our accrued environmental costs represent our best estimate of the total costs of assessments and remediation and the time period over which we expect to incur those costs. We review these accrued balances quarterly. Were we required to increase or decrease the accrued environmental costs in the future, it would adversely or favorably impact our operating results. Defined Benefit Pension and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans We sponsor five defined benefit pension plans in Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the United Kingdom covering employees who meet the applicable eligibility requirements in these countries. In July 2007, we made changes to the defined benefit pension plan in the United Kingdom by terminating the accrual of additional benefits for existing participants and suspending the enrollment of new participants. Although we do not have any defined benefit pension plans in the United States, we sponsor a post-retirement benefit plan that provides healthcare benefits to certain eligible retirees. Several statistical and other factors that attempt to anticipate future events are used in calculating the expenses and liabilities related to those plans for which the benefits are actuarially determined, such as our defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plans. These factors include assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of future compensation increases and rate of healthcare cost increases, all of which we determine within certain guidelines. In addition, we also use assumptions, such as withdrawal and mortality rates, to calculate the expenses and liabilities. The actuarial assumptions we use are long-term assumptions and may differ materially from actual experience particularly in the short term due to changing market and economic conditions and changing participant demographics. These differences may have a significant impact on the amount of defined benefit pension and post-retirement benefit plan expense we record. The expected rates of return on the various defined benefit pension plans assets are based on the asset allocation of each plan and the long-term projected return on those assets. The discount rate enables us to state expected future cash flows at a present value on the measurement date. The discount rates used for defined benefit plans in all countries are based primarily on the yields of a universe of high quality corporate bonds in each applicable country or the spot rate of high quality AA-rated corporate bonds, 61 Table of Contents with durations corresponding to the expected durations of the benefit obligations. A change in the discount rate will cause the present value of benefit obligations to change in the opposite direction. Valuation of Derivative Instruments We use foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of currency fluctuations on sales transactions denominated in foreign currencies and on assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. These foreign currency forward contracts are derivative instruments and are measured at fair value. ASC 820 establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value (see Note 3, Fair Value of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Each level of input has different levels of subjectivity and difficulty involved in determining fair value. The fair value of foreign currency forward contracts are calculated primarily using Level 2 inputs, which include currency spot and forward rates, interest rate and credit or non-performance risk. The spot rate for each currency is the same spot rate used for all balance sheet translations at the measurement date and sourced from our major trading banks. The forward point values for each currency and the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) to discount assets and liabilities are interpolated from commonly quoted broker services. One year credit default swap spreads of the counterparty at the measurement date are used to adjust derivative assets, all of which mature in less than 12 months, for non-performance risk. We are required to adjust derivative liabilities to reflect the potential non-performance risk to lenders based on our incremental borrowing rate. Each contract is individually adjusted using the counterparty (for net asset) or our discount rate (for net liability). The use of Level 2 inputs in determining fair values requires certain management judgment and subjectivity. Changes to these Level 2 inputs could have a material impact to the valuation of our derivative instruments, as well as on our result of operations. Taxes on Earnings We are subject to taxes on earnings in both the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As a global taxpayer, significant judgments and estimates are required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for taxes on earnings. The provisions in ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes contain a two-step approach to recognizing, derecognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining whether the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, based on the technical merits, the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. Recognition, derecognition and measurement are based on management best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the end of the accounting period. A tax benefit should be recognized in the first period in which it meets the more likely than not recognition threshold, and conversely, a tax benefit previously recognized should be derecognized in the first period in which new information results in a change in judgment in which the position fails to meet the recognition threshold. A benefit not previously recognized would be recognized when the tax position is effectively settled through examination, negotiation or litigation with tax authorities, or when the statute of limitations for the relevant taxing authority to examine and challenge the position has expired. Our policy is to include interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits within the provision for taxes on earnings. Generally, the carrying value of our net deferred tax assets assumes that we will be able to generate sufficient future taxable earnings in the applicable tax jurisdictions to utilize these deferred tax assets. Should we conclude it is more likely than not that we will be unable to recover our net deferred tax assets in these tax jurisdictions, we would increase our valuation allowance and our tax provision would increase in the period in which we make such a determination. 62 Table of Contents Our foreign earnings are generally taxed at rates lower than U.S. rates. Our effective tax rate is impacted by existing tax laws in both the United States and in the respective countries in which our foreign subsidiaries do business. In addition, a decrease in the percentage of our total earnings from our foreign countries, or a change in the mix of foreign countries among particular tax jurisdictions, could increase our effective tax rate. Also, our current effective tax rate does not assume U.S. taxes on certain undistributed profits of certain foreign subsidiaries. These earnings could become subject to incremental foreign withholding or U.S. federal and state taxes should they either be deemed or actually remitted to the United States. Results of Operations Fiscal Year Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Friday nearest September 30. Fiscal year 2011 was the 52-week period ended on September 30, 2011. Fiscal year 2010 was the 52-week period ended on October 1, 2010 and fiscal year 2009 was the 53-week period ended on October 2, 2009. Set forth below is a discussion of our results of operations for fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009. As indicated above, the operating results of Research Instruments have been segregated and presented as a discontinued operation in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings for all periods. Discussion of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years 2011, 2010 and 2009 Total Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Product $ 1,971 9 % $ 1,814 3 % $ 1,767 Service Contracts and Other 626 15 % 543 21 % 447 Total Revenues $ 2,597 10 % $ 2,357 6 % $ 2,214 Product as a percentage of total revenues 76 % 77 % 80 % Service Contracts and Other as a percentage of total revenues 24 % 23 % 20 % Revenues by region North America $ 1,170 16 % $ 1,012 (9 %) $ 1,111 Europe 788 5 % 747 21 % 620 Asia 537 5 % 513 24 % 412 Rest of world 102 20 % 85 19 % 71 Total International(1) 1,427 6 % 1,345 22 % 1,103 Total $ 2,597 10 % $ 2,357 6 % $ 2,214 North America as a percentage of total revenues 45 % 43 % 50 % International as a percentage of total revenues 55 % 57 % 50 % (1) We consider international revenues to be revenues outside of North America. Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 due to revenue growth in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and VPT, partially offset by a decrease in SIP revenues. Total revenues increased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, as increased revenues in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and VPT were partially offset by a decrease in SIP revenues. In fiscal year 2011, Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and VPT contributed to the growth in product revenues over fiscal year 2010, partially offset by a decline in SIP product revenues. In fiscal year 2010, 63 Table of Contents the increase in product revenues over fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to an increase in product revenues from X-ray Products, which was mostly offset by the decreases in product revenues from Oncology Systems and SIP. Product revenues grew faster from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2011 as compared to fiscal year 2009 to fiscal year 2010, primarily because Oncology Systems product revenues showed growth in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 and because VPT began to recognize revenues for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project. Service contract and other revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 due to an increase in Oncology Systems service contract revenues and, to a lesser extent, an increase in SIP service contract and other revenues, partially offset by a decline in VPT service contract revenues. Oncology Systems service contracts revenues were the primary contributor to the growth in service contracts and other revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, although, to a lesser extent, VPT and SIP also contributed to the increase in service contracts and other revenues. Service contracts and other revenues grew slower in fiscal year 2011 over 2010 compared to fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to the slower growth in Oncology Systems service contract revenues in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. The increase in North American revenues in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010 was due to increases in revenues in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, and the VPT and SIP businesses. North American revenues decreased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 as the decline in North American revenues from Oncology Systems and SIP more than offset the increase in X-ray Products North American revenues. International revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 due to increases in international revenues in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products, although these were partially offset by declines in international revenues in SIP and VPT. All international regions contributed to the growth in international revenues in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010, which favorably affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. International revenues also grew in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, with Oncology Systems, X-ray Products, SIP and VPT all contributing to the growth. Europe, with revenue growth from all businesses, and Asia, with revenue growth primarily from Oncology Systems and X-ray Products, contributed to the bulk of the growth in international revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. In the rest of the world region, the increase in Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was partially offset by a decrease in X-ray Products revenues. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, which favorably affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. Oncology Systems Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Product $ 1,416 5 % $ 1,343 (1 %) $ 1,363 Service Contracts(1) 606 17 % 519 19 % 435 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,022 9 % $ 1,862 4 % $ 1,798 Product as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 70 % 72 % 76 % Service Contracts as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 30 % 28 % 24 % Oncology Systems revenues as a percentage of total revenues 78 % 79 % 81 % 64 Table of Contents (1) Revenues from service contracts represent revenues from fixed-term service contracts and labor cost services. This excludes revenues from spare parts sold by our service department. Oncology Systems product revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 primarily due to increases in revenues from sales of our linear accelerators and, to a lesser extent, from sales of our software products. Oncology Systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily as a result of decreased revenues from sales of our linear accelerators, partially offset by increased revenues from sales of our brachytherapy products. The increases in service contract revenues, in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 and in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, were primarily driven by increased customer adoption of service contracts as our products become more sophisticated and by increased number of customers as the installed base of our products continues to grow. Since service contract revenues grew faster than product revenues from fiscal year 2009 to fiscal year 2010 and from fiscal year 2010 to fiscal year 2011, service contract revenues also increased as a percentage of total Oncology Systems revenues in each fiscal year. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010 and in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, which favorably affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 North America $ 971 13 % $ 860 (11 %) $ 970 Europe 650 6 % 614 17 % 524 Asia 303 (2 %) 309 27 % 242 Rest of world 98 24 % 79 28 % 62 Total International 1,051 5 % 1,002 21 % 828 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,022 9 % $ 1,862 4 % $ 1,798 North America as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 48 % 46 % 54 % International as a percentage of Oncology Systems revenues 52 % 54 % 46 % The international region represented more than half of total Oncology Systems revenues in both fiscal years 2011 and 2010. In fiscal year 2011, Oncology Systems revenues grew over fiscal year 2010 in all international regions, except for Asia, where a supplemental government spending program resulted in high Japanese revenues in fiscal year 2010. The increase in Oncology Systems international revenues in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to an increase in service contract revenues in all international regions, as well as an increase in product revenues from sales of our software products in all international regions, that was partially offset by decreased product revenues from our high energy linear accelerators in Asia. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010 which favorably affected our Oncology Systems international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. In fiscal year 2010, the international region drove the growth in Oncology Systems revenues over fiscal year 2009. All international regions contributed to the increase in international Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. The increase in international Oncology Systems revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 reflected higher product revenue driven by increased sales across most product lines, as well as an increase in service contract revenues. Overall, the U.S. dollar was weaker against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, which favorably affected our international revenues when measured in U.S. dollars. 65 Table of Contents North American Oncology Systems revenues increased in fiscal year 2011 over the fiscal year 2010 primarily due to increases in revenues from sales of our high energy linear accelerators and an increase in service contract revenues, partially offset by a decrease in revenues from our software products. North American Oncology Systems product revenues decreased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 due to decreased sales in most product lines, although the decrease was partially offset by increased service contract revenues. Varying cycles of higher and lower revenues between the international and North American regions is a historical pattern reflecting regional influences such the effects of government economic stimulus programs, the effects of the recession and slow economic recovery, the effects of the European sovereign debt crisis, uncertainty created by healthcare reform and reductions in Medicare reimbursement rates for radiotherapy and radiosurgery in the United States, and different technology adoption cycles that are consistent with the net order patterns discussed more fully under Net Orders. X-ray Products Revenues Revenues by region Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 North America $ 137 7 % $ 128 16 % $ 110 Europe 97 43 % 68 37 % 49 Asia 231 15 % 201 24 % 162 Rest of world 4 (30 %) 6 (36 %) 10 Total International 332 21 % 275 24 % 221 Total X-ray Products $ 469 16 % $ 403 22 % $ 331 North America as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 29 % 32 % 33 % International as a percentage of X-ray Products revenues 71 % 68 % 67 % X-ray Products revenues as a percentage of total revenues 18 % 17 % 15 % In fiscal year 2011, the international region and North America both contributed to the increase in X-ray Products revenues over fiscal year 2010, with increased sales of our flat panel products in all international regions and increased sales of our x-ray tube products in Asia and Europe contributing to the increase in the international revenues, and increased sales of our flat panel products that was partially offset by a slight decline in sales of our x-ray tube products accounting for the increase in North American revenues. The increase in X-ray Products international revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to increased revenues from sales of our flat panel products in Europe and Asia and increased revenues from sales of our x-ray tube products in Asia. The increase in X-ray Products North American revenues in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was due to increased revenues from sales of our flat panel products, partially offset by a decline in revenues from sales of our x-ray tube products. The fluctuation of the U.S. dollar against foreign currencies did not have a material impact on X-ray Products international revenue growth because sales transactions in the X-ray Products business are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. 66 Table of Contents Other Revenues Revenues by sales classification Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Product $ 85 26 % $ 68 (7 %) $ 73 Service Contracts and Other 21 (14 %) 24 99 % 12 Total Other $ 106 16 % $ 92 8 % $ 85 Other revenues as a percentage of total revenues 4 % 4 % 4 % Revenues in the Other category, which is comprised of SIP, VPT and GTC, increased in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 because of an increase in VPT revenues primarily associated with product revenues recognized for the proton therapy system for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project, partially offset by a decrease in product revenues in our SIP business as a result of slower deployment of products for security and inspection systems. In fiscal year 2011, we recognized revenue of $33 million for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project. We signed the equipment purchase agreement with CPTC for this project in April 2010 and we did not book this order until September 2011 when the financing was completed. The $33 million revenue we recognized represented progress made on this project since the equipment purchase agreement was signed. Revenues in our Other category increased in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to an increase in VPT service revenues related to the commissioning of a proton therapy system, partially offset by a decrease in SIP revenues from decreased sales of our Linatron products. Gross Margin Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Dollar by segment Oncology Systems $ 917 10 % $ 837 4 % $ 806 X-ray Products 193 19 % 162 25 % 130 Other 26 (4 %) 27 8 % 25 Gross margin $ 1,136 11 % $ 1,026 7 % $ 961 Percentage by segment Oncology Systems 45.4 % 44.9 % 44.8 % X-ray Products 41.2 % 40.3 % 39.3 % Total Company 43.7 % 43.5 % 43.4 % In fiscal year 2011, the increase in total company gross margin percentage over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increases in gross margins in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and SIP. The improvement in SIP gross margin was primarily due to a mix shift toward higher margin products. However, total company gross margin percentage in fiscal year 2011 was negatively impacted by VPT, which began to recognize revenues with a zero profit margin for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project. In fiscal year 2010, total company gross margin percentage increased slightly over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to the improvement in X-ray Products and Oncology Systems gross margins, while the gross margin percentage for the Other category remained relatively flat. Total product gross margin was 41.6% in fiscal year 2011, compared to 41.8% in fiscal year 2010 and 42.6% in fiscal year 2009. Total service contracts and other gross margin was 50.6% in fiscal year 2011, compared to 49.2% in fiscal year 2010 and 46.4% in fiscal year 2009. Oncology Systems gross margin in fiscal year 2011 increased 0.5 percentage point over fiscal year 2010 primarily due to increases in both service and product gross margins. Oncology Systems service contract 67 Table of Contents gross margin was 51.4% in fiscal year 2011, compared to 51.0% in fiscal year 2010. The increase in service contract gross margin was primarily due to higher service contract volume partially offset by higher product retrofit costs. Oncology Systems product gross margin increased to 42.8% in fiscal year 2011 from 42.6% in fiscal year 2010, primarily due to higher proportion of product revenues from our TrueBeam system (which carries higher gross margins compared with our other linear accelerators). In fiscal year 2010, Oncology Systems gross margin increased over fiscal year 2009 due to an increase in Oncology Systems service contract gross margin that was mostly offset by a decline in Oncology Systems product gross margin. Oncology Systems product gross margin was 42.6% in fiscal year 2010, compared to 43.7% in fiscal year 2009, primarily due to the geographic mix shift towards a higher proportion of international revenues, which typically have lower margins than revenues from North America, partially offset by a product mix shift toward a greater proportion of higher margin software products. Oncology Systems service contract gross margin was 51.0% in fiscal year 2010, compared to 48.3% in fiscal year 2009. The increase in Oncology Systems service contract gross margin in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was mainly due to higher service contract volume, cost control initiatives and costs associated with quality. X-ray Products gross margin improved 0.9 percentage point in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 primarily due to higher sales volume, product mix shift towards flat panel products (which carry higher gross margins), as well as lower costs of quality for our x-ray tube products. X-ray Products gross margin increased 1.0 percentage point in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to product mix shift toward higher margin products and higher sales volume. For the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project, we recognized revenues under the percentage-of-completion method as we can provide a reasonably dependable cost estimate for this project. Although we cannot precisely estimate the project final outcome due to certain uncertainties and contingencies, we do not expect a loss on this project. Accordingly, we began to recognize revenues for this project initially under the zero profit margin approach until these uncertainties and contingencies are resolved. Research and Development Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Research and development $ 171 9 % $ 157 6 % $ 147 As a percentage of total revenues 7 % 7 % 7 % The $14 million increase in research and development expenses in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increases in expenses of $6 million in Oncology Systems, $5 million in X-ray Products, $3 million in the Other category and in Corporate. The $6 million increase in Oncology Systems was mainly due to a $5 million unfavorable currency translation impact, as foreign currency denominated research and development expenses for Oncology Systems were translated into weaker U.S. dollars, as well as an increase in material costs and consulting expenses for product development. The $5 million increase in X-ray Products was attributable primarily to higher development expenses for flat panel and x-ray tube products. The $3 million increase in the Other category and in Corporate was primarily due to an increase in expenses for development projects in VPT, partially offset by a decrease in research expenses in SIP. The $10 million increase in research and development expense for fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 was driven by increased expenses of $6 million in the Other category, $2 million in Oncology Systems and $2 million in X-ray Products. The $6 million increase in the Other category was primarily due to an increase in labor expenses, material costs and consulting expenses for research and development projects in VPT and SIP. The $2 million increase in Oncology Systems was primarily attributable to an unfavorable impact when foreign-currency-denominated research and development expenses for 68 Table of Contents Oncology Systems were translated into U.S. dollars in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, when the U.S. dollar was relatively stronger against foreign currencies. The $2 million increase in X-ray Products was mainly due to higher development expenses for x-ray tube products. Selling, General and Administrative Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Selling, general and administrative $ 377 13 % $ 335 (1 %) $ 339 As a percentage of total revenues 15 % 14 % 15 % The $42 million increase in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $14 million net increase in employee-related costs that reflected increased headcount to support our growing business activities; (b) a $10 million net increase in legal expenses and contingent liabilities; (c) unfavorable foreign currency impact of $8 million as the foreign currency denominated selling, general and administrative expenses of our foreign operations were translated into weaker U.S. dollars; (d) a $5 million increase in depreciation and facility expenses primarily related to a Palo Alto, California facility that was placed in service in the first quarter of fiscal year 2011; (e) a loss of $1 million in fiscal year 2011, compared to a gain of $1 million in fiscal year 2010, for hedging balance sheet exposures from our various foreign subsidiaries and business units; (f) a $2 million increase in operating expenses associated with required information technology infrastructure improvements to support our growing business activities; and (g) a $2 million increase in bad debt expense. These increases were partially offset by: (i) income of $4 million, versus a loss of $1 million in fiscal year 2011, recognized on our equity investment in dpiX Holding and (ii) the inclusion in fiscal year 2010 of $3 million related to an October 2009 reduction in force. The $4 million decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses for fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 was primarily attributable to: (a) a $6 million decrease in expenses related to contingent liabilities in the ordinary course of business; (b) a $5 million net decrease in certain commission and product promotion expenses for our Oncology Systems products and (c) a $5 million decrease in information technology expenses primarily due to the completion of the implementation of our enterprise resource planning system in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009. These decreases were partially offset by: (i) a $4 million increase in employee-related costs primarily related to increased accrued bonuses; (ii) a $3 million expense associated with reduction in force during fiscal year 2010; (iii) a $2 million decrease in net gain from hedging balance sheet exposures from our various foreign subsidiaries and business units; (iv) a $2 million increase in insurance expenses and (v) an unfavorable impact of $2 million when the foreign currency denominated selling, general and administrative expenses of our foreign operations were translated into U.S. dollars in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009, when the U.S. dollar was relatively stronger against foreign currencies. Interest Income, Net Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Interest income (expense), net $ 0.3 120 % $ (1.3 ) (357 %) $ 0.5 For fiscal year 2011, the net increase in interest income, net, over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to lower interest expenses associated with lower levels of long-term debt compared to fiscal year 2010. In fiscal year 2010, the net increase in interest expense, net of interest income, over fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to the lower average interest rates earned on our cash and cash equivalents. Taxes on Earnings Fiscal Years 2011 Change 2010 Change 2009 Effective tax rate 30.6 % 31.0 % 1 % 30.2 % 69 Table of Contents The slight decrease in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to an increase in the benefit from discrete items in fiscal year 2011, including a greater release of liabilities for uncertain tax positions as a result of settlements with taxing authorities and the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions, partially offset by a decrease in the benefit from the foreign rate differential in fiscal year 2011. The increase in our effective tax rate in fiscal year 2010 from fiscal year 2009 was primarily due to a decrease in the benefit from discrete items in fiscal year 2010, including a smaller release of liabilities for uncertain tax positions as a result of settlements with taxing authorities and the expiration of the statutes of limitation in various jurisdictions, partially offset by an increase in the benefit from the foreign rate differential in fiscal year 2010. In general, our effective income tax rate differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because our foreign earnings are taxed at rates that are, on average, lower than the U.S. federal rate, and our domestic earnings are subject to state income taxes. Our future effective tax rate could be adversely affected by having lower earnings than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory rates and higher earnings than anticipated in countries where we have higher statutory rates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, and by changes in tax laws or interpretations of those laws. For example, recent proposals would make significant changes U.S. taxation of U.S.-based multinational corporations. Although we cannot predict whether or in what form Congress would enact any such proposals, legislation of this type could have an adverse impact on our effective tax rate. We also expect that our effective tax rate may experience increased fluctuation from period to period under the provisions in ASC 740 related to accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. See Note 14, Taxes on Earnings of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Net Earnings Per Diluted Share Fiscal Years 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Net earnings per diluted share $ 3.44 16 % $ 2.96 12 % $ 2.65 The increase in net earnings from continuing operations per diluted share in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 resulted from (i) an increase in total revenues, (ii) an improvement in gross margin, (iii) a decrease in effective tax rate and (iv) a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due mainly to the various accelerated stock repurchase programs that were executed in fiscal year 2011. The increase in earnings per diluted share in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 resulted from (i) an increase in total revenues, (ii) an improvement in gross margin, (iii) a decrease in our operating expenses as a percent of revenues and (iv) a reduction in the number of diluted shares of common stock outstanding due to stock repurchases (v) partially offset by an increase in effective tax rate. 70 Table of Contents Net Orders Total Net Orders (by segment and region) Fiscal Years (Dollars in millions) 2011 % Change 2010 % Change 2009 Oncology Systems: North America $ 1,038 5 % $ 985 4 % $ 949 Total International 1,211 11 % 1,091 16 % 942 Total Oncology Systems $ 2,249 8 % $ 2,076 10 % $ 1,891 X-ray Products: North America $ 140 22 % $ 115 3 % $ 111 Total International 343 13 % 304 33 % 228 Total X-ray Products $ 483 15 % $ 419 24 % $ 339 Other: $ 201 100 % $ 0 (100 %) $ 151 Total Net Orders $ 2,933 18 % $ 2,495 5 % $ 2,381 Oncology Systems net orders grew 8% in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010, compared to a 10% growth in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. On a constant currency basis, Oncology Systems net orders grew 6% in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010, compared to 8% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. Both the international region and North America contributed to the growth in Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. The growth in international Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increased demand for our high energy linear accelerators (including the TrueBeam system) in Europe and the rest of the world region, partially offset by a decline in demand for our high energy linear accelerators in Asia, where a supplemental spending program in Japan contributed to very high order levels in the first half of fiscal year 2010. Growth in demand for our service contracts and software upgrades in all international regions also contributed to the growth in international Oncology Systems net orders in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. When measured in constant currency, international Oncology Systems net orders grew 6% in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010. The growth in North American Oncology Systems net orders in the fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010, helped in part by strong net orders growth in Canada, was primarily due to increased demand for our high energy linear accelerators (including the TrueBeam system) and software upgrades, as well as growth in demand for our service contracts. Oncology Systems North American net orders increased 4% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009, with growth in net orders in the second half of the fiscal year more than offsetting the net order decline in the first half of the fiscal year. Increased demand for our linear accelerators, driven by the TrueBeam system, as well as increased demand for our service contracts, including software service agreements, were the primarily contributors to the Oncology Systems North American net order increase in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. Oncology Systems international net orders increased 16%, or 13% on a constant currency basis, in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily due to increased demand for our linear accelerators (including the TrueBeam system and UNIQUE) and our software products, in Europe and Asia, as well as growth in demand for our service contracts in all international regions. The overall weaker U.S. dollar against foreign currencies in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 favorably impacted Oncology Systems international net orders when measured in U.S. dollars. The trailing 12 months growth in net orders for Oncology Systems for the three immediately prior fiscal quarters ends were: a 10% total increase, with a 14% increase in North America and a 7% increase for the international region, as of July 1, 2011; a 10% total increase, with an 18% increase in North America and a 4% increase for the international region, as of April 1, 2011; a 10% total increase, with an 11% increase in North America and a 10% increase for the international region, as of December 31, 2010. Consistent with the historical pattern, we expect that Oncology Systems net orders will continue to 71 Table of Contents experience regional fluctuations. In addition, the availability of government programs that stimulate the purchase of healthcare products, such as the one in place in 2010 in Japan, could affect the demand for our products from period to period, and could therefore make it difficult to compare our financial results. X-ray Products net orders grew 15% in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010, compared to 24% in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009. In fiscal year 2011, the increase in X-ray Products net orders over fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to an increase in both North American and international net orders. Increased demand for both the x-ray tube products and the flat panel products contributed the fiscal year 2011 increase in North American X-ray Products net orders. The fiscal year 2011 increase in international X-ray Products net orders was primarily due to increased demand for x-ray tube products in Asia and Europe and increased demand for flat panel products in Europe, partially offset by a decline in net orders for flat panel products in Asia. The growth in X-ray Products net orders in fiscal year 2010 was primarily due to increased demand for flat panel products, especially our radiographic flat panels, in North America, Europe and Asia, as well as increased demand for our x-ray tubes products in Asia. Net orders in the Other category increased $201 million in fiscal year 2011 from fiscal year 2010 with VPT recording the $88 million order from CPTC for the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2011 and cancelling the $62 million proton therapy system order from Skandion Kliniken in fiscal year 2010. The increase in net orders in the Other category in fiscal year 2011 over fiscal year 2010 was also attributable to a $51 million increase in net orders in SIP primarily due to i) increased demand for Linatron x-ray accelerators for cargo screening and border protection and ii) a $21 million order from U.S. Customs and Border Protection for five of our IntellX cargo screening systems. Net orders in the Other category declined $151 million in fiscal year 2010 over fiscal year 2009 primarily because VPT booked the $62 million Skandion Kliniken order in fiscal year 2009 and then cancelled in fiscal year 2010 without booking any further orders. SIP also experienced a decrease in net orders in fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 as this business was negatively impacted by bid award challenges among competitors for a large government project in North America. Orders in any period may not be directly correlated to the level of revenues in any particular future quarter or period since the timing of revenue recognition will vary significantly based on the delivery requirements of individual orders, acceptance schedules and the readiness of individual customer sites for installation of our products. Moreover, certain types of orders, such as orders for software or newly introduced products in our Oncology Systems segment, typically take more time from order to completion of installation and acceptance than hardware or older products. Discontinued Operations In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2008, we approved a plan to sell Research Instruments to focus the business that we acquired from ACCEL exclusively on the development of our VPT business. The sale of Research Instruments was completed in the second quarter of fiscal year 2009. Research Instruments has been classified as a discontinued operation in our Consolidated Statements of Earnings for all periods presented. In fiscal year 2010, we recognized an additional loss of $7.1 million for additional cost to settle one customer contract and estimated costs to complete and settle the other customer contract, both of which were related to Research Instruments. In fiscal year 2011, the Company recognized a loss of $9.7 million for additional costs to settle the remaining customer contract. These contracts had been accounted for under the percentage-of-completion method, under which revenues and costs of sales are adjusted to reflect changes in estimated costs to complete the contracts. Including the additional loss recognized for the remaining contract, the total loss from discontinued operations for fiscal year 2011 was $9.7 million, less applicable income tax of zero. Including the additional loss recognized for the two contracts, total 72 Table of Contents losses of Research Instruments for fiscal year 2010 was $7.1 million, less applicable income tax of zero. Loss from discontinued operations for fiscal year 2009 was $12.5 million, less applicable income tax of zero. In fiscal year 2009, loss from discontinued operations included a loss of $8.1 million on the disposal of Research Instruments. Total revenues of Research Instruments, reported in discontinued operations, for fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009 were zero, $(3.6) million and $9.8 million, respectively. As of September 30, 2011, we had no remaining obligation related to Research Instruments. See Note 18, Discontinued Operations to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed discussion. Backlog Including the backlog related to the Scripps Proton Therapy Center project, our backlog at September 30, 2011 was $2.5 billion, which is an increase of 15% over the backlog at October 1, 2010. Our Oncology Systems backlog at September 30, 2011 was 11% higher than the backlog at October 1, 2010, which reflects a 21% increase for the international regions and a 4% increase for North America. Liquidity and Capital Resources Liquidity is the measurement of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including ongoing commitments to repay borrowings, acquire businesses, repurchase VMS stock, and fund continuing operations. Our sources of cash have included operations, borrowings, stock option exercises and employee stock purchases (although no purchases under our employee stock purchase plan were made during fiscal year 2010) and interest income. Our cash usage is actively managed on a daily basis to ensure the maintenance of sufficient funds to meet our needs. Because Research Instruments cash flows were not material for any period presented, we have not segregated them from continuing operations on our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and the discussion herein. Cash and Cash Equivalents The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents: (In millions) September 30, 2011 October 1, 2010 Increase Cash and cash equivalents $ 564 $ 520 $ 44 Our cash and cash equivalents increased $44 million from $520 million at October 1, 2010 to $564 million at September 30, 2011. The increase in cash and cash equivalents in fiscal year 2011 was due primarily to $472 million of cash generated from operating activities, $161 million of cash from net borrowings under our credit facilities, $138 million of cash provided by stock option exercises and $23 million of cash provided by the excess tax benefits from share-based compensation. These increases were partially offset by aggregate payments of $611 million in connection with three accelerated share repurchase agreements and for shares repurchased in the open market, $71 million of capital expenditures, $19 million used for loans to CPTC for financing the construction and startup operations of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center, $15 million for an investment in a minority equity interest in Augmenix plus an exclusive option to purchase the remaining equity interest, $15 million used to satisfy employee tax withholding requirements for employees who tendered VMS stock upon vesting of restricted common stock and restricted stock units, $8 million used for the acquisition of all of the outstanding capital stock of a supplier of devices for delivery of brachytherapy treatments and $7 million used for the repayment of bank borrowings. In addition, foreign currency exchange rate changes in fiscal year 2011 increased cash and cash equivalents by $1 million. At September 30, 2011, we had approximately $15 million or 3%, of total cash and cash equivalents in the United States. Approximately $549 million, or 97%, of total cash and cash equivalents was held abroad and could be subject to additional taxation if it were repatriated to the United States. As of September 30, 2011, most of our cash and cash equivalents that were held abroad were in U.S. dollars and were primarily held as bank deposits. Because our cash levels in the United States are relatively low, 73 Table of Contents we have used our credit facilities to meet our cash needs from time to time and expect to continue to do so in the future. Borrowings under our credit facilities may be used for working capital, capital expenditures, stock repurchases, acquisitions and other corporate purposes. We expect to either negotiate a new credit facility or extend our existing credit facility when it expires in June 2012. See further discussion of our credit facility under Cash Flows. Cash Flows Fiscal Years (In millions) 2011 2010 2009 Net cash flow provided by (used in): Operating activities $ 472 $ 460 $ 305 Investing activities (118 ) (75 ) (78 ) Financing activities (311 ) (422 ) (71 ) Effects of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 1 3 1 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 44 $ (34 ) $ 157 Our primary cash inflows and outflows for fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009 were as follows: We generated net cash from operating activities of $472 million in fiscal year 2011, compared to $460 million and $305 million in fiscal years 2010 and 2009, respectively. The $12 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2011 compared to fiscal year 2010 was driven primarily by an increase of $39 million in net earnings and an increase in non-cash items of $5 million, partially offset by a net change of $32 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items). The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2011 were accounts receivable, inventories, accounts payable and advance payments from customers as follows: Accounts receivable increased $42 million due to higher revenues and timing of collections. Inventories increased by $42 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2012 mainly in Oncology Systems and X-ray Products. Accounts payable increased by $36 million due to timing of vendor payments, increased purchases due to the overall growth of our operations and payment due for settlement of a contract. Advance payments from customers increased by $23 million due to increased orders. The $155 million increase in net cash from operating activities during fiscal year 2010 compared to fiscal year 2009 was driven primarily by a net change of $63 million in operating assets and liabilities (working capital items), an increase in non-cash items of $51 million and an increase of $41 million in net earnings. The major contributors to the net change in working capital items in fiscal year 2010 were inventories and advance payments from customers as follows: Inventories increased by $53 million due to anticipated customer demands for products in fiscal year 2011 in Oncology Systems, X-ray Products and VPT. Advance payments from customers increased by $49 million due to increased orders, as well as receipt of a down payment for a proton therapy system not yet recognized in Net Orders as of the end of the third quarter. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, timing of product shipments 74 Table of Contents and customer acceptance, accounts receivable collections, inventory management, and the timing and amount of tax and other payments. See Item 1A, Risk Factors. Investing activities used $118 million of net cash in fiscal year 2011, compared to $75 million in fiscal year 2010 and $78 million in fiscal year 2009. Cash used for purchases of property, plant and equipment was $71 million in fiscal year 2011, compared to $68 million in fiscal year 2010 and $63 million in fiscal years 2009. During fiscal year 2011, we used $19 million for loans to CPTC, paid $15 million to Augmenix for a minority equity interest plus an exclusive option to purchase the remaining equity interest of Augmenix and paid cash of $8 million for the acquisition of all of the outstanding capital stock of a supplier of devices for delivery of brachytherapy treatment. In fiscal year 2009, we made an additional net loan advance of $6 million to dpiX. Financing activities used net cash of $311 million in fiscal year 2011, compared to $422 million in fiscal year 2010 and $71 million in fiscal year 2009. In fiscal year 2011, we paid an aggregate of $611 million in connection with three accelerated share repurchase agreements and for shares repurchased in the open market. In fiscal year 2010, we paid an aggregate of $520 million in connection with an accelerated share repurchase agreement and for shares repurchased in the open market. In fiscal year 2009, we used $101 million for the repurchases of VMS common stock. In fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009, we used $7 million, $9 million and $8 million, respectively, to repay bank borrowings. Cash used for financing activities in fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009 also includes $15 million, $8 million and $3 million (the value of withheld shares), respectively, for tendered VMS common stock to satisfy employee tax withholding requirements upon vesting of restricted common stock and restricted stock units. These uses were partially offset by cash proceeds from employee stock option exercises and employee stock purchases of $138 million, $84 million and $28 million in fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009 respectively, as well as cash provided by excess tax benefits from share-based compensation of $23 million in fiscal year 2011, $15 million in fiscal year 2010 and $10 million in fiscal year 2009. In fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009, we also borrowed a net amount of $161 million, $16 million and $4 million, respectively, from our credit facilities. We expect our capital expenditures, which typically represent construction and/or purchases of facilities, manufacturing equipment, office equipment and furniture and fixtures, as well as capitalized costs related to the implementation of software applications, will be approximately 3.0% of revenues in fiscal year 2012. As further described in Note 16, Variable Interest Entity of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we are participating in a $165 million loan facility to CPTC, under which we have committed to provide $115 million to finance the construction and start-up operations of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center. As of September 30, 2011, we have loaned $19.2 million to CPTC and we expect the remaining $96.1 million will continued to be drawn down by CPTC through 2014. We expect to use our cash abroad to meet funding requirements under this loan facility. We may sell all or a portion of our participation in this loan facility before the end of the drawdown period in 2014. Upon the sale of all or a portion of this loan facility, we will not be required to make further loan advances for the portion of the facility that is sold. We have a $300 million credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. ( BofA ), which was amended and restated in November 2008 and then again amended in July 2009, August 2010 and August 2011. This credit facility, as amended to date, is referred to as the Amended BofA Credit Facility. A portion of the Amended BofA Credit Facility is collateralized with a pledge of stock of certain of VMS present and future subsidiaries that are deemed to be material subsidiaries. As of September 30, 2011, VMS has pledged to BofA 65% of the voting shares that it holds in Varian Medical Systems Nederland B.V., a wholly-owned subsidiary. Under the Amended BofA Credit Facility, VMS Japanese subsidiary ( VMS KK ) can borrow up to 2.7 billion Japanese Yen as part of the overall credit facility (the Japanese Line of Credit ). At any time amounts are outstanding under the Japanese Line of Credit, the full borrowing capacity is deemed committed for use in Japan and therefore the maximum amount VMS can otherwise 75 Table of Contents borrow under the Amended BofA Credit Facility will be reduced by $35 million to $265 million. VMS guarantees the payment of the outstanding balance under the Japanese Line of Credit. The Amended BofA Credit Facility may be used for: working capital; capital expenditures; permitted acquisitions; and other lawful corporate purposes. Borrowings under the Japanese Line of Credit can be used by VMS KK for refinancing certain intercompany debts, working capital, capital expenditures and other lawful corporate purposes. Borrowings under the Amended BofA Credit Facility (outside of the Japanese Line of Credit) accrue interest either: (i) based on LIBOR plus a margin of 0.75% to 1.25% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA ) or (ii) based upon a base rate of either the federal funds rate plus 0.5% or BofA announced prime rate, whichever is greater, minus a margin of 0.5% to 0% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA (depending upon our instructions to BofA). We may select borrowing periods of one, two, three or six months for advances based on the LIBOR rate. Interest rates on advances based on the base rate are adjustable daily. Under the Amended BofA Credit Facility, we pay commitment fees at an annual rate of 0.2% to 0.3% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA. Borrowings under the Japanese Line of Credit accrue interest at the basic loan rate announced by the Bank of Japan plus a margin of 1.25% to 1.50% based on a leverage ratio involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA. The Amended BofA Credit Facility, as well as the Japanese Line of Credit, will expire on June 30, 2012, if not extended by mutual agreement of VMS and BofA. We expect to either negotiate a new credit facility or extend our existing credit facility when it expires. As of September 30, 2011, $181 million was outstanding under the Amended BofA Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 1.05% and none of which was outstanding under the Japanese Line of Credit. The Amended BofA Credit Facility contains customary affirmative and negative covenants for facilities of this type. We have also agreed to maintain certain financial covenants relating to: (i) leverage ratios involving funded indebtedness and EBITDA; (ii) liquidity; and (iii) consolidated assets. As of September 30, 2011, we were in compliance with all covenants. See also Note 8 Credit Facilities to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion regarding the Amended BofA Credit Facility. The following table provides additional information regarding our short-term borrowings: Fourth Quarter of Fiscal Year 2011 Fiscal Year (Dollars in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Amount outstanding (at end of period) $ 181 $ 181 $ 20 $ 4 Weighted average interest rate (at end of period) 1.05 % 1.05 % 1.51 % 1.55 % Average amount outstanding (during period) 140 60 18 13 Weighted average interest rate (during period) 2.02 % 2.07 % 1.52 % 1.92 % Maximum month-end amount outstanding during period $ 239 $ 239 $ 177 $ 28 Our liquidity is affected by many factors, some of which result from the normal ongoing operations of our business and some of which arise from uncertainties and conditions in the United States and global economies. Although our cash requirements will fluctuate as a result of the shifting influences of these factors, we believe that existing cash and cash equivalents and cash to be generated from operations and current or future credit facilities will be sufficient to satisfy anticipated commitments for capital expenditures and other cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. We currently anticipate that we will continue to utilize our available liquidity and cash flows from operations, as well as borrowed funds, to make strategic acquisitions, invest in the growth of our business, invest in advancing our systems and processes, repurchase VMS common stock and fund our loan commitment to CPTC. Total debt as a percentage of total capital increased to 13.7% at September 30, 2011 from 3.3% at October 1, 2010 primarily due to increased borrowings under our credit facility. The ratio of current assets to current liabilities decreased to 1.65 to 1 at September 30, 2011 from 1.86 to 1 at October 1, 2010. 76 Table of Contents Days Sales Outstanding Trade accounts receivable DSO were 80 days at September 30, 2011 compared to 82 days at October 1, 2010 Our accounts receivable and DSO are impacted by a number of factors, including primarily: the timing of product shipments, collections performance, payment terms, and the mix of revenues from different regions. As of September 30, 2011, less than 1% of our accounts receivable balance was related to customer contracts with extended payment terms of more than one year. Stock Repurchase Program During fiscal year 2011, 2010 and 2009, we repurchased 9,028,033 shares, 9,788,249 shares and 2,248,000 shares, respectively, of VMS common stock under various authorizations by VMS Board of Directors. The repurchased shares include shares of VMS common stock repurchased under various accelerated share repurchase agreements. Aggregate cash payments in connection with the various accelerated share repurchase agreements (as further discussed below) and for shares repurchased in the open market totaled $611 million, $520 million and $101 million in fiscal years 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. All shares that were repurchased have been retired. In March 2011, we settled an accelerated share repurchase agreement executed on August 24, 2010 with BofA (the August 2010 Repurchase Agreement ). Pursuant to the August 2010 Repurchase Agreement, we initially paid to BofA $225 million and BofA delivered 3,888,249 shares of VMS common stock, representing approximately 90% of the shares expected to be repurchased. Under the terms of the August 2010 Repurchase Agreement, the specific number of shares that we ultimately repurchased was to be based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, less a discount, such that we might be entitled to receive additional shares of VMS common stock from BofA or we might be required to deliver VMS shares or, at our option, make a cash payment to BofA. The repurchase period ended on February 23, 2011 and we made a cash payment of $26.1 million to settle this contract without receiving or delivering additional VMS shares in March 2011. On February 23, 2011, we entered into another accelerated share repurchase agreement with BofA (the February 2011 Repurchase Agreement ). Pursuant to the February 2011 Repurchase Agreement, we paid to BofA $280 million and BofA delivered 3,547,474 shares of VMS common stock, representing approximately 85% of the shares expected to be repurchased. Under the terms of the February 2011 Repurchase Agreement, the specific number of shares that we ultimately repurchased was to be based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, less a discount. In June 2011, BofA accelerated the end of the repurchase period and we received additional 630,921 shares of VMS common stock, with a then market value of approximately $41.3 million, upon the settlement of the February 2011 Repurchase Agreement. On August 25, 2011, we entered into another accelerated share repurchase agreement with BofA (the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement ). Pursuant to the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement, the Company paid to BofA $250 million and BofA delivered 3,849,638 shares of VMS common stock, representing approximately 85% of the shares expected to be repurchased. Under the terms of the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement, the specific number of shares that the Company ultimately will repurchase is based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, less a discount. The repurchase period will end on February 21, 2012, however beginning on November 23, 2011 BofA has the right to accelerate the end of the repurchase period. The August 2011 Repurchase Agreement provides that at the completion of the repurchase period, depending on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, the Company may be entitled to receive additional shares of VMS common stock from BofA or the Company may be required to deliver VMS shares or, at its option, make a cash payment to BofA. In February 2011, the VMS Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of 12 million shares of VMS common stock through the end of fiscal year 2012. As of September 30, 2011, 7,433,718 shares of VMS common stock remained available for repurchase under this repurchase authorization. Shares may be 77 Table of Contents repurchased in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions (including accelerated share repurchases) or under Rule 10b5-1 share repurchase plans, and may be made from time to time or in one or more blocks. Contractual Obligations The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of September 30, 2011 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Payments Due By Period (In millions) Fiscal Year 2012 Fiscal Years 2013 - 2014 Fiscal Years 2015 - 2016 Beyond Total Short-term borrowings(1) $ 181.4 $ $ $ $ 181.4 Long term debt(2) 9.9 6.2 16.1 Interest obligation on long term debt 0.8 0.7 1.5 Loan facility to CPTC(3) 19.2 76.9 96.1 Acquisition of Calpyso(4) 10.0 10.0 Operating leases(5) 15.2 20.1 8.8 3.9 48.0 Purchase commitments(6) 46.0 21.0 67.0 Defined benefit pension plans(7) 9.5 9.5 Post-retirement benefit plan(8) 0.5 1.0 1.1 2.4 5.0 Total(9) $ 292.5 $ 125.9 $ 9.9 $ 6.3 $ 434.6 (1) As of September 30, 2011, short-term borrowings in this amount were outstanding under the Amended BofA Credit Facility with a weighted average interest rate of 1.05%. See a detailed discussion of our credit facilities in Note 8, Credit Facilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Long-term debt, including current maturities, decreased $7.3 million from October 1, 2010 due to principal repayments. The fixed interest rates on the outstanding debt on this date ranged from 6.70% to 7.34% with a weighted average interest rate of 6.84%. As of September 30, 2011, land and buildings with a carrying amount of $7.8 million were pledged as collateral against certain loans we assumed related to purchases of land and buildings in Las Vegas. For further discussion regarding long-term debt, see Note 7, Long-term Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (3) As further described in Note 16, Variable Interest Entity of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we participate, through our Swiss subsidiary, in a $165 million loan facility to CPTC, under which we committed to loan up to $115 million, to finance the construction and startup operations of the Scripps Proton Therapy Center. As of September 30, 2011, we had loaned $19 million to CPTC and we expect CPTC to continue to draw down this facility through the construction and initial operation period. Amounts presented represent the estimated timing of loan drawdowns as of September 30, 2011, which may change due to changes in construction progress and other factors. We expect to use our cash abroad to meet funding requirements under this loan facility. We may sell all or a portion of our participation in this loan facility before the end of the drawdown period in 2014. Upon the sale of all or a portion of this facility, we will not be required to make further loan advances for the portion of the facility that is sold. (4) In October 2011, we acquired Calypso, a privately-held supplier of specialized products and software for real-time tumor tracking and motion management during radiosurgery and radiotherapy, for approximately $10 million, which is reflected as a payment obligation under Fiscal Year 2012 in the above table. We agreed to make additional contingent considerations upon achievement of certain milestones in fiscal years 2012, 2013 and 2014, which are not reflected in the above table. 78 Table of Contents (5) Operating leases include future minimum lease payments under all our noncancelable operating leases as of September 30, 2011. (6) As further described in Note 10, Commitments and Contingencies , under a commercial agreement, we agreed to make guaranteed prepayments to a third party for orders of their products that the Company will resell to end user customers. (7) As further described in Note 11, Retirement Plans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 30, 2011, our defined benefit pension plans were underfunded by $35 million. Due to the impact of future plan asset performance, changes in interest rates and other economic and demographic assumptions the potential for changes in legislation in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund its defined benefit pension plans beyond the next fiscal year. (8) As further described in Note 11, Retirement Plans of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 30, 2011, our post-retirement benefit plan had an estimated total benefit obligation of $5.9 million. Due to changes in health care cost trend rates, mortality rates of plan participants, and the potential for us to change the type of health care plans offered or the level of contributions from plan participants, we are not able to reasonably estimate the timing and amount of contributions to fund our post-retirement benefit plan beyond fiscal year 2021. (9) The following items are not included in the table above: Long-term income taxes payable includes the liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, and may also include other long-term tax liabilities. As of September 30, 2011, our liability for uncertain tax positions was $44.8 million and we do not anticipate payment of these amounts in the next 12 months. We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of future payments related to uncertain tax positions; therefore, the liability for uncertain tax positions has been excluded from the table above. See a detailed discussion in Note 14, Taxes on Earnings of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In February 2009, we agreed to loan an aggregate amount of $14 million to dpiX. As of September 30, 2011, we had loaned $8.8 million to dpiX and had outstanding commitment to loan an additional $5.2 million under this agreement. We do not know the timing of the funding of the remaining $5.2 million. See detailed discussion in Note 6, Related Party Transactions of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As further described in Note 10, Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as of September 30, 2011, we accrued $12.7 million for environmental remediation liabilities. The amount accrued represents estimates of anticipated future costs and the timing and amount of actual future environmental remediation costs may vary as the scope of our obligations become more clearly defined. As discussed above under Share Repurchase Program, we entered into the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement with BofA to repurchase $250 million of VMS common stock on August 25, 2011. As of September 30, 2011, we received 3,849,638 shares of VMS common stock under the August 2011 Repurchase Agreement. The specific number of shares that we ultimately will repurchase under the Repurchase Agreement will be based on the volume weighted average share price of VMS common stock during the repurchase period, which will end between November 23, 2011 and February 21, 2012. We may be entitled to receive additional shares of VMS common stock from BofA or we may be required, at its option, to deliver VMS shares or make a cash payment to BofA. 79 Table of Contents Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities For a discussion of environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 10 , Commitments and Contingencies Environmental Remediation Liabilities of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference. Acquisition-Related Commitments/Obligations When we acquired ACCEL in January 2007, ACCEL was involved in a contract-related lawsuit, which we settled by agreeing to perform commissioning services for a proton therapy system for a fixed price contract (the Fixed Price Contract ). As of October 2, 2009, we had a loss accrual of 7.6 million related to the Fixed Price Contract. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2010, we entered into a new contract (the New Contract ) to perform certain services for a fixed price. The balance of the loss accrual related to this contingency (the New Contract) was 1.0 million as of September 30, 2011. If the actual costs related to the contingency exceed the estimated amount or if the estimated loss increases, the variances will be recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Earnings in the periods in which these variances arise. Other Matters From time to time, we are a party to or otherwise involved in legal proceedings, claims and government inspections or investigations and other legal matters both in and outside the United States, arising in the ordinary course of our business or otherwise. Such matters are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable with assurance. We accrue amounts, to the extent they can be reasonably estimated, that we believe are adequate to address any liabilities related to legal proceedings and other loss contingencies that we believe will result in a probable loss. While the outcome of these matters is currently not determinable, we do not expect that the ultimate costs to resolve these matters will have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. However, it is possible that a legal or other proceeding brought against us could have an impact of this nature. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements In conjunction with the sale of our products in the ordinary course of business, we provide standard indemnification of business partners and customers for losses suffered or incurred for property damages, death and injury and for patent, copyright or any other intellectual property infringement claims by any third parties with respect to our products. The terms of these indemnification arrangements are generally perpetual. Except for losses related to property damages, the maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is unlimited. As of September 30, 2011, we have not incurred any significant costs since the Spin-offs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification arrangements. As a result, we believe the estimated fair value of these arrangements is minimal. We have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and officers and certain of our employees that serve as officers or directors of our foreign subsidiaries that may require us to indemnify our directors and officers and those certain employees against liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors or officers, and to advance their expenses incurred as a result of any legal proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In September 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) amended ASC 350, Intangibles Goodwill and Other. This amendment is intended to simplify how an entity tests goodwill for impairment and will allow an entity to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is 80 Table of Contents necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill impairment test. An entity no longer will be required to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit unless the entity determines, based on a qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the reporting unit fair value is less than its carrying amount. The amendment will be effective for us beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2013 and early adoption is permitted. We are currently assessing the potential impact of this amendment on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. In June 2011, the FASB amended ASC 220, Presentation of Comprehensive Income. This amendment will require companies to present the components of net income and other comprehensive income either as one continuous statement or as two consecutive statements. It eliminates the option to present components of other comprehensive income as part of the statement of changes in stockholders equity. The amended guidance, which must be applied retroactively, will be effective for us in the first quarter of fiscal year 2013. The adoption of this amendment concerns disclosure only and we do not expect it to have an impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows. In May 2011, the FASB amended ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement. This amendment is intended to result in convergence between GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards requirements for measurement of and disclosures about fair value. This guidance clarifies the application of existing fair value measurements and disclosures, and changes certain principles or requirements for fair value measurements and disclosures. The amendment will be effective for us in the second quarter of fiscal year 2012. We are currently assessing the potential impact, if any, this amendment may have on our consolidated financial position, results of operations and cash flows. 
