CIK: 27904
Company Name: DELTA AIR LINES INC DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-03-27


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview On September 14, 2005 (the Petition Date ), we and substantially all of our subsidiaries (collectively, the Debtors ) filed voluntary petitions for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code (the Bankruptcy Code ), in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York (the Bankruptcy Court ). The reorganization cases are being jointly administered under the caption, In re Delta Air Lines, Inc., et al., Case No. 05 -17923-ASH. Our Chapter 11 filing followed an extended effort by us to restructure our business to strengthen our competitive and financial position. In 2004, we announced our transformation plan, which is intended to provide us with approximately $5 billion in annual financial benefits by the end of 2006, as compared to 2002. While we were, and continue to be, on schedule to achieve the targeted benefits, we experienced a liquidity shortfall in 2005 due to historically high aircraft fuel prices and other cost pressures, continued low passenger mile yields and cash holdbacks instituted for the first time by our credit card processors. As a result, we determined that we could not continue to operate without the protections provided by Chapter 11. In connection with our Chapter 11 proceedings, we obtained $2.2 billion in post-petition financing, which provided net proceeds of $1.2 billion after the required repayment of certain pre-petition facilities. For further information about our Chapter 11 proceedings and our post-petition financing, see Notes 1 and 8, respectively, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. For the year ended December 31, 2005, we recorded a consolidated net loss of $3.8 billion. These results include $1.8 billion in aggregate charges for reorganization items and pension and restructuring charges, net. See Notes 1 and 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about these charges. Our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were $2.0 billion at December 31, 2005, compared to $1.8 billion at December 31, 2004. The benefits we realized under our transformation initiatives during 2005 were outpaced and masked by historically high aircraft fuel prices, which continue to have a material adverse effect on our financial performance. During 2005, our aircraft fuel expense increased 46%, or $1.3 billion, compared to 2004. In addition, we continue to operate in a highly competitive pricing environment, which limits our ability to increase fares to offset high fuel costs and has had a significant negative impact on our financial results. Although revenue passenger miles ( RPMs ), or traffic, and passenger revenue rose 6% in 2005 compared to 2004, passenger mile yield remained unchanged from the depressed level of the prior year. Chapter 11 Process The Debtors are operating as debtors-in -possession under the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Bankruptcy Code. In general, as debtors-in -possession, the Debtors are authorized under Chapter 11 to continue to operate as an ongoing business, but may not engage in transactions outside the ordinary course of business without the prior approval of the Bankruptcy Court. The Bankruptcy Court has approved various motions that facilitate our continuation of normal operations. The Bankruptcy Court orders authorize us, among other things, in our discretion to: (1) provide employee wages, healthcare coverage, vacation, sick leave and similar benefits without interruption; (2) honor obligations arising prior to the Petition Date ( pre-petition obligations ) to customers and continue customer service programs, including Delta SkyMiles frequent flyer program; (3) pay for fuel under existing fuel supply contracts and honor existing fuel supply, distribution and storage agreements; (4) honor pre-petition obligations related to our interline, clearinghouse, code sharing and other similar agreements; (5) pay pre-petition obligations to foreign vendors, foreign service providers and foreign governments; and (6) continue maintenance of existing bank accounts and existing cash management systems. Shortly after the Petition Date, the Debtors began notifying all known current or potential creditors of the Chapter 11 filing. Subject to certain exceptions under the Bankruptcy Code, the Debtors Chapter 11 filing automatically enjoined, or stayed, the continuation of any judicial or administrative proceedings or other actions against the Debtors or their property to recover on, collect or secure a claim arising prior to the 25 Table of Contents Petition Date. Thus, for example, most creditor actions to obtain possession of property from the Debtors, or to create, perfect or enforce any lien against the property of the Debtors, or to collect on monies owed or otherwise exercise rights or remedies with respect to a pre-petition claim are enjoined unless and until the Bankruptcy Court lifts the automatic stay. Vendors are being paid for goods furnished and services provided after the Petition Date in the ordinary course of business. As required by the Bankruptcy Code, the United States Trustee for the Southern District of New York appointed an official committee of unsecured creditors (the Creditors Committee ). The Creditors Committee and its legal representatives have a right to be heard on all matters that come before the Bankruptcy Court with respect to the Debtors. The Creditors Committee has been generally supportive of the Debtors positions on various matters; however, there can be no assurance that the Creditors Committee will support the Debtors positions on matters to be presented to the Bankruptcy Court in the future or on the Debtors plan of reorganization, once proposed. Disagreements between the Debtors and the Creditors Committee could protract the Chapter 11 proceedings, negatively impact the Debtors ability to operate and delay the Debtors emergence from the Chapter 11 proceedings. Under Section 365 and other relevant sections of the Bankruptcy Code, we may assume, assume and assign, or reject certain executory contracts and unexpired leases, including, without limitation, leases of real property, aircraft and aircraft engines, subject to the approval of the Bankruptcy Court and certain other conditions. Any description of an executory contract or unexpired lease in this Form 10-K, including where applicable our express termination rights or a quantification of our obligations, must be read in conjunction with, and is qualified by, any overriding rejection rights we have under Section 365 of the Bankruptcy Code. See Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In order to successfully exit Chapter 11, the Debtors will need to propose, and obtain confirmation by the Bankruptcy Court of, a plan of reorganization that satisfies the requirements of the Bankruptcy Code. A plan of reorganization would, among other things, resolve the Debtors pre-petition obligations, set forth the revised capital structure of the newly reorganized entity and provide for corporate governance subsequent to exit from bankruptcy. The Debtors have the exclusive right for 120 days after the Petition Date to file a plan of reorganization and, if we do so, 60 additional days to obtain necessary acceptances of our plan. The Bankruptcy Court has extended these periods until July 11, 2006 and September 9, 2006, respectively, and these periods may be extended further by the Bankruptcy Court for cause. If the Debtors exclusivity period lapses, any party in interest may file a plan of reorganization for any of the Debtors. In addition to being voted on by holders of impaired claims and equity interests, a plan of reorganization must satisfy certain requirements of the Bankruptcy Code and must be approved, or confirmed, by the Bankruptcy Court in order to become effective. A plan of reorganization has been accepted by holders of claims against and equity interests in the Debtors if (1) at least one-half in number and two-thirds in dollar amount of claims actually voting in each impaired class of claims have voted to accept the plan and (2) at least two-thirds in amount of equity interests actually voting in each impaired class of equity interests has voted to accept the plan. Under certain circumstances set forth in Section 1129(b) of the Bankruptcy Code, the Bankruptcy Court may confirm a plan even if such plan has not been accepted by all impaired classes of claims and equity interests. A class of claims or equity interests that does not receive or retain any property under the plan on account of such claims or interests is deemed to have voted to reject the plan. The precise requirements and evidentiary showing for confirming a plan notwithstanding its rejection by one or more impaired classes of claims or equity interests depends upon a number of factors, including the status and seniority of the claims or equity interests in the rejecting class (i.e., secured claims or unsecured claims, subordinated or senior claims, preferred or common stock). Generally, with respect to common stock interests, a plan may be crammed down even if the shareowners receive no recovery if the proponent of the plan demonstrates that (1) no class junior to the common stock is receiving or retaining property under the plan and (2) no class of claims or interests senior to the common stock is being paid more than in full. The timing of filing a plan of reorganization by us will depend on the timing and outcome of numerous other ongoing matters in the Chapter 11 proceedings. Although we expect to file a plan of reorganization that provides for our emergence from bankruptcy as a going concern, there can be no assurance at this time that a 26 Table of Contents plan of reorganization will be confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court, or that any such plan will be implemented successfully. The Debtors will file with the Bankruptcy Court schedules and statements of financial affairs setting forth, among other things, the assets and liabilities of the Debtors, subject to the assumptions filed in connection therewith. All of the schedules will be subject to further amendment or modification. Differences between amounts scheduled by the Debtors and claims by creditors will be investigated and resolved in connection with the claims resolution process. In light of the expected number of creditors of the Debtors, the claims resolution process may take considerable time to complete. Accordingly, the ultimate number and amount of allowed claims is not presently known, nor can the ultimate recovery with respect to allowed claims be presently ascertained. Our Business Plan Our business plan is intended to make Delta a simpler, more efficient and customer focused airline with an improved financial condition. As part of our Chapter 11 reorganization, we are seeking $3 billion in annual financial benefits (revenue enhancements and cost reductions) by the end of 2007 from revenue and network improvements; savings to be achieved through the Chapter 11 restructuring process; and reduced Mainline employee cost. This amount is in addition to the $5 billion in annual financial benefits we are on schedule to achieve by the end of 2006, as compared to 2002, under the transformation plan we announced in 2004. Components of the $3 billion in annual financial benefits we are seeking by the end of 2007 include: Revenue and Network Productivity Improvements. Our business plan targets $1.1 billion in benefits to be realized annually through revenue and network productivity improvements. Key initiatives include: achieving financial benefits from the simplification of our aircraft fleet, including retiring four fleet types by the end of 2006, two of which we retired in January 2006; right-sizing capacity to better meet customer demand, including utilizing smaller aircraft in domestic operations, resulting in a reduction of domestic Mainline capacity by 15-20% as compared to 2005 due to over-capacity in the U.S. market; growing international presence by shifting wide-body aircraft from domestic to international operations, resulting in an increase of approximately 20% in international capacity in 2006 as compared to 2005 to pursue routes with greater profit potential; and increasing point-to -point flying and right-sizing and simplifying our domestic hubs to achieve a greater local traffic mix. We are strengthening our domestic hubs and growing our international operations. As of December 1, 2005, we reduced capacity by approximately 25% at Cincinnati, with the intention of increasing the percentage of local Cincinnati traffic from approximately 35% to nearly 50%. To respond to increased demand for service to emerging business and leisure destinations, we are increasing international capacity by approximately 25% by the summer of 2006 in comparison to our schedule in the summer of 2005, with a focus on routes to Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean. For example, we and, with respect to certain routes, our contract carriers have added or announced plans to add more than 50 new international routes in the last year, including over 20 since November 2005. In 2006, service will be added to new destinations in countries such as Denmark, Ecuador, Germany, Honduras, Hungary, Israel, Jamaica, Mexico, Ukraine, and United Kingdom, some of which service is subject to government approval. As part of our revenue and network productivity improvements, we announced that Song service will merge into Delta in May 2006. We plan to add 26 First Class seats to each of the 48 B757-200 aircraft now operating in Song service; convert an additional 50 or more Mainline aircraft to two-class service; and expand personal digital in-flight entertainment system to the converted aircraft. Our plan is to grow this service, referred to as Song service, to all transcontinental Mainline routes beginning in the fall of 2006 and all routes over 1,750 miles by the end of 2007. In-Court Restructuring. Our business plan includes a target of $970 million of cost reductions to be realized annually through in-court restructuring initiatives such as debt relief, lease and facility savings, 27 Table of Contents aircraft lease rejections and negotiations, restructuring of vendor contracts and changes to retiree medical benefits. Competitive Employment Costs. Our business plan targeted $930 million of benefits to be realized annually through reduced employment costs. These reductions are planned to result from changes to pay and benefits for our employees, as well as employee productivity improvements, outsourcing and overhead reductions. The total targeted benefit represents annual, ongoing labor cost reductions of $605 million from our nonpilot workforce including management. Specific components of nonpilot employment changes include: Reducing pay at all levels of management effective as of November 1, 2005. This includes a 25% pay reduction for our Chief Executive Officer; a 15% reduction for other officers; and a 9% reduction for supervisory and other administrative personnel. Reducing pay scales by 7-10% for most front-line employees, excluding those earning less than $25,000 annually. These changes were also effective as of November 1, 2005. Changes to employee benefit programs, including freezing future pension accruals, increased cost sharing for healthcare and reductions in paid time off programs. Defined benefit pension accruals were frozen effective December 31, 2005 for nonpilot employees; other changes will be implemented in the first half of 2006. Enhancing profit-sharing to allow all our employees to share in future success from the first dollar of profitability. As previously announced, our business plan contemplates that approximately 7,000 9,000 jobs will be eliminated system-wide by the end of 2007. A portion of these reductions contributes to our targeted reduction in employment costs and the remainder contributes to our targeted benefits from revenue and network productivity improvements. We plan to achieve these reductions through previously announced changes to strengthen our route network and right-size our Cincinnati hub, increased outsourcing and reduced overhead. The final number of job reductions will depend in part upon changes to our fleet. We originally targeted ongoing, annual labor cost reductions of $325 million from our pilot workforce, but have reduced the requested amount to $305 million in connection with our effort to reach a consensual agreement with ALPA. See Key Chapter 11 Efforts below regarding the status of our pilot labor cost reduction initiatives. Key Chapter 11 Efforts The following generally describes our efforts in the Chapter 11 proceedings in the areas of liquidity, pilot labor cost reductions, restructurings of aircraft fleet, and real estate and special facility bond restructurings. See Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the Chapter 11 reorganization process. Liquidity. On September 16, 2005, we entered into a Secured Super-Priority Debtor-in -Possession Credit Agreement which, as amended ( DIP Credit Facility ), permits us to borrow up to $1.9 billion from a syndicate of lenders arranged by General Electric Capital Corporation ( GECC ) and Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc. ( Morgan Stanley ), for which GECC acts as administrative agent. On the same date, we entered into an agreement (the Modification Agreement ) with American Express Travel Related Services Company ( Amex ) and American Express Bank, F.S.B. pursuant to which we modified certain existing agreements with Amex, including two agreements under which we had previously borrowed $500 million from Amex (collectively, the Amex Pre-Petition Facility ). We used a portion of the proceeds of our borrowings under the DIP Credit Facility to (1) repay in full the $480 million principal amount outstanding under our pre-petition credit facility for which GECC was agent ( GE Pre-Petition Facility ); (2) repay in full the $500 million principal amount outstanding under our Amex Pre-Petition Facility; and (3) prepay $50 million of the $350 million principal amount that we borrowed from Amex pursuant to the terms of the Amex Pre-Petition Facility as modified by the Modification Agreement (collectively, the Amex Post-Petition Facility ). The Bankruptcy Court approved our entering into the DIP Credit Facility and the Modification Agreement. 28 Table of Contents On March 27, 2006 we executed an amended and restated credit agreement with a syndicate of lenders led by GECC and Morgan Stanley that replaced the DIP Credit facility in its entirety. In September 2005, we entered into an amendment to our Visa/MasterCard credit card processing agreement to extend its term to October 2007. On January 26, 2006, with the authorization from the Bankruptcy Court, we entered into a letter of credit facility with Merrill Lynch. Under the Letter of Credit Reimbursement Agreement, Merrill Lynch issued a $300 million irrevocable standby letter of credit ( Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit ) for the benefit of our Visa/MasterCard credit card processor ( Processor ). As contemplated in our Visa/MasterCard credit card processing agreement ( Processing Agreement ), we are providing the Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit as a substitution for a portion of the cash reserve that the Processor maintains. Under the Processing Agreement, the Processor is permitted to maintain a reserve from our receivables that is equal to the Processor potential liability for tickets purchased with Visa or MasterCard that have not yet been used for travel (the unflown ticket liability ). We estimate that the reserve, which adjusts daily, will range between $450 million and $850 million during the term of the Processing Agreement. The Processing Agreement allows us to substitute the Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit for a portion of the cash reserve equal to the lesser of $300 million and 45% of the unflown ticket liability. The Merrill Lynch letter of credit will expire in January 2008. For further information about these liquidity initiatives, see Financial Condition and Liquidity in this Item 7 and Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In December 2005, the Bankruptcy Court authorized us to enter into fuel hedging contracts for up to 30% of our monthly estimated fuel consumption, with hedging allowed in excess of that level if we obtained approval of the Creditors Committee or the Bankruptcy Court. In February 2006, we received approval from the Creditors Committee to hedge up to 50% of our estimated 2006 aggregate fuel consumption, with no single month exceeding 80% of our estimated fuel consumption. We also agreed we would not enter into any fuel hedging contracts that extend beyond December 31, 2006 without additional approval from the Creditors Committee or the Bankruptcy Court. See Notes 5 and 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about fuel hedging. Pilot Labor Cost Reductions. We have been in and continue to be in negotiations with ALPA to reduce our pilot labor costs as required under our business plan. Because we were not able to reach a consensual agreement with ALPA, on November 1, 2005, we filed a motion with the Bankruptcy Court under Section 1113 of the Bankruptcy Code to reject our collective bargaining agreement with ALPA. In December 2005, we reached an interim agreement with ALPA, which was approved by the Bankruptcy Court and ratified by Delta pilots. The interim agreement provides for, among other things, a reduction in (1) hourly pilot wage rates of 14% and (2) other pilot pay and cost items equivalent to approximately an additional 1% hourly wage reduction. These reductions became effective December 15, 2005, and remain in effect until the earlier of (1) our entering into a comprehensive agreement with ALPA on changes to the pilot collective bargaining agreement; or (2) the time that the neutral panel described below issues its final order as to whether Delta is authorized to reject the pilot collective bargaining agreement under the legal standards of Section 1113 of the Bankruptcy Code. The interim agreement provides that Delta and ALPA will seek to negotiate a tentative comprehensive agreement, and establishes the following time limits ( March 2006 time limits ) for reaching that agreement: (1) March 1, 2006, for the parties negotiating committees to reach a tentative agreement; (2) March 8, 2006, for approval by the ALPA Master Executive Council; and (3) March 22, 2006, for pilot ratification. Because the first of the March 2006 time limits was not met, pursuant to our interim agreement with ALPA, the matter at issue in Delta Section 1113 motion has been submitted to a mutually agreed upon, neutral panel of three experts in airline labor matters for a binding decision on that issue. The interim agreement provides that the panel decision must be issued no later than 45 days after the failure to meet the applicable March 2006 time limit, which is April 15, 2006. We cannot predict the outcome of the neutral panel decision as to whether or not we would be authorized to reject the collective bargaining agreement. If the neutral panel determines that we are authorized to reject the collective bargaining agreement, ALPA has threatened to initiate a strike, which we believe should not be permitted under the Railway Labor 29 Table of Contents Act. However, we cannot predict the outcome of any effort we might undertake to obtain court relief to prevent or stop a strike or other forms of work disruption. A strike or other form of significant work disruption by ALPA would likely have a material negative impact on our ability to continue operating our business and would trigger an event of default under our post-petition financing agreements if all or substantially all of our flight and other operations are suspended for longer than two days. As a result, we could be required to cease operations permanently. Restructuring of Aircraft Fleet. A substantial portion of the cost savings from our Chapter 11 proceedings targeted in our business plan arises from reductions in aircraft costs and fleet simplification. We are negotiating with many of our aircraft lessors and lenders to restructure existing financings to reduce aircraft lease and ownership costs to better reflect current market rates. In February 2006, the Bankruptcy Court approved a term sheet we negotiated with a group of creditors with respect to financing transactions for 88 Mainline aircraft that would result in approximately $200 million in annual savings for us over the next several years compared with our existing rent and debt service obligations for those aircraft; these transactions are subject to completion of definitive documentation and certain other conditions. We have also reached agreements in principle to restructure a substantial number of other Mainline aircraft and some regional jet aircraft. We are in negotiations to restructure a substantial number of other regional jet aircraft. These transactions will be subject to Bankruptcy Court approval. In addition, we must enter into definitive documentation for all agreements in principle that we reach, and satisfy certain conditions. To the extent that we are unable to restructure additional financings or enter into definitive documentation, lessors or lenders may seek to repossess aircraft. The loss of a significant number of aircraft could result in a material adverse effect on our operating and financial performance. See Note 9 to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information about our aircraft leases. We have also rejected leases, relinquished possession of, returned, and sold certain aircraft to adjust our fleet size to more closely match our needs and to reduce costs. In addition to two aircraft types that we eliminated from our fleet in January 2006, we intend to eliminate two more aircraft types from our fleet by the end of 2006. Real Estate and Special Facility Bond Restructurings and Recharacterization Litigation. As part of our business plan, we are evaluating our real estate needs. In appropriate cases, when possible, we are taking actions to right-size our facilities, reduce real estate related costs and restructure lease and debt obligations. Among others, such actions may involve the sale of certain properties, the renegotiation or rejection of certain leases, litigating whether certain special facility bond obligations are lease or debt financing obligations and stopping payment on various unsecured debt obligations. Prior to the Petition Date, a number of our facilities, improvements and, in certain cases, equipment were financed with the proceeds of special facility bonds issued by various governmental entities. At December 31, 2005, there was a total of $1.8 billion in principal amount of such special facility bonds outstanding. As discussed in Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, $397 million of such bonds are backed by GECC letters of credit, with our reimbursement obligations to GECC being secured by certain of our aircraft and other assets. Our liability with respect to certain of the special facility bonds outstanding at December 31, 2005 may constitute debt obligations for bankruptcy purposes even if contained in an agreement that is labeled a lease. Successful recharacterization of such obligations as pre-petition debt obligations could enable us to curtail debt service payments with respect to such bonds while continuing to use the facilities and making only true lease payments, such as ground rent to the relevant airport operator. To date, we have filed one lease recharacterization action in Bankruptcy Court. The action relates to approximately $47 million principal amount of special facility bonds issued by the Regional Airports Improvement Corporation to finance improvements to certain Los Angeles International Airport terminal facilities occupied by us. The Bankruptcy Court has suspended action in this matter pending a decision of the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals on a similar case involving United Airlines. Although we are committed to restructuring our real estate related obligations in a manner that provides us with appropriate facilities at reasonable costs while substantially reducing our real estate related costs and 30 Table of Contents obligations, there is no assurance that such efforts will be successful or that there will be no adverse effect on us or our operations. See Notes 8 and 9 to the Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Basis of Presentation of Consolidated Financial Statements Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( GAAP ), including the provisions of American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Statement of Position 90-7, Financial Reporting by Entities in Reorganization Under the Bankruptcy Code ( SOP 90-7 ), on a going concern basis. This contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the ordinary course of business. Accordingly, our Consolidated Financial Statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability of assets and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern. As a result of sustained losses, labor issues and our Chapter 11 proceedings, the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities, without substantial adjustments and/or changes in ownership, are subject to uncertainty. Given this uncertainty, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements do not purport to reflect or provide for the consequences of the Chapter 11 proceedings. In particular, the financial statements do not purport to show (1) as to assets, their realizable value on a liquidation basis or their availability to satisfy liabilities; (2) as to pre-petition liabilities, the amounts that may be allowed for claims or contingencies, or the status and priority thereof; (3) as to shareowners equity accounts, the effect of any changes that may be made in our capitalization; or (4) as to operations, the effect of any changes that may be made in our business. Results of Operations 2005 Compared to 2004 Net Loss We recorded a consolidated net loss of $3.8 billion in 2005, compared to a consolidated net loss of $5.2 billion in 2004. Operating Revenues Year Ended December 31, Increase % Increase (in millions) 2005 2004 (Decrease) (Decrease) Operating Revenue: Passenger: Mainline $ 11,399 $ 10,880 $ 519 5 % Regional affiliates 3,225 2,910 315 11 % Total passenger revenue 14,624 13,790 834 6 % Cargo 524 500 24 5 % Other, net 1,043 945 98 10 % Total operating revenue $ 16,191 $ 15,235 $ 956 6 % 31 Table of Contents Increase (Decrease) 2005 vs. 2004 2005 Passenger Passenger Passenger Load (in millions) Revenue Revenue RPMs Yield RASM Factor Passenger Revenue: North American passenger revenue $ 11,503 4 % 4 % 3 % 2.2 International passenger revenue 3,003 17 % 13 % 4 % 4 % Charter revenue 118 (2 )% (25 )% 30 % 20 % (3.6 ) Total passenger revenue $ 14,624 6 % 6 % 3 % 1.8 Operating revenues totaled $16.2 billion in 2005, a $956 million increase as compared to the prior year. Passenger revenue increased 6% on a 3% increase in capacity. The increase in passenger revenue reflects a 6% rise in RPMs, and a flat passenger mile yield. The relatively constant passenger mile yield reflects our lack of pricing power due to the continuing growth of low-cost carriers with which we compete in most of our domestic markets, high industry capacity and price sensitivity by our customers, enhanced by the availability of airline fare information on the Internet. During the fourth quarter of 2005, passenger mile yield increased 8% compared to the fourth quarter of 2004, which reflects a general improvement in the overall business environment and the structural changes we made to strengthen our route network since our Chapter 11 filing. There can be no assurance that the passenger mile yield will continue to improve. Total Passenger Revenue per ASM ( Passenger RASM ) increased 3% to 9.33 . Load factor increased 1.8 points to 76.5%. North American Passenger Revenue North American passenger revenue increased 4% compared to the prior year due to increased traffic in 2005. In the first half of 2005 yields averaged 5% below the first half of 2004, while in the second half of 2005 yields averaged 5% higher than the second half of 2004. International Passenger Revenue Higher international passenger revenue reflects a capacity increase of 13%. RPMs also increased 13%, while passenger mile yield increased 4%. Passenger RASM increased 4% to 8.45 and load factor remained consistent with the prior year. These increases reflect increases in service to international destinations, primarily in transatlantic markets. 32 Table of Contents Operating Expenses Year Ended December 31, Increase % Increase (in millions) 2005 2004 (Decrease) (Decrease) Operating Expenses: Salaries and related costs $ 5,058 $ 6,338 $ (1,280 ) (20 )% Aircraft fuel 4,271 2,924 1,347 46 % Depreciation and amortization 1,273 1,244 29 2 % Contracted services 1,096 999 97 10 % Contract carrier arrangements 1,318 932 386 41 % Landing fees and other rents 863 875 (12 ) (1 )% Aircraft maintenance materials and outside repairs 776 681 95 14 % Aircraft rent 541 716 (175 ) (24 )% Passenger commissions and other selling expenses 948 939 9 1 % Passenger service 345 349 (4 ) (1 )% Impairment of intangible assets 1,875 (1,875 ) NM Restructuring, asset writedowns, pension settlements and related items, net 888 (41 ) 929 NM Other 815 712 103 14 % Total operating expenses $ 18,192 $ 18,543 $ (351 ) (2 )% Operating expenses for 2005 totaled $18.2 billion, which includes a $888 million charge for restructuring, asset writedowns, pension settlements and related items, net. For additional information about this charge, see Note 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Operating expenses for 2004 totaled $18.5 billion and include a $1.9 billion impairment of intangible assets related to the write-off of goodwill associated with Atlantic Southeast Airlines, Inc. ( ASA ) and Comair. For additional information about this charge, see Note 7 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. As a result of these items, operating expenses in the aggregate for 2005 and 2004 are not comparable. Operating capacity in 2005 compared to 2004 increased 3% to 157 billion Available Seat Miles ( ASMs ), primarily due to operational efficiencies from the redesign of our Atlanta hub from a banked to a continuous hub, which allowed us to increase system-wide capacity with no additional Mainline aircraft. Operating Cost per Available Seat Mile ( CASM ) decreased 5% to 11.60 in 2005 compared to 2004. Salaries and related costs. The decrease in salaries and related costs includes a 17% decrease from salary rate reductions for our pilot and nonpilot employees and a 7% decline due to lower headcount. Aircraft fuel. Aircraft fuel expense increased $1.3 billion, or 46% driven by higher fuel prices, which were slightly offset by a reduction in total gallons consumed due to our sale of ASA to SkyWest, Inc. ( SkyWest ) on September 7, 2005. See Financial Condition and Liquidity Sale of ASA below for information about our sale of ASA. Our average fuel price per gallon increased 47% to $1.71 while total gallons consumed decreased 1%. Fare increases implemented during 2005 in response to rising aircraft fuel prices offset only a small portion of those cost increases. During 2005, we had no significant hedges or contractual arrangements to reduce our fuel costs below market levels. Our fuel expense is shown net of fuel hedge gains of $105 million in 2004. Contract carrier arrangements. Contract carrier arrangements expense increased primarily due to (1) a change in how we account for ASA expenses as a result of its sale to SkyWest and (2) new contract carrier agreements with Shuttle America Corporation ( Shuttle America ) and Freedom Airlines, Inc. ( Freedom ). These increases were partially offset by the termination of our contract carrier arrangement with Flyi, Inc. in 2004. After the sale of ASA to SkyWest, expenses related to ASA are shown as contract carrier arrangements expense; prior to the sale, expenses related to ASA as our wholly owned subsidiary were reported in the applicable expense line item. 33 Table of Contents Aircraft rent. The decrease in aircraft rent expense largely reflects a 21% decrease due to our lease restructuring in the December 2004 quarter, which resulted in the reclassification of certain aircraft leases from operating to capital. As discussed below, this reclassification increased our interest expense. The reduction in aircraft rent expense also reflects our rejection of the leases for 50 aircraft, the renegotiation of the leases for seven aircraft and the repossession of 15 aircraft in connection with our Chapter 11 proceedings during 2005. Restructuring, asset writedowns, pension settlements and related items, net. Restructuring, asset writedowns, pension settlements and related items, net for 2005 includes: Pension Curtailment Charge. A $447 million curtailment charge related to our defined benefit pension plans for our pilot ( Pilot Plan ) and nonpilot ( Nonpilot Plan ) employees. This charge relates to the freeze of service accruals under the Pilot Plan effective December 31, 2004 and the impact of the planned reduction of 6,000-7,000 jobs announced in November 2004 on the Nonpilot Plan (see Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Pension Settlements. $388 million in settlement charges primarily related to the Pilot Plan due to a significant increase in pilot retirements and lump sum distributions from plan assets (see Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Workforce Reduction. A $46 million charge related to our decision in 2005 to reduce staffing by approximately 7,000 to 9,000 jobs by December 2007. This charge was offset by a net $3 million reduction in accruals associated with prior year workforce reduction programs. Asset Charges. A $10 million charge related to the removal from service of six B737-200 aircraft prior to their lease expiration dates. Restructuring, asset writedowns, pension settlements and related items, net for 2004 includes (1) a $527 million gain related to the elimination of the healthcare coverage subsidy for nonpilot employees who retire after January 1, 2006; (2) settlement charges totaling $251 million primarily related to the Pilot Plan; (3) a $194 million charge related to voluntary and involuntary workforce reduction programs; and (4) a $41 million aircraft impairment charge related to our agreement, entered into in the September 2004 quarter, to sell eight owned MD-11 aircraft. Other. The increase in other operating expenses primarily reflects a 13% rise due to the increase of incremental costs associated with our SkyMiles frequent flyer program (for further information regarding our SkyMiles frequent flyer program, see Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements) and a 5% increase from higher fuel taxes. These increases were partially offset by the impact of our sale of ASA. Other Income (Expense) Other expenses, net for 2005 increased 42% to $974 million compared to other expenses, net of $684 million for 2004. This change is primarily attributable to the following: Interest expense increased primarily due to a 31% increase from higher levels of debt outstanding and higher interest rates as well as a 10% rise due to additional interest related to the reclassification of certain aircraft leases from operating leases to capital leases as a result of renegotiations during the December 2004 quarter (see discussion of aircraft rent expense above). These increases were offset by a 15% decrease due to the accounting treatment of certain interest charges under our Chapter 11 proceedings (see discussion of interest expense in Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). Gain from sale of investments was $123 million in 2004 primarily due to the sale of our remaining equity interest in Orbitz, Inc. ( Orbitz ). For additional information about the sale of our investment in Orbitz, see Note 18 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 34 Table of Contents Reorganization Items, Net Reorganization items refer to revenues, expenses (including professional fees), realized gains and losses and provisions for losses that are realized or incurred in the bankruptcy proceedings. The following table summarizes the components included in reorganization items, net on our Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2005: Year Ended December 31, (in millions) 2005 Aircraft lease rejections, renegotiations and repossessions (1)(2) $ 611 Debt issuance and discount costs (3) 163 Facility leases (2)(4) 88 Professional fees 39 Interest income (17 ) Total reorganization items, net $ 884 (1) Estimated allowed claims from our rejection of the leases for 50 aircraft, the renegotiation of the leases for seven aircraft and the repossession of 15 aircraft. (2) We record an estimated claim associated with the rejection of an executory contract or unexpired lease when we file a motion with the Bankruptcy Court to reject such contract or lease and believe that it is probable the motion will be approved. We record an estimated claim associated with the renegotiation of an executory contract or unexpired lease when the renegotiated terms of such contract or lease are not opposed or otherwise approved by the Bankruptcy Court and there is sufficient information to estimate the claim. (3) Reflects the write-off of certain debt issuance costs and premiums in conjunction with valuing unsecured and undersecured debt. (4) Estimated allowed claims associated with facility leases and related bond obligations. Claims related to reorganization items are reflected in liabilities subject to compromise in our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2005. Income Tax Benefit (Provision) In 2004, we recorded a valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets as we determined it was more likely than not that we would not be able to realize the benefit of those tax assets. In 2005, we increased our valuation allowance by approximately $1.6 billion. As a result, our effective tax rate was (1.1)% and 30.2% for 2005 and 2004, respectively. For additional information about the income tax valuation allowance, see Note 11 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Results of Operations 2004 Compared to 2003 Net Loss We recorded a consolidated net loss of $5.2 billion in 2004, compared to a consolidated net loss of $773 million in 2003. Operating Revenues Operating revenues totaled $15.2 billion in 2004, a 6% increase from 2003. Passenger revenue increased 6% on a 9% increase in capacity. The increase in passenger revenue reflects an 11% rise in RPMs and a 4% decline in passenger mile yield. The increase in capacity was primarily driven by the restoration of flights that we reduced in 2003 due to the war in Iraq. The decline in the passenger mile yield reflected our lack of pricing power due to the continuing growth of low-cost carriers with which we compete in most of our domestic markets, high industry capacity and increased price sensitivity by our customers, enhanced by the availability of airline fare information on the Internet. Passenger RASM decreased 3% to 9.09 . Load factor increased 1.4 points to 74.7%. 35 Table of Contents North American Passenger Revenues. North American passenger revenues increased 4% to $11.1 billion for 2004 on a capacity increase of 7%. RPMs increased 9%, while passenger mile yield fell 4%. Passenger RASM decreased 3% to 9.28 . Load factor increased by 1.1 points to 73.7%. International Passenger Revenues. International passenger revenues increased 18% to $2.6 billion during 2004 on a capacity increase of 15%. RPMs increased 19%, while passenger mile yield remained unchanged. Passenger RASM increased 3% to 8.16 , and load factor rose 2.2 points to 78.9%. All of these increases are primarily due to the depressed levels in the prior year from the war in Iraq. Cargo and Other Revenues. Cargo revenues increased 7% to $500 million in 2004 primarily due to a 13% increase from higher international freight volume and yield, which was partially offset by a 5% decrease due to lower mail volume and yield. Cargo ton miles increased 6%, while cargo ton mile yield remained relatively flat. Other revenues increased 15% to $945 million, primarily reflecting a 6% increase due to revenue from new airport handling contracts and other miscellaneous contracts, a 5% rise due to increased administrative service charges, and a 3% increase due to higher codeshare revenue from capacity increases. Operating Expense Operating expenses were $18.5 billion for 2004, a 23%, or $3.5 billion, increase over 2003. As discussed below, the increase in operating expenses was primarily due to (1) a $1.9 billion goodwill impairment charge recorded in 2004; (2) significantly higher fuel prices in 2004 than in 2003; and (3) $398 million in reimbursements we received under the Emergency Wartime Supplemental Appropriations Act ( Appropriations Act ) in 2003 which were recorded as an offset to operating expenses in that year. Operating capacity increased 9% to 152 billion ASMs primarily due to the restoration of capacity that we reduced in 2003 due to the war in Iraq. CASM increased 13% to 12.23 . Salaries and related costs were relatively flat at $6.3 billion. This reflects a 3% decline due to a decrease in benefit expenses from our cost savings initiatives and a 2% decline due to lower Mainline headcount. These decreases were offset by (1) a 3% increase due to higher pension and related expense; (2) a 1% increase due to a 4.5% salary rate increase in May 2004 for our pilots under their collective bargaining agreement which was partially offset by their rate decrease effective December 1, 2004; and (3) a 1% increase due to growth in operations. Aircraft fuel expense increased 51%, or $986 million, to $2.9 billion, with approximately $820 million of the increase resulting from higher fuel prices. The average fuel price per gallon increased 42% to $1.16, and total gallons consumed increased 7%. Approximately 8% and 65% of our aircraft fuel requirements were hedged during 2004 and 2003, respectively. As discussed in Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, in February 2004, we settled all of our fuel hedge contracts prior to their scheduled settlement dates, resulting in a deferred gain of $82 million that we recognized during 2004. In 2004, our fuel expense is shown net of fuel hedge gains of $105 million, which included the gain related to the early settlement. Our fuel expense for 2003 is shown net of fuel hedge gains of $152 million. Contracted services expense increased 13%, primarily reflecting a 4% increase from new contracts to provide airport handling and other miscellaneous services, a 2% increase due to technology projects, a 2% increase due to the suspension of the Transportation Security Administration ( TSA ) security fee from June 1, 2003 to September 30, 2003 and subsequent reimbursements and a 2% increase resulting from higher capacity. Expenses from our contract carrier arrangements increased 19% to $932 million, largely reflecting an 8% increase from higher fuel costs, a 7% increase due to growth under certain contract carrier arrangements and a 3% increase from higher maintenance expense. Aircraft maintenance materials and outside repairs increased 8%, primarily due to increased materials volume and higher costs from scheduled maintenance events. Other selling expenses increased 5%, primarily reflecting a 3% rise from increased credit card charges due to higher traffic and a 1% increase from advertising and promotions. Passenger service expense increased 7%, primarily due to increased traffic. During December 2004, we recorded a $1.9 billion impairment charge, primarily related to goodwill, in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 142, Goodwill and Other 36 Table of Contents Intangible Assets ( SFAS 142 ). For additional information about the impairment charge, see Note 7 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Restructuring, asset writedowns, pension settlements and related items, net totaled a $41 million net gain for 2004 compared to a $268 million net charge for 2003. The 2004 amount includes (1) a $527 million gain related to the elimination of the healthcare coverage subsidy for nonpilot employees who retire after January 1, 2006; (2) settlement charges totaling $257 million primarily related to our Pilot Plan; (3) a $194 million charge related to voluntary and involuntary workforce reduction programs; and (4) a $41 million aircraft impairment charge related to our agreement, entered into in the September 2004 quarter, to sell eight owned MD-11 aircraft. The charge for 2003 consists of (1) $212 million related to settlements under the Pilot Plan; (2) $43 million related to a net curtailment loss for the cost of pension and postretirement obligations for participants under our 2002 workforce reduction programs; and (3) $41 million associated with the planned sale of 11 B737-800 aircraft. This charge was partially offset by a $28 million reduction to operating expenses from revised estimates of remaining costs associated with our restructuring activities. For additional information about these restructuring, asset writedowns, pension settlements and related items, net, see Note 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Reimbursements under the Appropriations Act totaled $398 million in 2003, representing reimbursements from the U.S. government to air carriers for certain passenger and air carrier security fees paid to the TSA. We recorded these amounts as a reduction to operating expenses in our Consolidated Statement of Operations. For additional information about the Appropriations Act, see Note 20 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Other operating expenses increased 20%. This primarily reflects a 7% increase from higher professional fees mainly from our restructuring and contingency planning efforts, a 4% increase due to a loss on certain aircraft transactions, a 4% increase from a rise in the navigation charges due to increased international capacity and a 4% increase due to higher fuel taxes. Operating Loss and Operating Margin We incurred an operating loss of $3.3 billion for 2004, compared to an operating loss of $785 million for 2003. Operating margin, which is the ratio of operating income (loss) to operating revenues, was (22%) and (6%) for 2004 and 2003, respectively. Other Income Other expense, net for 2004 was $684 million, compared to other expense, net of $404 million for 2003. This change is primarily attributable to the following: Interest expense increased $67 million for 2004 compared to 2003 primarily due to higher levels of debt outstanding and higher interest rates on variable debt. Gain (loss) from sale of investments, net was $123 million for 2004 compared to $321 million for 2003. In 2004, we sold our remaining equity interest in Orbitz, recognizing a gain of $123 million. The gain in 2003 was primarily related to a $279 million gain from the sale of our equity investment in WORLDSPAN, L.P. ( Worldspan ) and a $28 million gain from the sale of a portion of our equity interest in Orbitz. For additional information about these investments, see Note 18 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Fair value adjustments of derivatives accounted for under SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities ( SFAS 133 ) resulted in a $31 million charge for 2004 compared to a $9 million charge for 2003. These adjustments related to our equity warrants and other similar rights in certain companies and to derivative instruments used in our fuel hedging program. For additional information about the impact of SFAS 133 on our Consolidated Statements of Operations, see Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt, net was $9 million for 2004 compared to zero in 2003. During 2004, we recorded a gain due to the exchange of certain of our unsecured 7.7% Notes 37 Table of Contents due 2005 for newly issued unsecured 8.0% Senior Notes due in December 2007. During 2003, we recorded a $15 million loss from our purchase of a portion of the Delta Family-Care Savings Plan Series C Guaranteed Serial ESOP Notes, offset by a $15 million gain related to a debt exchange. Income Tax Provision (Benefit) During 2004, we recorded an additional valuation allowance against our net deferred income tax assets, which resulted in a $1.2 billion non-cash charge to income tax expense on our Consolidated Statement of Operations. For additional information about the income tax valuation allowance, see Note 11 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Financial Condition and Liquidity The matters described herein, to the extent that they relate to future events or expectations, may be significantly affected by our Chapter 11 proceedings. Those proceedings will involve, or may result in, various restrictions on our activities, limitations on financing, the need to obtain Bankruptcy Court and Creditors Committee approval for various matters and uncertainty as to relationships with vendors, suppliers, customers and others whom we may conduct or seek to conduct business. Significant Liquidity Events Debtor-in -Possession Financing On September 16, 2005, we entered into the DIP Credit Facility, which permits us to borrow up to $1.9 billion from a syndicate of lenders arranged by GECC and Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc. ( Morgan Stanley ), for which GECC acts as administrative agent. The Bankruptcy Court approved our entering into the DIP Credit Facility. The DIP Credit Facility consists of a $600 million Term Loan A arranged by GECC (the TLA ), a $700 million Term Loan B arranged by GECC (the TLB ) and a $600 million Term Loan C arranged jointly by GECC and Morgan Stanley (the TLC; together with the TLA and TLB, collectively, the DIP Loans ). We applied a portion of these proceeds to (1) repay in full the $480 million principal amount outstanding under the GE Pre-Petition Facility; (2) repay in full the $500 million principal amount outstanding under our Amex Pre-Petition Facility; and (3) prepay $50 million of the $350 million principal amount outstanding under our Amex Post-Petition Facility. The remainder of the proceeds of the DIP Loans is available for our general corporate purposes. Availability of funds under the TLA is subject to a borrowing base calculation. If the outstanding amount of the TLA at any time exceeds the borrowing base, we must immediately repay the TLA or post cash collateral in an amount equal to the excess. The TLA, TLB and TLC each mature on March 16, 2008. Prior to the Amended and Restated DIP Credit Facility (defined below), the TLA bore interest, at our option, at LIBOR plus 4.50% or an index rate plus 3.75%; the TLB bore interest, at our option, at LIBOR plus 6.50% or an index rate plus 5.75%; and the TLC bore interest, at our option, at LIBOR plus 9.00% or an index rate plus 8.25%. We may also request the issuance of up to $200 million in letters of credit under the DIP Credit Facility, which amount must be fully cash collateralized at all times such letters of credit are outstanding. Our obligations under the DIP Credit Facility are guaranteed by substantially all of our domestic subsidiaries (the Guarantors ). We will be required to make certain mandatory repayments of the DIP Loans in the event we sell certain assets, subject to certain exceptions. Any portion of the DIP Loans that are repaid through either voluntary or mandatory prepayment may not be reborrowed. The DIP Loans and the related guarantees are secured by first priority liens on substantially all of our and the Guarantors present and future assets (including assets that previously secured the GE Pre-Petition Facility) and by junior liens on certain of our and the Guarantors other assets (including certain accounts receivable and other assets subject to a first priority lien securing the Amex Post-Petition Facility described below), in each case subject to certain exceptions, including an exception for assets which are subject to 38 Table of Contents financing agreements that are entitled to the benefits of Section 1110 of the Bankruptcy Code, to the extent such financing agreements prohibit such liens. The DIP Credit Facility includes affirmative, negative and financial covenants that impose substantial restrictions on our financial and business operations, including our ability to, among other things, incur or secure other debt, make investments, sell assets and pay dividends or repurchase stock. The financial covenants require us to: maintain unrestricted funds in an amount not less than $750 million through May 31, 2006; $1 billion at all times from June 1, 2006 through November 30, 2006; $750 million at all times from December 1, 2006 through February 28, 2007; and $1 billion at all times thereafter ( Liquidity Covenant ); not exceed specified levels of capital expenditures during any fiscal quarter; and achieve specified levels of EBITDAR, as defined, for successive trailing 12-month periods through March 2008. During 2005, we were required to achieve increasing levels of EBITDAR, including EBITDAR of $644 million for the 12-month period ending December 31, 2005. Thereafter, the minimum EBITDAR level for each successive trailing 12-month period continues to increase, including $1.372 billion for the 12-month period ended December 31, 2006; $1.988 billion for the 12-month period ending December 31, 2007; and $2 billion for each 12-month period ending thereafter. If our cash on hand exceeds the minimum cash on hand that we are required to maintain pursuant to the Liquidity Covenant, then the EBITDAR level that we are required to achieve is effectively reduced by the amount of such excess cash, up to a maximum reduction of $250 million from the required EBITDAR level. The DIP Credit Facility contains events of default customary for debtor-in -possession financings, including cross-defaults to the Amex Post-Petition Facility and certain change of control events. The DIP Credit Facility also includes events of default specific to our business, including if all or substantially all of our flight and other operations are suspended for longer than two days, other than in connection with a general suspension of all U.S. flights, or if certain routes and, subject to certain materiality thresholds, other routes, and slots and gates are revoked, terminated or cancelled. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, the outstanding obligations under the DIP Credit Facility may be accelerated and become due and payable immediately. On March 27, 2006, we executed an amended and restated credit agreement (the Amended and Restated DIP Credit Facility ) with a syndicate of lenders led by GECC and Morgan Stanley that replaced the DIP Credit Facility in its entirety. The aggregate amounts available to be borrowed are not changed from the DIP Credit Facility by the Amended and Restated DIP Credit Facility. However, under the Amended and Restated DIP Credit Facility, the interest rates on borrowings have been reduced: the TLA bears interest, at our option, at LIBOR plus 2.75% or an index rate plus 2.00%; the TLB bears interest, at our option, at LIBOR plus 4.75% or an index rate plus 4.00%; and the TLC bears interest, at our option, at LIBOR plus 7.50% or an index rate plus 6.75%. The Amended and Restated DIP Credit Facility is otherwise substantially the same as the DIP Credit Facility, including financial covenants, collateral, guarantees, and events of default, and it allows the execution of amendments to certain other credit facilities and the reimbursement agreement with GECC discussed below under GECC Reimbursement Agreement Collateral Value Test and in Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Financing Agreement with Amex On September 16, 2005, we entered into the Modification Agreement with Amex and American Express Bank, F.S.B. pursuant to which we modified certain existing agreements with Amex, including the Amex Pre-Petition Facility under which we had borrowed $500 million from Amex. The Amex Pre-Petition Facility consisted of substantially identical supplements to the two existing agreements under which Amex purchases SkyMiles from us, the Membership Rewards Agreement and the Co-Branded Credit Card Program Agreement (collectively, the SkyMiles Agreements ). The Bankruptcy Court approved our entering into the Modification Agreement and our assuming the SkyMiles Agreements. Amex has the right, in certain 39 Table of Contents circumstances, to impose a significant holdback of our receivables, including for tickets purchased using an American Express credit card but not yet used for travel. As required by the Modification Agreement, on September 16, 2005, we used a portion of the proceeds of our initial borrowing under the DIP Credit Facility to repay the outstanding principal amount of $500 million, together with interest thereon, that we had previously borrowed from Amex under the Amex Pre-Petition Facility. Simultaneously, we borrowed $350 million from Amex pursuant to the terms of the Amex Post-Petition Facility. The amount borrowed under the Amex Post-Petition Facility will be credited, in equal monthly installments, towards Amex actual purchases of SkyMiles during the 17-month period commencing in July 2006. Any unused prepayment credit will carryover to the next succeeding month with a final repayment date for any then outstanding advances no later than November 30, 2007. Prior to March 27, 2006, the outstanding advances bore a fee, equivalent to interest, at a rate of LIBOR plus a margin of 10.25%. As the date of effectiveness of the Amended and Restated DIP Credit Facility, to which Amex consented, the fee on outstanding advances decreased to a rate of LIBOR plus a margin of 8.75%. On October 7, 2005, Amex consented to an amendment to the DIP Credit Facility in return for a prepayment of $50 million under the Amex Post-Petition Facility. The prepayment will be credited in inverse order of monthly installments during the 17-month period commencing in July 2006. Our obligations under the Amex Post-Petition Facility are guaranteed by the Guarantors of the DIP Credit Facility. Our obligations under certain of our agreements with Amex, including our obligations under the Amex Post-Petition Facility, the SkyMiles Agreements and the agreement pursuant to which Amex processes travel and other purchases made from us using Amex credit cards ( Card Services Agreement ), and the corresponding obligations of the Guarantors, are secured by (1) a first priority lien on our right to payment from Amex for purchased SkyMiles, our interest in the SkyMiles Agreements and related assets and our right to payment from Amex under, and our interest in, the Card Services Agreement and (2) a junior lien on the collateral securing the DIP Credit Facility. With certain exceptions, the Amex Post-Petition Facility contains affirmative, negative and financial covenants substantially the same as in the DIP Credit Facility. The Amex Post-Petition Facility contains customary events of default, including cross-defaults to our obligations under the DIP Credit Facility and to defaults under certain other of our agreements with Amex. The Amex Post-Petition Facility also includes events of default specific to our business, including upon cessation of 50% or more of our business operations (measured by net revenue) and other events of default comparable to those in the DIP Credit Facility. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under the Amex Post-Petition Facility, the loan under the Amex Post-Petition Facility may be accelerated and become due and payable immediately. An event of default under the Amex Post-Petition facility results in an immediate cross-default under the Amended and Restated DIP Credit Facility. The Amended and Restated DIP Credit Facility and the Amex Post-Petition Facility are subject to an intercreditor agreement that generally regulates the respective rights and priorities of the lenders under each Facility with respect to collateral and certain other matters. Sale of ASA On September 7, 2005, we sold ASA to SkyWest for a purchase price of $425 million. In conjunction with this transaction, we amended our contract carrier agreements with ASA and SkyWest Airlines, Inc. ( SkyWest Airlines ), a wholly owned subsidiary of SkyWest, under which those regional airlines serve as Delta Connection carriers. The sale of ASA resulted in an immaterial gain that is being amortized over the life of our contract carrier agreement with ASA. For additional information on our contract carrier agreements with ASA and SkyWest Airlines, see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. At the closing of our sale of ASA, we received $350 million, representing $330 million of purchase price and $20 million related to aircraft deposits. As the result of our assumption of our contract carrier agreements with ASA and SkyWest Airlines in our Chapter 11 proceedings, on November 2, 2005, we received an additional $120 million, consisting of $90 million of deferred purchase price and $30 million in aircraft deposits. We may receive up to the remaining $5 million of deferred purchase price depending on resolution 40 Table of Contents of a working capital adjustment. Upon the sale of ASA, we repaid, as required, $100 million of outstanding borrowings under a pre-petition credit facility. The remaining proceeds from our sale of ASA are available for general corporate purposes. See Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a list of the major classes of assets sold and liabilities assumed by SkyWest. Letter of Credit Facility Related to Visa/MasterCard Credit Card Processing Agreement On January 26, 2006, with the authorization from the Bankruptcy Court, we entered into a letter of credit facility with Merrill Lynch. Under the Letter of Credit Reimbursement Agreement, Merrill Lynch issued a $300 million irrevocable standby letter of credit ( Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit ) for the benefit of our Visa/MasterCard credit card processor ( Processor ). As contemplated in our Visa/MasterCard credit card processing agreement ( Processing Agreement ), we are providing the Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit as a substitution for a portion of the cash reserve that the Processor maintains. Under the Processing Agreement, the Processor is permitted to maintain a reserve from our receivables that is equal to the Processor potential liability for tickets purchased with Visa or MasterCard which have not yet been used for travel (the unflown ticket liability ). We estimate that the reserve, which adjusts daily, will range between $450 million and $850 million during the term of the Processing Agreement. The Processing Agreement allows us to substitute the Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit for a portion of the cash reserve equal to the lesser of $300 million and 45% of the unflown ticket liability. The Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit may only be drawn upon following certain events as described in the Processing Agreement. In addition, the Processor must first apply both the portion of the cash reserve that the Processor will continue to hold and any offsets from collections by the Processor before drawing on the Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit to cover fare refunds paid to passengers by the Processor. Our obligation to reimburse Merrill Lynch under the Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit for any draws made by the Processor is not secured and will constitute a super-priority administrative expense claim that is subject to certain other claims, including our post-petition financing. The Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit will expire on January 21, 2008, but will renew automatically for one year periods thereafter unless Merrill Lynch notifies the Processor 420 days prior to the applicable expiration date that it will not renew the Merrill Lynch Letter of Credit. Covenants As discussed above, the DIP Credit Facility and the Amex Post-Petition Facility include certain affirmative, negative and financial covenants. In addition, as is customary in the airline industry, our aircraft lease and financing agreements require that we maintain certain levels of insurance coverage, including war-risk insurance. Failure to maintain these coverages may result in an interruption to our operations. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about our war-risk insurance currently provided by the U.S. government. We were in compliance with these covenant requirements at December 31, 2005 and 2004. GECC Reimbursement Agreement Collateral Value Test. We have an agreement with GECC (the Reimbursement Agreement ) under which GECC has issued irrevocable, direct-pay letters of credit totaling $403 million to pay the principal and interest on $397 million aggregate principal amount of tax-exempt special facility bonds ( Bonds ) issued to refinance the construction cost of certain airport facilities leased to us. We are required to reimburse GECC for drawings under the letters of credit, and our reimbursement obligation is secured by certain of our aircraft and other assets. The Reimbursement Agreement contains a minimum collateral value test ( Collateral Value Test ). We will not satisfy the Collateral Value Test if (1) the aggregate amount of the outstanding letters of credit plus any other amounts payable by us under the Reimbursement Agreement ( Aggregate Obligations ) on March 20, 2006 is more than 60% of the appraised value of aircraft collateral which secures our reimbursement obligation to GECC plus the fair market value of permitted investments held as part of the collateral and (2) within 60 days thereafter, we have not either provided additional collateral to GECC in the form of cash or aircraft or caused a reduction in the Aggregate Obligations such that the Collateral Value Test is satisfied. If we fail to satisfy the Collateral Value Test on May 19, 2006, an event of default will 41 Table of Contents occur. We currently estimate that, in order to satisfy the Collateral Value Test on May 19, 2006, we will need to provide GECC with additional collateral in the form of cash in the amount of approximately $50 million. We entered into a letter of intent with GECC in December 2005 to amend the Reimbursement Agreement to eliminate the Collateral Value Test, among other things. In February 2006, the Bankruptcy Court approved the letter of intent, but because the completion of the transactions contemplated in the letter of intent is subject to definitive documentation and certain other conditions, there can be no assurance that the Collateral Value Test will be amended or eliminated. If the Collateral Value Test is not amended or eliminated, we intend to satisfy it. See Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the Reimbursement Agreement and the Bonds. Sources and Uses of Cash Our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were $2.0 billion at December 31, 2005, compared to $1.8 billion at December 31, 2004. Restricted cash totaled $928 million and $350 million at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2005 include approximately $155 million, which is set aside for payment of certain operational taxes and fees to various governmental authorities. Cash flows from operating activities For the year ended December 31, 2005, cash provided by operating activities totaled $175 million. This is comprised of our consolidated net loss for the year of $3.8 billion offset by noncash adjustments totaling approximately $3.0 billion and other changes in working capital of approximately $959 million. The $3.0 billion in noncash adjustments were primarily related to $1.3 billion of depreciation and amortization expense, $896 million of pension, postretirement and postemployment expense in excess of payments, net and $884 million of net noncash charges related to reorganization items. The $959 million change in working capital items was primarily related to a $336 million sale of short-term investments, an increase of $145 million in our air traffic liability due to higher bookings and preservation of cash due to the protection afforded to us under the Chapter 11 proceedings. Cash flows from investing activities For the year ended December 31, 2005, cash used in investing activities totaled $460 million, which includes the following significant items: Our restricted cash balance increased $578 million. The increase primarily relates to cash holdbacks associated with our Visa/ MasterCard credit card processing agreements and certain interline clearinghouses as a result of our Chapter 11 proceedings. Cash used for flight equipment additions, including advanced deposits, totaled $570 million. This includes $417 million we paid to purchase 11 B737-800 aircraft that we sold to a third party immediately after those aircraft were delivered to us by the manufacturer. This also includes approximately $66 million in improvements to our aircraft. Cash used for ground property and equipment totaling $244 million. This includes expenditures totaling $65 million related to our Boston Airport Terminal Project, which was offset by approximately $80 million in reimbursements from restricted investments related to this project. During 2005 cash used for technology, including updating software and hardware infrastructure, totaled approximately $121 million. Cash proceeds from the sale of ASA, net of cash that remained with ASA, was approximately $417 million. For additional information, see Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 42 Table of Contents Cash flows from financing activities For the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, cash provided by financing activities totaled $830 million and includes the following significant amounts: During the March 2005 quarter, we received the final installment of $250 million under our Amex Pre- Petition Facility. The Amex Pre-Petition Facility was repaid in connection with our post-petition financing. For additional information regarding our financing agreement with Amex, see Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. During the September 2005 quarter, in conjunction with the sale of ASA, we were required to repay $100 million pursuant to the GE Pre-Petition Facility. In conjunction with our Chapter 11 proceedings, we obtained post-petition financing including net proceeds of approximately $1.2 billion. For additional information regarding our post-petition financing, see Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We paid approximately $384 million of our pre-petition debt obligations. This amount includes $216 million of principal payments made prior to our Petition Date and $168 million of principal payments that are not classified as liabilities subject to compromise. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2005 and related to debt; operating leases; aircraft order commitments; capital leases; contract carrier obligations; interest and related payments; other material, noncancelable purchase obligations; other liabilities; and liabilities subject to compromise. We are in the process of evaluating our executory contracts in order to determine which contracts will be assumed in our Chapter 11 proceedings. Therefore, obligations as currently quantified in the table below and in the text immediately following the footnotes to the table will continue to change. The table below does not include contracts that we have successfully rejected through our Chapter 11 proceedings. The table also does not include commitments that are contingent on events or other factors that are uncertain or unknown at this time, some of which are discussed in footnotes to this table and in the text immediately following the footnotes. Contractual Obligations by Year After (in millions) 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2010 Total Long-Term debt, not including liabilities subject to compromise (1)(2) $ 1,183 $ 624 $ 2,080 $ 361 $ 1,271 $ 2,208 $ 7,727 Long-Term debt classified as liabilities subject to compromise (1) 365 326 757 908 207 3,203 5,766 Operating lease payments (2)(3) 1,324 1,202 1,281 1,150 1,089 6,994 13,040 Aircraft order commitments (4) 78 488 886 525 1,040 3,017 Capital lease obligations not subject to compromise (2)(5) 5 4 4 4 3 20 Capital lease obligations subject to compromise (2)(5) 178 133 109 146 141 269 976 Contract carrier obligations (6) 1,852 2,028 2,163 2,182 1,979 16,974 27,178 Other purchase obligations (7) 209 51 23 20 19 16 338 Other liabilities (8) 69 69 Total (9) $ 5,263 $ 4,856 $ 7,303 $ 5,296 $ 5,749 $ 29,664 $ 58,131 (1) These amounts are included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. For additional information about our debt and related matters, see Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Although we are not generally permitted to make any payments on pre-petition obligations as a result of our Chapter 11 proceedings, we have reached agreements with certain aircraft financing parties under Section 1110 of the Bankruptcy Code and received approval from the Bankruptcy Court to continue to make payments on certain aircraft 43 Table of Contents debt and lease obligations. The amounts included remain subject to change until a plan of reorganization is approved and we emerge from Chapter 11. (3) This amount includes our noncancelable operating leases and our lease payments related to aircraft under our contract carrier agreements with ASA, Skywest Airlines, Freedom Airlines, Inc. ( Freedom ) and Shuttle America. See Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. (4) Our aircraft order commitments as of December 31, 2005 consist of firm orders to purchase five B777-200 aircraft and 50 B737-800 aircraft. This includes commitments to purchase 10 B737-800 aircraft, which we have entered into a definitive agreement to sell to a third party immediately following delivery of these aircraft to us by the manufacturer starting in 2007. The impact of these sales on the future commitments above would be a total reduction of approximately $395 million during the period 2006 2008. (5) Interest payments related to capital lease obligations are included in the table. The present value of these obligations, excluding interest, is included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. For additional information about our capital lease obligations, see Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (6) This amount represents our minimum fixed obligation under our contract carrier agreements with Chautauqua Airlines, Inc. ( Chautauqua ), Shuttle America, ASA, SkyWest Airlines, and Freedom (excluding contract carrier lease payments accounted for as operating leases, (see footnote (3) above)). For additional information regarding our contract carrier agreements, see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (7) Includes purchase obligations pursuant to which we are required to make minimum payments for goods and services, including but not limited to insurance, outsourced human resource services, marketing, maintenance, obligations related to Comair, technology, and other third party services and products. For additional information about other commitments and contingencies, see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (8) Represents other liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets for which we are obligated to make future payments related to medical benefit costs incurred but not yet paid and payments required under the pilot collective bargaining agreement for unused vacation time. These liabilities are not included in any other line item on this table. (9) In addition to the contractual obligations included in the table, we have significant cash obligations that are not included in the table. For example, we will pay wages required under collective bargaining agreements; fund pension plans (as discussed below); purchase capacity under contract carrier arrangements (as discussed below); and pay credit card processing fees and fees for other goods and services, including those related to fuel, maintenance and commissions. While we are parties to legally binding contracts regarding these goods and services, the actual commitment is contingent on certain factors such as volume and/or variable rates that are uncertain or unknown at this time. Therefore, these items are not included in the table. In addition, purchase orders made in the ordinary course of business are excluded from the table and any amounts which we are liable for under the purchase orders are included in current liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The following items are not included in the table above: Pension Plans. We sponsor defined contribution and defined benefit pension plans for eligible employees and retirees. Our funding obligations for certain of these plans are governed by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ( ERISA ). Estimates of pension plan funding requirements can vary materially from actual funding requirements because the estimates are based on various assumptions, including those described below. Defined Contribution Pension Plans ( DC Plans ) During the year ended December 31, 2005, we contributed approximately $100 million to our DC Plans. Estimates of future funding requirements under the DC Plans are based on various assumptions. These assumptions include, among other things, the number of participants in the DC Plans; the salary levels of those participants; and the outcome of efforts to modify our collective bargaining agreement with ALPA, either on a consensual basis or under the Chapter 11 process. Assuming current plan design, we expect to contribute approximately $100 million to our DC Plans in 2006. Defined Benefit Pension Plans ( DB Plans ) Our principal DB Plans are the Pilot Plan and the Nonpilot Plan. During the year ended December 31, 2005, we contributed approximately $325 million to our DB Plans. Estimates of future funding requirements under the DB Plans are based on various assumptions, including legislative changes regarding these obligations. These assumptions also include, among other things, the actual and projected market performance of assets of the DB Plans; future long-term corporate bond yields; statutory requirements; the terms of the DB Plans; and demographic data for participants in the DB Plans, including the number of participants, their salaries and the rate of participant attrition. Assuming current funding rules and current plan design, we estimate that the funding requirements under our DB Plans for 2006, 2007 and 2008 will aggregate approximately $3.4 billion, excluding any liquidity shortfall contribution requirements under the Pilot Plan. Substantially this entire amount relates to benefits 44 Table of Contents earned prior to the Petition Date. We believe we are not required to fund such pre-petition amounts while operating under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code. Certain entities unsuccessfully challenged this position in Bankruptcy Court, and this issue is currently on appeal. If our DB Plans continue after we emerge from Chapter 11, we may be required to fully fund required contributions at that date, including contributions related to benefits earned prior to our Petition Date. Based on our preliminary five-year forecast and additional information regarding the assets and liabilities for the DB Plans, we believe that, under current pension funding rules, we would need to seek distress termination of both the Nonpilot Plan and the Pilot Plan in order to successfully reorganize and emerge from Chapter 11. Proposed legislation that passed in the U.S. Senate and is now pending in a House Senate Conference Committee would extend our funding obligations for our DB Plans over 20 years. If the pending legislation is enacted in the form in which it passed the U.S. Senate, we hope to avoid a distress termination of the Nonpilot Plan, though there is no assurance that we can do so. We currently believe, however, that the existence of the lump sum option in the Pilot Plan and the significant number of early pilot retirements it may drive make it unlikely that we could satisfy our funding obligations to that plan even if the pending legislation is enacted in the form in which it passed the U.S. Senate. See Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about the lump sum option under the Pilot Plan and our pension plans generally. Contract Carriers. We have long-term contract carrier agreements with the following five regional air carriers (in addition to Comair): Chautauqua, Shuttle America, ASA, SkyWest Airlines, and Freedom. Under these agreements, the carriers operate certain of their aircraft using our flight code, and we schedule those aircraft, sell the seats on those flights and retain the related revenues. We pay those airlines an amount, as defined in the applicable agreement, which is based on a determination of their cost of operating those flights and other factors intended to approximate market rates for those services. Under these long-term contract carrier agreements, we are obligated to pay certain minimum fixed obligations, which are included in the table above. The remaining estimated expenses are not included in the table because these expenses are contingent based on the costs associated with the operation of contract carrier flights by those air carriers as well as rates that are unknown at this time. We cannot reasonably estimate at this time our expenses under the contract carrier agreements in 2006 and thereafter. We may terminate the Chautauqua and Shuttle America agreements without cause at any time after May 2010 and January 2013, respectively, by providing certain advance notice. If we terminate either the Chautauqua or Shuttle America agreements without cause, Chautauqua or Shuttle America, respectively, has the right to (1) assign to us leased aircraft that the airline operates for us, provided we are able to continue the leases on the same terms the airline had prior to the assignment and (2) require us to purchase or lease any of the aircraft that the airline owns and operates for us at the time of the termination. If we are required to purchase aircraft owned by Chautauqua or Shuttle America, the purchase price would be equal to the amount necessary to (1) reimburse Chautauqua or Shuttle America for the equity it provided to purchase the aircraft and (2) repay in full any debt outstanding at such time that is not being assumed in connection with such purchase. If we are required to lease aircraft owned by Chautauqua or Shuttle America, the lease would have (1) a rate equal to the debt payments of Chautauqua or Shuttle America for the debt financing of the aircraft calculated as if 90% of the aircraft was debt financed by Chautauqua or Shuttle America and (2) other specified terms and conditions. We estimate that the total fair values, determined as of December 31, 2005, of the aircraft that Chautauqua or Shuttle America could assign to us or require that we purchase if we terminate without cause our contract carrier agreements with those airlines are $549 million and $386 million, respectively. The actual amount that we may be required to pay in these circumstances may be materially different from these estimates. For additional information on contract carrier agreements see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Interest and Related Payments. Estimated amounts for future interest and related payments in connection with our debt obligations are based on the fixed and variable interest rates specified in the associated debt agreements. We expect to pay $1.05 billion related to interest on fixed and variable rate debt 45 Table of Contents in 2006. Estimates on variable rate interest were calculated using implied short term LIBOR rates based on LIBOR at February 1, 2006. The related payments represent credit enhancements required in conjunction with certain financing agreements. As a result of our Chapter 11 filing, actual interest expense in 2006 is expected to be less than the contractual interest expense. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about our policy relating to interest expense. Legal Contingencies. We are involved in various legal proceedings relating to antitrust matters, employment practices, environmental issues and other matters concerning our business. We cannot reasonably estimate the potential loss for certain legal proceedings because, for example, the litigation is in its early stages or the plaintiff does not specify the damages being sought. As a result of our Chapter 11 proceedings, virtually all pre-petition pending litigation against us is stayed and related amounts accrued have been classified in liabilities subject to compromise on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2005. Other Contingent Obligations under Contracts. In addition to the contractual obligations discussed above, we have certain contracts for goods and services that require us to pay a penalty, acquire inventory specific to us or purchase contract specific equipment, as defined by each respective contract, if we terminate the contract without cause prior to its expiration date. These obligations are contingent upon whether we terminate the contract without cause prior to its expiration date; therefore, no obligation would exist unless such a termination were to occur. We also cannot predict the impact, if any, that our Chapter 11 proceedings might have on these obligations. For additional information about other contingencies not discussed above as well as discussions related to general indemnifications, see Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Application of Critical Accounting Policies Critical Accounting Estimates The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions. We periodically evaluate these estimates and assumptions, which are based on historical experience, changes in the business environment and other factors that management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates. Revenue Recognition Passenger Revenue. We record sales of passenger tickets as air traffic liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Passenger revenues are recognized when we provide transportation, reducing the related air traffic liability. We periodically evaluate the estimated air traffic liability and record any resulting adjustments in our Consolidated Statements of Operations in the period in which the evaluations are completed. We sell mileage credits in our SkyMiles frequent flyer program to participating partners such as credit card companies, hotels and car rental agencies. The portion of the revenue from the sale of mileage credits that approximates the fair value of travel to be provided is deferred. We amortize the deferred revenue on a straight-line basis over the period when transportation is expected to be provided. The majority of the revenue from the sale of mileage credits, including the amortization of deferred revenue, is recorded in passenger revenue on our Consolidated Statements of Operations; the remaining portion is recognized in income currently and is classified as other revenue. Frequent Flyer Program Liability. We have a frequent flyer program, the SkyMiles Program, offering incentives to increase travel on Delta. This program allows participants to earn mileage for travel awards by flying on Delta, Delta Connection carriers and participating airlines, as well as through participating partners such as credit card companies, hotels and car rental agencies. Mileage credits can be redeemed for free or upgraded air travel on Delta and participating airline partners, for membership in our Crown Room Club and for other program partner awards. We record a liability for the estimated incremental cost of flight awards which are earned under our SkyMiles frequent flyer program and expected to be redeemed for travel on Delta or other airline partners. Our incremental costs include (1) our system average cost per passenger for fuel, food and other direct passenger costs for awards to be redeemed on Delta and (2) contractual costs for awards to be redeemed on 46 Table of Contents partner airlines. The liability is recorded in accounts payable, deferred credits and other accrued liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We periodically record adjustments to this liability in other operating expenses on our Consolidated Statements of Operations based on awards earned, awards redeemed, changes in our estimated incremental costs and changes to the SkyMiles program. Goodwill and Intangible Assets. In accordance with SFAS No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, we apply a fair value-based impairment test to the net book value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets on an annual basis and, if certain events or circumstances indicate that an impairment loss may have been incurred, on an interim basis. The annual impairment test date for our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets is December 31. Intangible assets with determinable useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Our leasehold and operating rights have definite useful lives and are amortized over their respective lease terms, which range from nine to 19 years. We had one reporting unit with assigned goodwill at December 31, 2005 and 2004. In evaluating our goodwill for impairment, we first compare the reporting unit fair value to its carrying value. We estimate the fair value of our reporting unit by considering (1) market multiple and recent transaction values of peer companies and (2) projected discounted future cash flows if reasonably estimable. In applying the projected discounted future cash flow methodology, we (1) estimate the reporting unit future cash flows based on capacity, passenger yield, traffic, operating costs and other relevant factors and (2) discount those cash flows based on the reporting unit weighted average cost of capital. If the reporting unit fair value exceeds its carrying value, no further testing is required. If, however, the reporting unit carrying value exceeds its fair value, we then determine the amount of the impairment charge, if any. We recognize an impairment charge if the carrying value of the reporting unit goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. We perform the impairment test for our indefinite-lived intangible assets by comparing the asset fair value to its carrying value. Fair value is estimated based on projected discounted future cash flows. We recognize an impairment charge if the asset carrying value exceeds its estimated fair value. See Note 7 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about the goodwill and intangible assets impairment charges recorded during 2004. Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We record impairment losses on long-lived assets used in operations when events and circumstances indicate the assets might be impaired and the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than their carrying amounts. The amount of impairment loss recognized is the amount by which the carrying amounts of the assets exceed the estimated fair values. In order to evaluate potential impairment as required by SFAS No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets ( SFAS 144 ), we group assets at the fleet type level (the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows) and then estimate future cash flows based on assumptions involving projections of passenger yield, fuel costs, labor costs and other relevant factors. Aircraft fair values are estimated by management using published sources, appraisals and bids received from third parties, as available. Changes in these assumptions may have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. For additional information about our accounting policy for the impairment of long-lived assets, see Notes 2 and 7 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Income Tax Valuation Allowance. In accordance with SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes ( SFAS 109 ), deferred tax assets should be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The future realization of our net deferred tax assets depends on the availability of sufficient future taxable income. In making this determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence and make certain assumptions. We consider, among other things, our deferred tax liabilities; the overall business environment; our historical earnings and losses; our industry historically cyclical periods of earnings and losses; and our outlook for future years. For additional information about income taxes, see Notes 2 and 11 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Pension Plans. We sponsor defined benefit pension plans ( Plans ) for eligible employees and retirees. The impact of the Plans on our Consolidated Financial Statements as of December 31, 2005 and 2004 and for the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003 is presented in Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Assuming current plan design, we currently estimate that our defined 47 Table of Contents benefit pension plan expense in 2006 will be approximately $450 million. The effect of our Plans on our Consolidated Financial Statements is subject to many assumptions. We believe the most critical assumptions are (1) the weighted average discount rate and (2) the expected long-term rate of return on the assets of our Plans. We determine our weighted average discount rate on our measurement date primarily by reference to annualized rates earned on high quality fixed income investments and yield-to -maturity analysis specific to our estimated future benefit payments. We used a weighted average discount rate of 5.69% and 6.00% at September 30, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Additionally, our weighted average discount rate for net periodic benefit cost in each of the past three years has varied from the rate selected on our measurement date, ranging from 6.83% in 2003 to 5.81% in 2005, due to remeasurements throughout the year. The impact of a .50% change in our weighted average discount rate is shown in the table below. The expected long-term rate of return on the assets of our Plans is based primarily on specific asset investment studies for our Plans performed by outside consultants who used historical returns on our Plans assets. The investment strategy for pension plan assets is to utilize a diversified mix of global public and private equity portfolios, public and private fixed income portfolios, and private real estate and natural resource investments to earn a long-term investment return that meets or exceeds a 9% annualized return target. The impact of a .50% change in our expected long-term rate of return is shown in the table below. Effect on Accrued Effect of 2006 Pension Liability at Change in Assumption Pension Expense December 31, 2005 .50% decrease in discount rate +$ 30 million +$ 800 million .50% increase in discount rate -$ 30 million -$ 800 million .50% decrease in expected return on assets +$ 30 million - .50% increase in expected return on assets -$ 30 million - Our rate of change in future compensation levels is based primarily on labor contracts with our employees under collective bargaining agreements and expected future pay rate changes for other employees. Due to recent employee pay reductions and the freeze of benefit accruals effective December 31, 2005 in our Nonpilot Plan, adjusting the rate of change in future compensation levels does not have a significant impact on 2006 pension expense or on the accrued pension liability at December 31, 2005. For additional information about our pension plans, see Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements In May 2005, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued SFAS No. 154, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections ( SFAS 154 ). This standard replaces Accounting Principles Board ( APB ) Opinion No. 20, Accounting Changes and SFAS No. 3, Reporting Accounting Changes in Interim Financial Statements. SFAS 154 is effective for us as of January 1, 2006, and will impact how we report changes in accounting, if any, on our Consolidated Financial Statements. In March 2005, the FASB issued FASB Interpretation No. 47 ( FIN 47 ), Accounting for Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations. FIN 47 clarifies the term conditional asset retirement obligation as used in FASB Statement No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations. Our adoption of FIN 47 did not have a material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment ( SFAS 123R ) which requires an entity to recognize compensation expense in an amount equal to the fair value of share based payments, such as stock options granted to employees. This standard replaces SFAS No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation ( SFAS 123 ), and supersedes APB Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees ( APB 25 ). We adopted SFAS 123R on January 1, 2006, as required. Based on stock based awards outstanding as of that date, we estimate that related 48 Table of Contents compensation expense will be approximately $50 million and $20 million for the years ending December 31, 2006 and 2007, respectively. Market Risks Associated with Financial Instruments We have significant market risk exposure related to aircraft fuel prices and interest rates. Market risk is the potential negative impact of adverse changes in these prices or rates on our Consolidated Financial Statements. To manage the volatility relating to these exposures, we periodically enter into derivative transactions pursuant to stated policies (see Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements). We expect adjustments to the fair value of financial instruments accounted for under SFAS 133 to result in ongoing volatility in earnings and shareowners deficit. The following sensitivity analyses do not consider the effects of a change in demand for air travel, the economy as a whole, or actions we may take to seek to mitigate our exposure to a particular risk. For these and other reasons, the actual results of changes in these prices or rates may differ materially from the following hypothetical results. Aircraft Fuel Price Risk Our results of operations can be significantly impacted by changes in the price of aircraft fuel. To manage this risk, we periodically purchase options and other similar derivative instruments and enter into forward contracts for the purchase of fuel. We do not enter into fuel hedge contracts for speculative purposes. We did not have any fuel hedge contracts at December 31, 2005 or 2004. Our business plan assumes that in 2006 our aircraft fuel consumption will be approximately 2.1 billion gallons and that our average annual jet fuel price per gallon will be approximately $1.74. Based on these assumptions, a 10% rise in that jet fuel price would increase our aircraft fuel expense by approximately $370 million in 2006. In December 2005, the Bankruptcy Court authorized us to enter into fuel hedging contracts for up to 30% of our monthly estimated fuel consumption, with hedging allowed in excess of that level if we obtained approval of the Creditors Committee or the Bankruptcy Court. In February 2006, we received approval of the Creditors Committee to hedge up to 50% of our estimated 2006 aggregate fuel consumption, with no single month exceeding 80% of our estimated fuel consumption. We also agreed that we would not enter into any fuel hedging contracts that extend beyond December 31, 2006 without additional approval from the Creditors Committee or the Bankruptcy Court. For additional information regarding fuel hedging and other exposures to market risks, see Notes 5 and 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Interest Rate Risk Our exposure to market risk due to changes in interest rates primarily relates to our long-term debt obligations. Market risk associated with our fixed-rate long-term debt is the potential change in fair value resulting from a change in interest rates. A 10% decrease in average annual interest rates would have increased the estimated fair value of our long-term debt by $504 million at December 31, 2005 (including debt classified as liabilities subject to compromise) and by $1.6 billion at December 31, 2004. A 10% increase in average annual interest rates would not have a material impact on our interest expense in 2006. At December 31, 2005, we had no interest rate swaps or contractual arrangements that would reduce our interest expense. For additional information on our long-term debt agreements, see Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In accordance with SOP 90-7, interest expense is recorded only to the extent that (1) interest will be paid during the bankruptcy proceedings or (2) it is probable that interest will be an allowed priority, secured, or unsecured claim. Interest expense recorded on our Consolidated Statement of Operations totaled approximately $1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2005. Contractual interest expense (including 49 Table of Contents interest expense that is associated with obligations in liabilities subject to compromise) during this period totaled approximately $1.2 billion. Glossary of Defined Terms ASM Available Seat Mile. A measure of capacity. ASMs equal the total number of seats available for transporting passengers during a reporting period multiplied by the total number of miles flown during that period. Cargo Ton Miles The total number of tons of cargo transported during a reporting period, multiplied by the total number of miles cargo is flown during that period. Cargo Ton Mile Yield The amount of cargo revenue earned per cargo ton mile during a reporting period. CASM (Operating) Cost per Available Seat Mile. The amount of operating cost incurred per ASM during a reporting period, also referred to as unit cost . Passenger Load Factor A measure of utilized available seating capacity calculated by dividing RPMs by ASMs for a reporting period. Passenger Mile Yield The amount of passenger revenue earned per RPM during a reporting period. RASM (Operating or Passenger) Revenue per ASM. The amount of operating or passenger revenue earned per ASM during a reporting period. Passenger RASM is also referred to as unit revenue. RPM Revenue Passenger Mile. One revenue-paying passenger transported one mile. RPMs equal the number of revenue passengers during a reporting period multiplied by the number of miles flown by those passengers during that period, RPMs are also referred to as traffic . 50 Table of Contents 
