CIK: 2969
Company Name: AIR PRODUCTS CHEMICALS INC DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-11-26


ITEM 7. Includes full- and part-time employees from continuing and discontinued operations. (F) Capital expenditures on a GAAP basis include additions to plant and equipment, investment in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates, and acquisitions. The Company utilizes a non-GAAP measure in the computation of capital expenditures and includes spending associated with facilities accounted for as capital leases and purchases of noncontrolling interests. Refer to page 32 for a reconciliation of the GAAP to non-GAAP measures for 2013, 2012, and 2011. For 2010, the GAAP measure was adjusted by $123 and $42 for spending associated with facilities accounted for as capital leases and purchases of noncontrolling interests, respectively. For 2009, the GAAP measure was adjusted by $239 for spending associated with facilities accounted for as capital leases. (E) Total capitalization includes total debt plus total equity plus redeemable noncontrolling interest as of the end of the year. (D) Calculated using income from continuing operations attributable to Air Products and five-quarter average Air Products shareholders equity. (C) Total debt includes long-term debt, current portion of long-term debt, and short-term borrowings as of the end of the year. (B) Table of Contents 17 For 2009, these items include: (i) a charge of $298 ($200 after-tax, or $.94 per share) related to the global cost reduction plan, (ii) an expense of $32 ($21 after-tax, or $.10 per share) related to a customer bankruptcy and other asset actions, (iii) an expense of $8 ($5 after-tax, or $.02 per share) related to a pension settlement loss. For 2011 and 2010, these items include: expenses of $49 ($32 after-tax, or $.14 per share) and $96 ($60 after-tax, or $.28 per share), respectively, related to the net loss on Airgas transaction. For 2012, these items include: (i) a charge to operating income of $327 ($222 after-tax, or $1.03 per share) related to business restructuring and cost reduction plans, (ii) a gain of $86 ($55 after-tax, or $.25 per share) related to the gain on our previously held equity interest in DA NanoMaterials, (iii) a charge of $10 ($6 after-tax, or $.03 per share) related to a customer bankruptcy, (iv) a tax expense of $44 ($.20 per share) for a Spanish tax settlement, (v) a tax benefit of $58 ($.27 per share) for a favorable Spanish tax ruling. Certain items which management does not believe to be indicative of on-going business trends are considered non-GAAP items in our results discussions. For 2013, these items include: (i) a charge to operating income of $232 ($158 after-tax, or $.74 per share) related to business restructuring and cost reduction plans, (ii) expenses of $10 ($6 after-tax, or $.03 per share) related to advisory costs. (A) 18,900 18,300 18,900 21,300 21,600 (F) Employees at year-end 8,600 8,300 7,900 7,500 7,000 Shareholders at year-end $22.68 $25.94 $27.57 $30.48 $33.35 Book value per common share at year-end 214 217 218 215 212 Weighted average common shares outstanding assuming dilution (in millions) 210 212 213 211 210 Weighted average common shares outstanding (in millions) 1.79 1.92 2.23 2.50 2.77 Dividends declared per common share 101 ) (580 ) (485 ) (78 115 Cash provided by (used for) financing activities 998 1,014 1,170 2,435 1,697 Cash used for investing activities 1,286 1,485 1,710 1,765 1,553 Cash provided by operating activities 1,433 1,256 1,539 2,778 1,997 (E) Capital expenditures on a non-GAAP basis 1,194 1,092 1,366 2,560 1,748 (E) Capital expenditures on a GAAP basis $807 $827 $834 $841 $907 Depreciation and amortization Other Data % 47.7 % 42.0 % 43.4 % 43.0 % 45.3 (B)(D) Total debt to total capitalization % 11.2 % 10.3 % 9.7 % 9.9 % 10.5 Selling and administrative as a percentage of sales % 9.2 % 14.7 % 15.6 % 13.3 % 13.0 Operating margin % 11.5 % 18.2 % 19.4 % 16.1 % 15.3 (C) Return on average Air Products shareholders equity Financial Ratios 4,930 5,698 5,939 6,623 7,199 Total equity 4,792 5,547 5,796 6,477 7,042 Air Products shareholders equity 393 376 Redeemable noncontrolling interest 4,500 4,128 4,562 5,292 6,274 (B) Total debt 494 790 848 726 212 Working capital 13,029 13,506 14,291 16,942 17,850 Total assets $15,387 $15,934 $16,859 $18,046 $19,530 Plant and equipment, at cost Year-End Financial Position 2.96 4.74 5.63 5.44 4.68 Net income 2.59 4.34 5.22 4.66 4.73 Income from continuing operations Diluted earnings per common share attributable to Air Products: 3.01 4.85 5.75 5.53 4.74 Net income 2.64 4.44 5.33 4.73 4.79 Income from continuing operations Basic earnings per common share attributable to Air Products: 631 1,029 1,224 1,167 994 Net income attributable to Air Products 554 942 1,134 999 1,004 Income from continuing operations attributable to Air Products 149 306 375 287 308 Income tax provision 122 122 116 124 142 Interest expense 112 127 154 154 168 Equity affiliates income 724 1,268 1,508 1,282 1,324 Operating income 298 327 232 Business restructuring and cost reduction plans 116 115 119 126 134 Research and development 882 887 942 947 1,066 Selling and administrative 5,819 6,289 7,098 7,052 7,472 Cost of sales $7,847 $8,616 $9,674 $9,612 $10,180 Sales Operating Results (A) 2009 (A) 2010 (A) 2011 (A) 2012 (A) 2013 (Millions of dollars, except per share) SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA ITEM 6. Table of Contents 16 (Assumes Reinvestment of All Dividends) Comparative Growth of a $100 Investment Air Products, S&P 500, and Chemicals Composite Indices COMPARISON OF FIVE YEAR CUMULATIVE SHAREHOLDER RETURN The performance graph below compares the five-year cumulative returns of the Company common stock with those of the Standard & Poor 500 and Dow Jones Chemicals Composite Indices. The figures assume an initial investment of $100 and the reinvestment of all dividends. Performance Graph Table of Contents 15 and 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, through repurchase agreements established with several brokers. During fiscal year 2013, we purchased 5.7 million of our outstanding shares at a cost of $461.6 million. No purchases were made during the fourth quarter of 2013. At 30 September 2013, $485.3 million in share repurchase authorization remains. Rules 10b5-1 On 15 September 2011, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding common stock. This program does not have a stated expiration date. We repurchase shares pursuant to Purchases of Equity Securities by the Issuer $2.50 0.64 82.70 77.21 85.83 Fourth 0.64 80.73 76.11 92.79 Third 0.64 91.80 85.60 92.48 Second $0.58 $85.19 $72.26 $90.20 First Dividend Close Low High 2012 $2.77 0.71 106.57 90.12 114.75 Fourth 0.71 91.57 84.04 97.12 Third 0.71 87.12 84.15 90.34 Second $0.64 $84.02 $76.78 $86.31 First Dividend Close Low High 2013 Quarterly Stock Information Avenue, Brooklyn, New York 11219, telephone (800) 937-5449 (U.S. and Canada) or (718) 921-8124 (all other locations); Internet website www.amstock.com; and e-mail address info@amstock.com. As of 31 October 2013, there were 7,040 record holders of our common stock. Quarterly stock prices, as reported on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape of transactions, and dividend information for the last two fiscal years appear below. Cash dividends on the Company common stock are paid quarterly. Our objective is to pay dividends consistent with the reinvestment of earnings necessary for long-term growth. It is our expectation that we will continue to pay comparable cash dividends in the future. th Our common stock (ticker symbol APD) is listed on the New York Stock Exchange. Our transfer agent and registrar is American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, 6201 15 MARKET FOR REGISTRANT S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS, AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES ITEM 5. PART II NOT APPLICABLE ITEM 4. While we do not expect that any sums we may have to pay in connection with these or any other legal proceeding would have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position or net cash flows, a future charge for regulatory fines or damage awards could have a significant impact on our net income in the period in which it is recorded. We have denied the allegations made by the authorities and filed an appeal in October 2010 to the Brazilian courts. Certain of the Company defenses, if successful, could result in the matter being dismissed with no fine against us. The Company, with advice of its outside legal counsel, has assessed the status of this matter and has concluded that, although an adverse final judgment after exhausting all appeals is reasonably possible, such a judgment is not probable. As a result, no provision has been made in the consolidated financial statements. In September 2010, the Brazilian Administrative Council for Economic Defense (CADE) issued a decision against our Brazilian subsidiary, Air Products Brasil Ltda., and several other Brazilian industrial gas companies for alleged anticompetitive activities. CADE imposed a civil fine of R$179.2 million (approximately $81 million at 30 September 2013) on Air Products Brasil Ltda. This fine was based on a recommendation by a unit of the Brazilian Ministry of Justice whose investigation began in 2003, alleging violation of competition laws with respect to the sale of industrial and medical gases. The fines are based on a percentage of the Company total revenue in Brazil in 2003. Table of Contents 14 The Company is a party to proceedings under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (the federal Superfund law); the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and similar state environmental laws relating to the designation of certain sites for investigation or remediation. Presently there are approximately 33 sites on which a final settlement has not been reached where the Company, along with others, has been designated a Potentially Responsible Party by the Environmental Protection Agency or is otherwise engaged in investigation or remediation, including cleanup activity at certain of its current or former manufacturing sites. We do not expect that any sums we may have to pay in connection with these matters would have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position. Additional information on the Company environmental exposure is included under Narrative Description of the Company Business Generally Environmental Controls. From time to time, we are also involved in proceedings, investigations, and audits involving governmental authorities in connection with environmental, health, safety, competition, and tax matters. In the normal course of business, the Company and its subsidiaries are involved in various legal proceedings, including contract, product liability, intellectual property, and insurance matters. Although litigation with respect to these matters is routine and incidental to the conduct of our business, such litigation could result in large monetary awards, especially if a civil jury is allowed to determine compensatory and/or punitive damages. However, we believe that litigation currently pending to which we are a party will be resolved without any material adverse effect on our financial position, earnings, or cash flows. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS ITEM 3. The Company or its affiliates own approximately 33% of the real estate in this segment and lease the remaining locations. The Energy division produces electric power at various facilities globally, including a gas-fueled power generation facility in Thailand, in which the Company has a 48.8% interest. Flue gas desulfurization operations are conducted at the Pure Air facility in Chesterton, Indiana. The Company is constructing a 50MW renewable energy facility in Tees Valley, U.K. with the expected start-up in 2014 and has announced plans to build a second renewable energy facility on an adjacent site. Energy commercial and engineering team members are located at Trexlertown, Pennsylvania, Hersham and Tees Valley, U.K. The Equipment division operates at eight facilities in the U.S., one in Europe and three in Asia. We manufacture a significant portion of the world supply of LNG equipment at our Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, site. In early 2014, the Company expects to open its new LNG manufacturing facility at the Port of Manatee, Florida. Air separation columns and cold boxes for Company-owned facilities and third-party sales are produced by operations in Caojing, China and Tanjung Langsat, Malaysia as well as in the Wilkes-Barre facility. Cryogenic transportation containers for liquid helium are manufactured and reconstructed at facilities in eastern Pennsylvania; Liberal, Kansas; and Istres, France. Equipment commercial and engineering team members are located at offices in Trexlertown and Bethlehem, Pennsylvania; Hersham, U.K.; Pune, India; and Shanghai, China. Equipment and Energy The segment conducts R&D related activities at 11 locations worldwide, including Trexlertown, Pennsylvania; Carlsbad, California; Tempe, Arizona; Utrecht, the Netherlands; at 3 sites in Germany; Chubei and Hsin Chu, Taiwan; Shanghai, China; and Kawasaki, Japan. The Performance Materials division within this segment operates 5 production facilities in the United States, 3 in Europe and 4 in Asia. Seven of the Performance Materials facility sites are owned. The Electronics business within this segment produces, packages, and stores nitrogen, specialty gases, and electronic chemicals, and manufactures equipment at 40 sites in the United States (9 of which are owned and the majority of the remaining are located on customer sites), nine leased facilities in Europe and the Middle East, and 55 facilities in Asia (13 of which are owned, 28 of which are located on customer sites and the remainder are leased or term grants). Electronics and Performance Materials offices in Texas, Louisiana, California, and Calgary, Alberta in North America as well as in Hersham, U.K.; Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Moscow, Russia; Shanghai, China; Singapore; Bahrain; and Doha, Qatar. Table of Contents 13 Tonnage Gases operates over 65 plants (9 are located on owned property) in North and South America that produce over 300 standard tons per day of product. Over 40 of these facilities produce or recover hydrogen. Many of the hydrogen facilities support the major pipeline systems located in Los Angeles, California and Alberta, Canada; and along the United States Gulf Coast through the Gulf Coast Connection Pipeline, which interconnects Texas and Louisiana pipeline networks. The segment also operates 30 tonnage plants in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa and 26 tonnage plants within Asia. The majority of the sites in this segment are under structured long-term leasehold type agreements. Sales support offices are located at our headquarters in Trexlertown, Pennsylvania and leased Tonnage Gases Research and development (R&D) activities for this segment are conducted in Trexlertown, Pennsylvania; Basingstoke and Carrington in the U.K.; a leased site in British Columbia, Canada; and a leased site in Shanghai, China. locations with the acquisition of EPCO Carbon Dioxide Products, Inc. in May of this year. Helium is processed at sites in Kansas and Texas and then distributed to/from transfill sites in the U.S., Canada, Europe, and Asia. Sales support offices are located at our global office centers above, at 9 leased properties in the U.S. and Canada, at 9 leased sites and at production plant sites in Europe, at 10 leased sites and at production plant sites in Asia and at regional production plant sites in South America. 2 Merchant Gases currently operates 300 production and distribution facilities in North and South America (98 are located on owned property), 152 facilities in Europe and Middle East and Africa (50 are on owned property), and 87 facilities within Asia (11 are on owned property). The production and distribution facilities include approximately 30 integrated sites that primarily serve the Tonnage Gases or Electronics businesses. These assets are also included in information provided for those businesses. We added 12 liquid CO Merchant Gases The following is a description of the properties used by our four business segments. We believe that, in general, our facilities are suitable and adequate for our current and anticipated future levels of operation and are adequately maintained. Air Products owns its principal administrative offices, which are our headquarters in Trexlertown, Pennsylvania and administrative offices in Hersham, U.K. and Santiago, Chile. The Company leases administrative offices in Ontario, Canada; Crewe, U.K.; Brussels, Belgium; Paris, France; Barcelona and Madrid, Spain; Rotterdam and Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Bochum, Germany; Moscow, Russia; Warsaw, Poland; S o Paulo, Brazil; Shanghai, Beijing and Xi an, China; Taipei, Taiwan; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Kawasaki, Japan; Seoul, South Korea; and Singapore. PROPERTIES ITEM 2. We have not received any written comments from the Commission staff that remain unresolved. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS ITEM 1B. Adverse equity market conditions and volatility in the credit markets may have an unfavorable impact on the value of the Company pension trust assets and its future estimated pension liabilities, significantly affecting the net periodic benefit costs of its pension plans and ongoing funding requirements for these plans. As a result, the Company financial results and cash flow in any period could be negatively impacted. For information about potential impacts from pension funding and the use of certain assumptions regarding pension matters, see the discussion in Note 16, Retirement Benefits, to the consolidated financial statements, included in Item 8, below. Pension Liabilities The Company results of operations and financial condition could be negatively impacted by its pension plans. The Company faces strong competition from several large global competitors and many smaller regional ones in many of its business segments. Introduction by competitors of new technologies, competing products, or additional capacity could weaken demand for or impact pricing of the Company products, negatively impacting financial results. In addition, competitors pricing policies could materially affect the Company profitability or its market share. Competition Inability to compete effectively in a segment could adversely impact sales and financial performance. an impairment on tangible assets, such as facilities and equipment, or intangible assets, such as intellectual property or goodwill, which would have a negative impact on its financial results. Table of Contents 12 Weak demand may cause underutilization of the Company manufacturing capacity or elimination of product lines; contract terminations or customer shutdowns may force sale or abandonment of facilities and equipment; and contractual provisions may allow customer buyout of facilities or equipment. These or other events associated with weak economic conditions or specific end market, product, or customer events may require the Company to record Asset Impairments The Company may be required to record impairment on its long-lived assets. The Company is subject to litigation and regulatory proceedings in the normal course of business and could become subject to additional claims in the future, some of which could be material. The outcome of existing legal proceedings may differ from the Company expectations because the outcomes of litigation, including regulatory matters, are often difficult to predict reliably. Various factors or developments can lead the Company to change current estimates of liabilities and related insurance receivables, where applicable, or make such estimates for matters previously not susceptible to reasonable estimates, such as a significant judicial ruling or judgment, a significant settlement, significant regulatory developments, or changes in applicable law. A future adverse ruling, settlement, or unfavorable development could result in charges that could have a material adverse effect on the Company results of operations in any particular period. For a more detailed discussion of the legal proceedings involving the Company, see Item 3, below. Litigation and Regulatory Proceedings The Company financial results may be affected by various legal and regulatory proceedings, including those involving antitrust, tax, environmental, or other matters. The Company business involves the use, storage, and transmission of information about its employees, vendors, and customers. The protection of such information, as well as the Company information, is critical to the Company. The regulatory environment surrounding information security and privacy is increasingly demanding, with the frequent imposition of new and constantly changing requirements. The Company has established policies and procedures to help protect the security and privacy of this information. The Company also, from time to time, exports sensitive customer data and technical information to recipients outside the United States. Breaches of our security measures or the accidental loss, inadvertent disclosure, or unapproved dissemination of proprietary information or sensitive or confidential data about us or our customers, including the potential loss or disclosure of such information or data as a result of fraud, trickery, or other forms of deception, could expose us, our customers, or the individuals affected to a risk of loss or misuse of this information, result in litigation and potential liability for us, damage our reputation, or otherwise harm our business. We depend on information technology to enable us to operate efficiently and interface with customers as well as to maintain financial accuracy and efficiency. Our information technology capabilities are delivered through a combination of internal and outsourced service providers. If we do not allocate and effectively manage the resources necessary to build and sustain the proper technology infrastructure, we could be subject to transaction errors, processing inefficiencies, the loss of customers, business disruptions, or the loss of or damage to our intellectual property through security breach. As with all large systems, our information systems could be penetrated by outside parties intent on extracting information, corrupting information, or disrupting business processes. The Company systems have in the past been and likely will in the future be subject to hacking attempts. To date, the Company is not aware of any impact on its operations or financial results from such attempts; however, unauthorized access could disrupt our business operations, result in the loss of assets, and have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, or results of operations. Information Security The security of the Company Information Technology systems could be compromised, which could adversely affect its ability to operate. The Company operation of its facilities, pipelines, and delivery systems inherently entails hazards that require continuous oversight and control, such as pipeline leaks and ruptures, fire, explosions, toxic releases, mechanical failures, or vehicle accidents. If operational risks materialize, they could result in loss of life, damage to the environment, or loss of production, all of which could negatively impact the Company ongoing operations, reputation, financial results, and cash flow. In addition, the Company operating results are dependent on the continued operation of its production facilities and its ability to meet customer requirements. Operating results are also dependent on the Company ability to complete new construction projects on time, on budget, and in accordance with performance requirements. Failure to do so may expose the Company to loss of revenue, potential litigation, and loss of business reputation. Operational Risks Operational and execution risks may adversely affect the Company operations or financial results. Table of Contents 11 The Company operations could be impacted by catastrophic events outside the Company control, including severe weather conditions such as hurricanes, floods, earthquakes, and storms, or acts of war and terrorism. Any such event could cause a serious business disruption that could affect the Company ability to produce and distribute its products and possibly expose it to third-party liability claims. Additionally, such events could impact the Company suppliers or customers, in which event energy and raw materials may be unavailable to the Company, or its customers may be unable to purchase or accept the Company products and services. Any such occurrence could have a negative impact on the Company operations and financial results. Catastrophic Events Catastrophic events could disrupt the Company operations or the operations of its suppliers or customers, having a negative impact on the Company business, financial results, and cash flow. The majority of the Company sales are derived from outside the United States and denominated in foreign currencies. The Company also has significant production facilities that are located outside of the United States. Financial results therefore will be affected by changes in foreign currency rates. The Company uses certain financial instruments to mitigate these effects, but it is not cost-effective to hedge foreign currency exposure in a manner that would entirely eliminate the effects of changes in foreign exchange rates on earnings, cash flows, and fair values of assets and liabilities. Accordingly, reported sales, net earnings, cash flows, and fair values have been and in the future will be affected by changes in foreign exchange rates. For a more detailed discussion of currency exposure, see Item 7A, below. Currency Fluctuations Changes in foreign currencies may adversely affect the Company financial results. Achieving our long-term profitability and return goals depends significantly on our efforts to control or reduce our operating costs. Because many of our costs are affected by factors outside or substantially outside our control, we generally must seek to control or reduce costs through operating efficiency or other initiatives. Such initiatives are important to our success. If we are not able to identify and complete initiatives designed to control or reduce costs and increase operating efficiency, or if the cost savings initiatives we have implemented to date, or any future cost-savings initiatives, do not generate expected cost savings, our financial results could be adversely impacted. We may not be able to successfully implement initiatives to improve productivity and streamline operations to control or reduce costs. The Company is subject to extensive federal, state, local, and foreign environmental and safety laws and regulations concerning, among other things, emissions in the air; discharges to land and water; and the generation, handling, treatment, and disposal of hazardous waste and other materials. The Company takes its environmental responsibilities very seriously, but there is a risk of environmental impact inherent in our manufacturing operations and transportation of chemicals. Future developments and more stringent environmental regulations may require the Company to make additional unforeseen environmental expenditures. In addition, laws and regulations may require significant expenditures for environmental protection equipment, compliance, and remediation. These additional costs may adversely affect financial results. For a more detailed description of these matters, see Narrative Description of the Company Business Generally Environmental Controls, above. Environmental Compliance Costs and expenses resulting from compliance with environmental regulations may negatively impact the Company operations and financial results. Increased public concern may result in more international, U.S. federal, and/or regional requirements to reduce or mitigate the effects of GHG. Although uncertain, these developments could increase the Company costs related to consumption of electric power, hydrogen production, and fluorinated gases production. The Company believes it will be able to mitigate some of the increased costs through its contractual terms, but the lack of definitive legislation or regulatory requirements prevents accurate estimate of the long-term impact on the Company. Any legislation that limits or taxes GHG emissions could impact the Company growth, increase its operating costs, or reduce demand for certain of its products. mandatory reporting and anticipated constraints on GHG emissions in Ontario, Canada and South Korea. In addition, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is regulating GHG emissions for new construction and major modifications to existing facilities. Table of Contents 10 Some of the Company operations are within jurisdictions that have or are developing regulatory regimes governing emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG). These include existing and expanding coverage under the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme; mandatory reporting and reductions at manufacturing facilities in Alberta, Canada; and Greenhouse Gases Legislative and regulatory responses to global climate change create financial risk. The Company is subject to government regulation in the United States and foreign jurisdictions in which it conducts its business. The application of laws and regulations to the Company business is sometimes unclear. Compliance with laws and regulations may involve significant costs or require changes in business practice that could result in reduced profitability. Determination of noncompliance can result in penalties or sanctions that could also impact financial results. Compliance with changes in laws or regulations can require additional capital expenditures or increase operating costs. Export controls or other regulatory restrictions could prevent the Company from shipping its products to and from some markets or increase the cost of doing so. Export restrictions continue to attract external focus by multiple customs and export enforcement authorities. Changes in tax laws and regulations and international tax treaties could affect the financial results of the Company businesses. Increasingly aggressive enforcement of anti-bribery and anti-corruption requirements, including the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, the United Kingdom Bribery Act and the China Anti-Unfair Competition Law, could subject the Company to criminal or civil sanctions if a violation occurs. We have internal control policies and procedures to foster compliance with these laws, including compliance and training programs for our employees; however, the foregoing cannot eliminate the risk that violations could be committed by our employees, agents or joint venture partners. Regulatory Compliance The Company is subject to extensive government regulation in jurisdictions around the globe in which it does business. Changes in regulations addressing, among other things, environmental compliance, import/export restrictions, anti-bribery and corruption, and taxes, can negatively impact the Company operations and financial results. The Company typically contracts to pass through cost increases in energy and raw materials to its customers, but cost variability can still have a negative impact on its results. The Company may not be able to raise prices as quickly as costs rise, or competitive pressures may prevent full recovery. Increases in energy or raw material costs that cannot be passed on to customers for competitive or other reasons would negatively impact the Company revenues and earnings. Even where costs are passed through, price increases can cause lower sales volume. The Electronics and Performance Materials segment uses a wide variety of raw materials, including alcohols, ethyleneamines, cyclohexylamine, acrylonitriles, and glycols. Shortages or price escalation in these materials could negatively impact financial results. The Company supply of crude helium for purification and resale is largely dependent upon natural gas production by crude helium suppliers. Lower natural gas production (which may result from natural gas pricing or supplier operating issues) or interruptions in sales from other crude helium suppliers, can reduce the Company supplies of crude helium available for processing and resale to its customers. Hydrocarbons, including natural gas, are the primary feedstock for the production of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and syngas. Energy, including electricity, natural gas, and diesel fuel for delivery trucks, is the largest cost component of the Company business. Because the Company industrial gas facilities use substantial amounts of electricity, energy price fluctuations could materially impact the Company revenues and earnings. A disruption in the supply of energy or raw materials, whether due to market conditions, legislative or regulatory actions, natural events, or other disruption, could prevent the Company from meeting its contractual commitments, harming its business and financial results. Raw Material and Energy Cost and Availability Interruption in ordinary sources of supply or an inability to recover increases in energy and raw material costs from customers could result in lost sales or reduced profitability. A number of new technologies and new product offerings are being developed or implemented by the Company. Some of our existing technologies are being implemented in products and designs beyond our experience base. These technological expansions can create nontraditional performance risks to our operations. Failure of the technologies to work as predicted or unintended consequences of new designs or uses, could lead to cost overruns, project delays, financial penalties, or damage to our reputation. New Technologies New technologies create performance risks that could impact our financial results or reputation. Table of Contents 9 At 30 September 2013, the Company had total consolidated debt of $6,273.6 million, of which $1,617.3 million will mature in the next twelve months. The Company expects to continue to incur indebtedness to fund new projects and replace maturing debt. Although the Company actively manages its interest rate risk through the use of derivatives and diversified debt obligations, not all borrowings at variable rates are hedged, and new debt will be priced at market rates. If interest rates increase, the Company interest expense could increase significantly, affecting earnings and reducing cash flow available for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, and other purposes. In addition, changes by any rating agency to the Company outlook or credit ratings could increase the Company cost of borrowing and weaken our ability to access capital and credit markets on terms commercially acceptable to us. For a more detailed discussion of interest rate risk, see Item 7A, below. Interest Rate Increases The Company earnings, cash flow, and financial position can be impacted by interest rate increases and access to credit. Our developing market operations may be subject to greater risks than those faced by our operations in mature economies, including geopolitical, legal, economic and talent risks. We expect to achieve our long-term financial goals, in part, by achieving disproportionate growth in developing regions. Should growth rates or our market share fall substantially below expected levels in these regions, our results could be negatively impacted. Our success will depend, in part, on our ability to manage the risks inherent in operating in a developing market, including unfamiliar regulatory environments, new relationships with local partners, language and cultural differences, and tailoring products for acceptance by local markets. The majority of the Company revenue is derived from international operations. In addition, the Company is actively investing significant capital and other resources in emerging markets. The Company operations in certain foreign jurisdictions may be subject to project delays due to unanticipated government actions and to nationalization and expropriation risk, and some of its contractual relationships within these jurisdictions are subject to cancellation without full compensation for loss. Economic and political conditions within foreign jurisdictions, social unrest, or strained relations between countries can cause fluctuations in demand, price volatility, supply disruptions, or loss of property. The occurrence of any of these risks could have a material adverse impact on the Company operations and financial results. Operational, Political, and Legal Risks of International Operations The Company foreign operations can be adversely impacted by nationalization or expropriation of property, undeveloped property rights and legal systems, or political instability. Developing market operations present special risks. Demand for the Company products and services depends in part on the general economic conditions affecting the countries and industries in which the Company does business. In the past few years, uncertain economic conditions in certain geographies and industries served by the Company have impacted and may in the future impact demand for the Company products and services, in turn negatively impacting the Company revenues and earnings. Unfavorable conditions can depress sales in a given market, affect our margins, constrain our operating flexibility, or result in charges which are unusual or nonrecurring. Excess capacity in the Company or its competitors manufacturing facilities could decrease the Company ability to maintain pricing and generate profits. Unanticipated contract terminations or project delays by current customers can also negatively impact financial results. Our operating results in one or more segments may also be affected by uncertain or deteriorating economic conditions particularly germane to that segment or to particular customer markets within that segment. Overall Economic Conditions A weakening or reversal of economic recovery in certain markets in which the Company does business may decrease the demand for its goods and services and adversely impact its revenues, operating results, and cash flow. In conjunction with evaluating an investment in the Company and the forward-looking information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K or presented elsewhere by management from time to time, you should carefully read the following risk factors. Any of the following risks could have a material adverse effect on our business, operating results, financial condition, and the actual outcome of matters as to which forward-looking statements are made and could adversely affect the value of an investment in our common stock as well. While we believe we have identified and discussed below the key risk factors affecting our business, there may be additional risks and uncertainties that adversely affect our business, performance, or financial condition in the future that are not presently known, are not currently believed to be significant, or are not identified below because they are common to all businesses. RISK FACTORS ITEM 1A. Table of Contents 8 Mr. McGlade has announced that he plans to retire in 2014. (1) Member, Executive Committee of the Board of Directors (C) Member, Board of Directors (B) Member, Corporate Executive Committee (A) Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Administrative Officer (became Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Administrative Officer in 2013; Senior Vice President and General Counsel in 2009; and Assistant General Counsel, Americas and Europe in 2007). 55 (A) John D. Stanley Senior Vice President and General Manager Merchant Gases (became Senior Vice President and General Manager Merchant Gases in 2014; Senior Vice President Supply Chain in 2012; Senior Vice President - Corporate Strategy and Technology in 2011; and Vice President and General Manager, Global Electronics in 2007). 51 (A) Corning F. Painter Senior Vice President and General Manager Electronics, Performance Materials, Strategy and Technology (became Senior Vice President and General Manager Electronics, Performance Materials, Strategy and Technology in 2012; Group Vice President, Dow Coating Materials at Dow Chemical Company in 2010; Vice President, Polyurethanes Business at Dow Chemical Company in 2009; and Vice President at Rohm and Haas in 2008). 51 (A) Guillermo Novo Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer (became Chairman and Chief Executive Officer in 2008). 59 (A)(B)(C) John E. McGlade (1) Senior Vice President Supply Chain (became Senior Vice President Supply Chain in 2014 and Vice President and General Manager of Performance Materials in 2009). 53 (A) Patricia A. Mattimore Senior Vice President and General Manager, Tonnage Gases, Equipment and Energy and China President (became Senior Vice President and General Manager, Tonnage Gases, Equipment and Energy and China President in 2011; Senior Vice President and General Manager, Tonnage Gases, Equipment and Energy in 2009; Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary in 2008). 52 (A) Stephen J. Jones Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (became Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer in 2013 and Vice President and Corporate Controller in 2008). 49 (A) M. Scott Crocco Office Age Name Information with respect to offices held is stated in fiscal years. The Company executive officers and their respective positions and ages on 21 November 2013 follow. Executive Officers of the Company Table of Contents 7 No segment business is subject to a government entity renegotiation of profits or termination of contracts that would be material to our business as a whole. Governmental Contracts We do not have a homogeneous customer base or end market, and no single customer accounts for more than 10% of our consolidated revenues. The Tonnage Gases and Electronics and Performance Materials segments do have concentrations of customers in specific industries, primarily refining, chemicals, and electronics. Within each of these industries, the Company has several large-volume customers with long-term contracts. A negative trend affecting one of these industries, or the loss of one of these major customers, although not material to our consolidated revenues, could have an adverse impact on the affected segment. Customers The Company maintains inventory where required to facilitate the supply of products to customers on a reasonable delivery schedule. Merchant Gases inventory consists primarily of industrial, specialty gas, and crude helium inventories supplied to customers through liquid bulk and packaged gases supply modes. Electronics and Performance Materials inventories consist primarily of bulk and packaged specialty gases and chemicals, bulk and packaged performance chemical solutions and also include inventories to support sales of equipment and services. Specialty and performance chemical inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. Tonnage Gases and Equipment and Energy have limited inventory. Working Capital Although none of the four business segments are subject to seasonal fluctuations to any material extent, the Electronics and Performance Materials segment is susceptible to the cyclical nature of the electronics industry and to seasonal fluctuations in underlying end-use performance materials markets. Seasonality The public may also read and copy any materials filed by the Company with the SEC at the SEC Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC maintains an Internet site that contains reports, proxy, and information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC. The address of that site is www.sec.gov. the Company Internet website at www.airproducts.com. Such documents are available as soon as reasonably practicable after electronic filing of the material with the SEC. All 1934 Act Reports filed during the period covered by this report were available on the Company website on the same day as filing. Table of Contents 6 All periodic and current reports, registration statements, and other filings that the Company is required to file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the Company annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the 1934 Act Reports), are available free of charge through Available Information On 30 September 2013, the Company (including majority-owned subsidiaries) had approximately 21,600 employees, of whom approximately 21,300 were full-time employees and of whom approximately 13,600 were located outside the United States. The Company has collective bargaining agreements with unions at various locations that expire on various dates over the next four years. The Company considers relations with its employees to be satisfactory. Employees Although precise amounts are difficult to determine, the Company estimates that we spent $4.0 million in both 2013 and 2012, on capital projects to control pollution. Capital expenditures to control pollution in future years are estimated at approximately $4.0 million in both 2014 and 2015. The amounts charged to income from continuing operations related to environmental matters totaled $37.1 million in fiscal 2013, $44.7 million in 2012, and $34.0 million in 2011. These amounts represent an estimate of expenses for compliance with environmental laws, and activities undertaken to meet internal Company standards. Refer to Note 17, Commitments and Contingencies, to the consolidated financial statements for additional information. The Company is subject to various environmental laws and regulations in the countries in which it has operations. Compliance with these laws and regulations results in higher capital expenditures and costs. From time to time, the Company is involved in proceedings under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA: the federal Superfund law), Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and similar state and foreign environmental laws relating to the designation of certain sites for investigation or remediation. Additional information with respect to these proceedings is included under Item 3, Legal Proceedings, below. The Company accounting policy for environmental expenditures is discussed in Note 1, Major Accounting Policies, and environmental loss contingencies are discussed in Note 17, Commitments and Contingencies, to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 8, below. Environmental Controls As of 1 November 2013, the Company owns 972 United States patents, 3,439 foreign patents, and is a licensee under certain patents owned by others. While the patents and licenses are considered important, the Company does not consider its business as a whole to be materially dependent upon any particular patent, patent license, or group of patents or licenses. Research and development expenditures were $133.7 million during fiscal year 2013, $126.4 million in fiscal year 2012, and $118.8 million in fiscal year 2011. In addition, the Company expended $45.5 million on customer-sponsored research activities during fiscal year 2013, $45.4 million in fiscal year 2012, and $29.1 million in fiscal year 2011. The Company corporate research groups, which include science and process technology centers, support the research efforts of various businesses throughout the Company. Development of technology for use within Merchant Gases, Tonnage Gases, and Equipment and Energy focuses primarily on new and improved processes and equipment for the production and delivery of industrial gases and new or improved applications for all such products. Research and technology development for Electronics and Performance Materials supports development of new products and applications to strengthen and extend the Company present positions. Work is also performed in Electronics and Performance Materials to lower processing costs and develop new processes for the new products. The Company pursues a market-oriented approach to technology development through research and development, engineering, and commercial development processes. It conducts research and development principally in its laboratories located in the United States (Trexlertown, Pennsylvania; Carlsbad, California; Milton, Wisconsin; and Phoenix, Arizona), Canada (Vancouver), the United Kingdom (Basingstoke and Carrington), Germany (Hamburg), the Netherlands (Utrecht), Spain (Barcelona), Japan (Kawasaki), China (Shanghai), Korea (Giheung), and Taiwan (Chupei and Hsinchu City). The Company also funds and cooperates in research and development programs conducted by a number of major universities and undertakes research work funded by others principally the United States government. Technology Development Table of Contents 5 Financial information about the Company foreign operations and investments is included in Note 8, Summarized Financial Information of Equity Affiliates; Note 22, Income Taxes; and Note 25, Business Segment and Geographic Information, to the consolidated financial statements included under Item 8, herein. Information about foreign currency translation is included under Foreign Currency in Note 1, Major Accounting Policies, and information on the Company exposure to currency fluctuations is included in Note 13, Financial Instruments, to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 8, below, and in Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk, included under Item 7A, below. Export sales from operations in the United States to third-party customers amounted to $410.3 million, $521.1 million, and $537.3 million in fiscal years 2013, 2012, and 2011, respectively. The Company has majority or wholly owned foreign subsidiaries that operate in Canada, 18 European countries (including the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and Spain), 11 Asian countries (including China, Korea, and Taiwan), 8 Latin American countries (including Chile and Brazil) and 2 African countries. The Company also owns less-than-controlling interests in entities operating in Europe, Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America (including Italy, Germany, China, India, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, South Africa, and Mexico). The Company, through subsidiaries, affiliates, and less-than-controlling interests, conducts business in over 50 countries outside the United States. Its international businesses are subject to risks customarily encountered in foreign operations, including fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and controls; import and export controls; and other economic, political, and regulatory policies of local governments. Narrative Description of the Company Business Generally The backlog of equipment orders (including letters of intent believed to be firm) from third-party customers was approximately $402 million on 30 September 2013, approximately 6% of which is for cryogenic equipment and 66% of which is for LNG heat exchangers, as compared with a total backlog of approximately $450 million on 30 September 2012. The Company expects that approximately $250 million of the backlog on 30 September 2013 will be completed during fiscal year 2014. Equipment and Energy competes with a great number of firms for all of its offerings except LNG heat exchangers, for which there are fewer competitors due to the limited market size and proprietary technologies. Competition is based primarily on technological performance, service, technical know-how, price, and performance guarantees. Steel, aluminum, and capital equipment subcomponents (compressors, etc.) are the principal raw materials in the equipment portion of this segment. Adequate raw materials for individual projects are acquired under firm purchase agreements. Limestone is the largest cost component in the production of energy. The Company mitigates these cost components, in part, through long-term cost pass-through contracts. During fiscal year 2013, no significant difficulties were encountered in obtaining adequate supplies of raw materials. Energy markets are served through the Company operation and partial ownership of cogeneration and flue gas desulfurization facilities. In addition, we are developing hydrogen as an energy carrier, waste-to-energy facilities to produce electricity, carbon capture technologies for a variety of industrial and power applications, and oxygen-based technologies to serve energy markets in the future. The Company operates and owns a 48.8% interest in a 112-megawatt gas-fueled power generation facility in Thailand. The Company also operates and owns a 70% interest in a flue gas desulfurization facility in Indiana. Equipment is sold globally to customers in the chemical and petrochemical manufacturing, oil and gas recovery and processing, and steel and primary metals processing industries. The segment also provides a broad range of plant design, engineering, procurement, and construction management services to its customers. Equipment and Energy designs and manufactures cryogenic equipment for air separation, hydrocarbon recovery and purification, natural gas liquefaction (LNG), and helium distribution (cryogenic transportation containers), and serves energy markets in a variety of ways. Equipment and Energy Total sales from Electronics and Performance Materials constituted approximately 22% of consolidated sales in fiscal year 2013, 24% in fiscal year 2012, and 24% in fiscal year 2011. The Electronics and Performance Materials segment faces competition on a product-by-product basis against competitors ranging from niche suppliers with a single product to larger and more vertically integrated companies. Competition is principally conducted on the basis of price, quality, product performance, reliability of product supply, technical innovation, service, and global infrastructure. Table of Contents 4 The Electronics and Performance Materials segment uses a wide variety of raw materials, including ammonia, tungsten powder, hydrogen fluoride, amines, alcohols, epoxides, organic acids, and ketones. During fiscal year 2013, no significant difficulties were encountered in obtaining adequate supplies of energy or raw materials. Electronics and Performance Materials also provides performance materials for a wide range of products, including coatings, inks, adhesives, civil engineering, personal care, institutional and industrial cleaning, mining, oil refining, and polyurethanes, and focuses on the development of new materials aimed at providing unique functionality to emerging markets. Principal performance materials include polyurethane catalysts and other additives for polyurethane foam, epoxy amine curing agents and auxiliary products for epoxy systems, specialty surfactants for formulated systems, and functional additives for industrial cleaning and mining industries. Electronics and Performance Materials employs applications technology to provide solutions to a broad range of global industries through chemical synthesis, analytical technology, process engineering, and surface science. This segment provides the electronics industry with specialty gases (such as nitrogen trifluoride, arsine, phosphine, white ammonia, silicon tetrafluoride, carbon tetrafluoride, hexafluoromethane, critical etch gases, and tungsten hexafluoride), tonnage gases (primarily nitrogen), chemicals mechanical planarization slurries, specialty chemicals, services, and equipment primarily for the manufacture of silicon and compound semiconductors and thin film transistor liquid crystal displays. These products are delivered through various supply chain methods, including bulk delivery systems or distribution by pipelines such as those located in California Silicon Valley; Phoenix, Arizona; Tainan, Taiwan; Gumi and Giheung, Korea; and Tianjin China. Electronics and Performance Materials Tonnage Gases sales constituted approximately 33% of the Company consolidated sales in fiscal year 2013, 33% in fiscal year 2012, and 34% in fiscal year 2011. Tonnage Gases hydrogen and related product sales constituted approximately 21% of consolidated sales in fiscal year 2013, 19% in fiscal year 2012, and 21% in fiscal year 2011. Tonnage Gases competes against three global industrial gas companies: L Air Liquide S.A.; Linde AG; Praxair, Inc.; and several regional competitors. Competition is based primarily on price, reliability of supply, the development of applications that use industrial gases, and, in some cases, provision of other services or products such as power and steam generation. We also have a competitive advantage in regions where we have pipeline networks, which enable us to provide a reliable and economic supply of products to customers. Natural gas is the principal raw material for hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and syngas production. Electric power is the largest cost component in the production of atmospheric gases. The Company mitigates energy and natural gas price increases through long-term cost pass-through contracts. During fiscal year 2013, no significant difficulties were encountered in obtaining adequate supplies of energy or raw materials. Tonnage Gases provides hydrogen, carbon monoxide, nitrogen, oxygen, and syngas (a hydrogen-carbon monoxide mixture) principally to the energy production and refining, chemical, and metallurgical industries worldwide. Gases are produced at large facilities located adjacent to customers facilities or by pipeline systems from centrally located production facilities and are generally governed by contracts with 15- to 20-year terms. The Company is the world largest provider of hydrogen, which is used by oil refiners to facilitate the conversion of heavy crude feedstock and lower the sulfur content of gasoline and diesel fuels to reduce smog and ozone depletion. The energy production industry uses nitrogen injection for enhanced recovery of oil and natural gas and oxygen for gasification. The metallurgical industry uses nitrogen for inerting and oxygen for the manufacture of steel and certain nonferrous metals. The chemical industry uses hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and syngas as feedstocks in the production of many basic chemicals. The Company delivers product through pipelines from centrally located facilities in or near the United States Gulf Coast; Los Angeles, California; Alberta, Canada; Rotterdam, the Netherlands; United Kingdom; Western Belgium; Ulsan, Korea; Nanjing, China; Tangshan, China; Kuan Yin, Taiwan; Singapore; and Cama ari, Brazil. The Company also owns less than controlling interests in pipelines located in Thailand and South Africa. Tonnage Gases accounted for as part of the Merchant Gases operating segment. The Merchant Gases segment also includes the Company share of the results of several joint ventures accounted for by the equity method. The largest of these joint ventures operate in Mexico, Italy, South Africa, Saudi Arabia, India, and Thailand. Table of Contents 3 The Company owns a 67.2% controlling interest in the outstanding shares of Indura S.A., an industrial gas company in South America which produces packaged and liquid bulk gases and sells related hard goods. Indura S. A. is Merchant Gases sales constituted 40% of the Company consolidated sales in fiscal year 2013, 38% in fiscal year 2012, and 38% in fiscal year 2011. Sales of atmospheric gases (oxygen, nitrogen, and argon) constituted approximately 19% of consolidated sales in fiscal year 2013, 21% in fiscal year 2012, and 21% in fiscal year 2011. Merchant Gases competes worldwide against three global industrial gas companies: L Air Liquide S.A.; Linde AG; and Praxair, Inc.; and several regional sellers (including Airgas, Inc., primarily with respect to liquid bulk sales). Competition in industrial gases is based primarily on price, reliability of supply, and the development of industrial gas applications. Electric power is the largest cost component in the production of atmospheric gases oxygen, nitrogen, and argon. Natural gas is also an energy source at a number of the Company Merchant Gases facilities. The Company mitigates energy and natural gas price increases through pricing formulas and surcharges. Helium is primarily produced as a by-product of natural gas production. We purchase crude helium for purification and resale. During fiscal year 2013, we experienced shortages in helium supply due to industry-wide sourcing shortfalls. No other significant difficulties were encountered in obtaining adequate supplies of energy or raw materials during the year. Customers receive product through small on-sites (cryogenic or noncryogenic generators), either by a sale of gas contract or the sale of the equipment to the customer. Small on-site plants Small quantities of product are delivered in either cylinders or dewars. The Company operates packaged gas businesses in Europe, Asia, and Latin America. In the United States, the Company packaged gas business sells products only for the electronics and magnetic resonance imaging (principally helium) industries. Packaged gases Product is delivered in bulk (in liquid or gaseous form) by tanker or tube trailer and stored, usually in its liquid state, in equipment designed and installed by the Company at the customer site for vaporizing into a gaseous state as needed. Liquid bulk sales are typically governed by three- to five-year contracts. Liquid bulk Merchant Gases supplies the following types of products: Merchant Gases sells atmospheric gases, such as oxygen, nitrogen, and argon (primarily recovered by the cryogenic distillation of air); process gases such as hydrogen, helium (purchased or refined from crude helium), and carbon dioxide; specialty gases; temporary gas supply services; and equipment, throughout the world to customers in diversified industries, including metals, glass, electronics, chemical processing, food processing, healthcare, general manufacturing, and petroleum and natural gas industries. Merchant Gases Narrative Description of Business by Segments The Company manages its operations, assesses performance, and reports earnings under four business segments: Merchant Gases, Tonnage Gases, Electronics and Performance Materials, and Equipment and Energy. Financial information concerning the Company four business segments appears in Note 25, Business Segment and Geographic Information, to the consolidated financial statements, included under Item 8, herein. Financial Information about Segments Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. ( we, our, us, the Company, Air Products, or registrant ), a Delaware corporation originally founded in 1940, serves energy, electronics, chemicals, metals, and manufacturing customers globally with a unique portfolio of products, services, and solutions that include atmospheric gases, process and specialty gases, performance materials, equipment, and services. The Company is the world largest supplier of hydrogen and helium and has built leading positions in growth markets such as refinery hydrogen, semiconductor materials, natural gas liquefaction, and advanced coatings and adhesives. As used in this report, unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms we, our, us, the Company, or registrant include controlled subsidiaries and predecessors of Air Products and its subsidiaries. General Description of Business BUSINESS ITEM 1. PART I Table of Contents 2 103 SIGNATURES 102 EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES ITEM 15. 101 PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES ITEM 14. 101 CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE ITEM 13. 100 SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS ITEM 12. 100 EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION ITEM 11. 100 DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ITEM 10. 99 OTHER INFORMATION ITEM 9B. 99 CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES ITEM 9A. 99 CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE ITEM 9. 45 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA ITEM 8. 43 QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK ITEM 7A. 18 
