CIK: 30625
Company Name: FLOWSERVE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-02-13


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations set forth in this Item 7 reflects the restatement of our 2003 and 2002 consolidated financial statements as discussed below, and all amounts for these prior periods and prior period comparisons reflect the balances and amounts on a restated basis. In addition, the following discussion and analysis reflects certain events that occurred subsequent to the original due date for filing this Annual Report, including, but not limited to, the completion of our refinancing during the third quarter of 2005 and updates to recently issued accounting standards. The following discussion and analysis is provided to increase the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. Please see Risk Factors and Forward-Looking Statements sections for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements. Unless otherwise noted, all amounts discussed herein are consolidated. EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW We are an established leader in the fluid motion and control business, with a strong portfolio of pumping systems, valves, sealing solutions, automation and services in support of the power, oil and gas, chemical, and other process markets. These products are mission critical in the movement, control and protection of fluids in our customers critical processes, whether it is a refinery, a power generation facility or a transportation pipeline. Our business model is heavily influenced by the capital spending of these industries for the placement 22 Table of Contents of new products in service. The worldwide installed base of our products is another important source of revenue where our products are expected to ensure the maximum operating time of the many key industrial processes. The aftermarket business is generally a higher margin business and a key component to our profitable growth. We have experienced steadily improving conditions in 2004 and 2005 in several core markets, including oil and gas, chemical, and numerous general industries. The rise and continued elevation of the price of crude oil and natural gas in particular has spurred capital investment in the oil and gas market, resulting in many new projects and expansion opportunities. Although feedstock costs are increasing in the chemical market, greater global demand is allowing companies to pass through pricing and strengthen the global market. The opportunity to increase our installed base of new products and drive recurring aftermarket business in future years is a critical by-product of these market conditions. We have six key strategies that have been well communicated throughout the business. One of our key strategies is the globalization of our business. See Our Strategies section of this Management Discussion and Analysis for a discussion of our six key strategies. We currently have approximately 14,000 employees in more than 56 countries. We continue to implement new Quick Response Centers ( QRCs ) to be better positioned as near to our customers as possible for service and support, as a means to capture this important aftermarket business. Our markets have improved and we see corresponding growth in our business, much of which is in non-traditional areas of the world where new oil and gas reserves have been discovered. We and our customers are seeing rapid growth in Asia, with China providing a source of significant project growth. We have a strategy in place to increase our presence in China to capture the aftermarket business with our current installed base as well as new projects and process plant expansions. Along with ensuring that we have the local capability to sell, install and service our equipment in remote regions, it becomes more imperative to continuously improve our global operations. Our global supply chain capability is being expanded to meet the global customer demands and ensure the quality and timely delivery of our products. Significant efforts are underway to reduce the supply base and drive processes across the divisions to find areas of synergy and cost reduction. In addition, we are improving our supply chain management capability to insure we meet global customer demands. We continue to focus on improving on-time delivery and quality, while reducing warranty costs across our global operations through a focused Continuous Improvement Process ( CIP ) initiative. The goal of the CIP initiative is to maximize service fulfillment to our customers (such as on-time delivery, reduced cycle time and quality) at the highest internal productivity. This program is a key factor in our margin expansion plans. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS Restatement of Financial Statements We have restated our results for 2002, 2003 and the first quarter of 2004. The restatement of our annual 2002 consolidated financial statements, our annual and interim 2003 consolidated financial statements and our 2004 first quarter consolidated financial statements is collectively referred to as the 2004 Restatement. This Annual Report includes our consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2004 and for the year then ended and our restated consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2003 and for the years ended December 31, 2003 and 2002. We will file restated condensed consolidated financial statements in an amendment to our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the period ending March 31, 2004 at a later date. The impact of the 2004 Restatement on periods prior to January 1, 2002 is reflected as a decrease of $13.7 million to beginning retained earnings as of January 1, 2002. Information in Item 6. Selected Financial Data, however, is presented on a restated basis for all of the periods presented, and the impact of the 2004 Restatement on periods prior to January 1, 2000 is reflected as a decrease of $2.8 million to beginning retained earnings as of January 1, 2000. The 2004 Restatement corrects errors made in the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ), including errors with respect to inventory valuation, long-term contract accounting, intercompany accounts, pension expense, fixed assets and intangibles, financial derivatives, 23 Table of Contents unclaimed property, tax matters, and other adjustments from unreconciled accounts. The 2004 Restatement is more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. The cumulative net reduction in net earnings for the 2004 Restatement was $35.9 million. This includes the $13.7 million reduction to beginning retained earnings at January 1, 2002, the total $19.1 million reduction in net earnings to 2003 and 2002 results of operations discussed below, and the $3.1 million reduction in net earnings to the first quarter of 2004 results of operations. The impact of the 2004 Restatement decreased sales for 2003 by $7.4 million and increased sales for 2002 by $2.6 million, decreased net earnings for 2003 and 2002 by $8.4 million and $10.7 million, respectively, and decreased total assets, decreased total liabilities and increased total shareholders equity at December 31, 2003 by $120.1 million, $121.8 million and $1.7 million, respectively. The decreases in total assets and total liabilities are due primarily to the proper netting of deferred tax assets and liabilities. The net increase in shareholders equity at December 31, 2003 is due primarily to an increase in currency translation adjustments, net of tax included in accumulated other comprehensive loss, partially offset by the cumulative $32.8 million decrease in net earnings through December 31, 2003 discussed above. Diluted net earnings per share decreased by $0.16 and $0.20 per share for 2003 and 2002, respectively. As a result of the 2004 Restatement and the new obligations regarding internal control certification under Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or Section 404, we were unable to timely file with the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) this Annual Report and our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the quarterly periods ended June 30, 2004, September 30, 2004, March 31, 2005, June 30, 2005 and September 30, 2005. We will continue to work toward becoming current in our quarterly filings with the SEC as soon as practicable after the filing of this Annual Report. We will not, however, be able to timely file with the SEC our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2005 and our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarterly period ended March 31, 2006. The 2004 Restatement follows our earlier restatement, announced on February 3, 2004, of annual results for the years 2000 through 2002 and quarterly results for 2003. We refer to the prior restatement as the 2003 Restatement. The 2003 Restatement was completed on April 26, 2004 and principally related to inventory and costs of sales adjustments resulting primarily from reconciliation issues at two of our reporting locations due to difficulties associated with the conversion to new computer systems. The 2003 Restatement also included corrective adjustments relating to the computation of our income tax provision, classification of certain balance sheet accounts and other account reconciliations. As part of our assessment of internal control over financial reporting under Section 404 and our 2004 Restatement, we performed additional analyses and other procedures to ensure that our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report were prepared in accordance with GAAP. These procedures included, among other things, expansion of our year-end closing procedures and dedication of significant internal resources and external consultants to scrutinize account analyses and reconciliations at a detailed level. We conducted expanded assessments of customer shipments at certain of our locations for revenue cut-off; analyzed certain long-term sales contracts; analyzed pending litigation matters; analyzed leasehold improvements for proper classification and amortization; analyzed our inventory reserves, including our obsolete and slow moving inventory calculations and estimates; assessed our non-U.S. actuarially determined pension obligations and related liabilities; analyzed our liabilities associated with unclaimed third party property; analyzed our equity investments; analyzed our accounts receivable factoring and securitization arrangements; analyzed our accounting for financial derivatives; analyzed our purchase accounting for acquired businesses; performed expanded procedures on the existence, depreciation and disposals of fixed assets; performed expanded analyses of our intercompany, income tax and foreign currency translation accounts; and conducted site visits at selected locations to perform additional account balance examinations. As a result of these and other expanded procedures, management believes that the financial statements included in this Annual Report present fairly, in all material respects, our financial position, results of operations and cash flows for the periods presented in conformity with GAAP. We have incurred significant costs in 2005 in connection with the 2004 Restatement and financial statement audit, Section 404 assessment and Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) tax audit, which is discussed 24 Table of Contents below. We expect that the professional fees expensed in 2005 for external advisors relating to the 2004 Restatement and the IRS audit, together with the fees for the audit of our 2004 consolidated financial statements and internal controls in compliance with Section 404, will be approximately $48 million. In 2004, we incurred approximately $22 million in professional fees related to the 2003 Restatement, 2004 and 2003 financial statement audits, Section 404 assessment and deferred tax analysis. Pending SEC Investigations On February 4, 2004, we received an informal inquiry from the SEC requesting the voluntary production of documents and information related to the 2003 Restatement. On June 2, 2004, we were advised that the SEC issued a formal order of private investigation into issues regarding the 2003 Restatement and any other issues that arise from the investigation. We continue to cooperate with the SEC in this matter. On February 7, 2006, we received a subpoena from the SEC regarding goods and services that were delivered to Iraq from 1996 through 2003 during the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program. We are in the process of reviewing and responding to the subpoena and intend to cooperate with the SEC. We believe that other companies in our industry (as well as in other industries) have received similar subpoenas and requests for information. Securities Class Action and Derivative Lawsuits During the quarter ended September 30, 2003, related putative lawsuits were filed in federal court in the Northern District of Texas (the Court ), alleging that we violated federal securities laws. Since the filing of these cases, which have been consolidated, the lead plaintiff has amended its complaint several times in the action. The lead plaintiff current pleading is the fifth consolidated amended complaint ( Complaint ). The Complaint alleges that federal securities violations occurred between February 6, 2001 and September 27, 2002 and names as defendants Mr. C. Scott Greer, our former Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Ms. Ren e J. Hornbaker, our former Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, PricewaterhouseCoopers, LLP, our independent registered public accounting firm, and Banc of America Securities LLC and Credit Suisse First Boston LLC, which served as underwriters for two of our public stock offerings during the relevant period. The Complaint asserts claims under Sections 10(b) and 20(a) of Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and Rule 10b-5 thereunder, and Sections 11 and 15 of the Securities Act of 1933. The lead plaintiff seeks unspecified compensatory damages, forfeiture by Mr. Greer and Ms. Hornbaker of unspecified incentive-based or equity-based compensation and profits from any stock sales and recovery of costs. On November 22, 2005, the Court entered an order denying the defendants motions to dismiss the Complaint on the pleadings in their entirety. The case is currently set for trial on March 27, 2007. We continue to believe that the lawsuit is without merit and are vigorously defending the case. On October 6, 2005, a shareholder derivative lawsuit was filed purportedly on behalf of our company in the 193rd Judicial District of Dallas County, Texas. The lawsuit names as defendants Mr. Greer, Ms. Hornbaker, and current board members Hugh K. Coble, George T. Haymaker, Jr., William C. Rusnack, Michael F. Johnston, Charles M. Rampacek, Kevin E. Sheehan, Diane C. Harris, James O. Rollans and Christopher A. Bartlett. We are named as a nominal defendant. Based primarily on the purported misstatements alleged in the above-described federal securities case, the plaintiff asserts claims against the defendants for breach of fiduciary duty, abuse of control, gross mismanagement, waste of corporate assets and unjust enrichment. The plaintiff alleges that these purported violations of state law occurred between April 2000 and the date of suit. The plaintiff seeks on behalf of our company an unspecified amount of damages, injunctive relief and/or the imposition of a constructive trust on defendants assets, disgorgement of compensation, profits or other benefits received by the defendants from us, and recovery of attorneys fees and costs. We strongly believe that the suit was improperly filed and have filed a motion seeking dismissal of the case. 25 Table of Contents IRS Audits We have recently concluded an IRS audit of our U.S. federal income tax returns for the years 1999 through 2001. Based on its audit work, the IRS has issued proposed adjustments to increase taxable income during 1999 through 2001 by $12.8 million, and to deny foreign tax credits of $2.9 million in the aggregate. The tax liability resulting from these proposed adjustments will be offset with foreign tax credit carryovers and other refund claims, and therefore should not result in a material future cash payment, pending final review by the Joint Committee on Taxation. The effect of the adjustments to current and deferred taxes has been reflected in the consolidated financial statements for periods covered by the 2004 Restatement. During 2006, the IRS will commence an audit of our U.S. federal income tax returns for the years 2002 through 2004. While we expect that the upcoming IRS audit will be similar in scope to the recently completed examination, the upcoming audit may be broader. Furthermore, the preliminary results from the audit of 1999 through 2001 are not indicative of the future result of the audit of 2002 through 2004. The audit of 2002 through 2004 may result in additional tax payments by us, the amount of which may be material, but will not be known until that IRS audit is finalized. In the course of the IRS audit of 1999 through 2001, we have identified recordkeeping and other material internal control weaknesses, which caused us to incur significant expense to substantiate our tax return items and address information and document requests made by the IRS. We expect to incur similar expense with respect to the upcoming IRS audit of the years 2002 through 2004. Due to the recordkeeping issues referred to above, the IRS has issued a Notice of Inadequate Records for the years 1999 through 2001, and may issue a similar notice for the years 2002 through 2004. While the IRS has agreed not to assess penalties for inadequacy of records with respect to the years 1999 through 2001, no assurances can be made that the IRS will not seek to assess such penalties or other types of penalties with respect to the years 2002 through 2004. Such penalties could result in a material impact to the consolidated results of operations. Management Changes and Other Employee Matters During the past two years, following resignations of several of our senior executives, we hired Lewis M. Kling as our Chief Operating Officer and subsequently appointed him as our Chief Executive Officer, hired Mark A. Blinn as our Chief Financial Officer, Richard J. Guiltinan, Jr. as our Controller and Chief Accounting Officer, Deborah K. Bethune as our Vice President of Taxes, Thomas L. Pajonas as our President of our Flow Control Division, Linda P. Jojo as Vice President and Chief Information Officer, and Joseph R. Pinkston, as our Vice President of Human Resources, appointed Mark D. Dailey as our Chief Compliance Officer and Paul W. Fehlman as our Treasurer, and created and staffed new positions responsible for accounting policy and procedures, financial reporting, tax compliance and internal audit. To promote continuity of senior management, in March 2005 our Board of Directors approved a Transitional Executive Security Plan, which provides cash and stock-based incentives to key management personnel to remain employed by us for the near term. As a result of this plan, we recorded additional compensation expenses in 2005 of approximately $3 million. See Transitional Executive Security Plan in Item 11. Executive Compensation of this Annual Report for a detailed discussion on this plan. During 2005, we made a number of modifications to our stock plans, including the acceleration of certain restricted stock grants and outstanding options, as well as the extension of the exercise period associated with certain outstanding options. These modifications resulted from severance agreements with former executives and from our decision to temporarily suspend option exercises. As a result of the modifications, we recorded additional compensation expenses in 2005 of approximately $7 million based upon the intrinsic values of the awards, primarily related to severance agreements with former executives, on the dates the modifications were made. As a result of the severance and executive search payments related to the management changes of approximately $2 million, expenses under the Transitional Executive Security Plan described above and stock 26 Table of Contents compensation expense resulting from the modification of our stock option plans described above, we recorded total incremental compensation expense of approximately $12 million in 2005. On June 1, 2005, we took action to extend to December 31, 2006, the regular term of certain options granted to employees, including executive officers, qualified retirees and directors, which were scheduled to expire in 2005. Subsequently, we took action on November 4, 2005, to extend the exercise date of these options, and options expiring in 2006, to January 1, 2009. We thereafter concluded, however, that recent regulatory guidance issued under section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code might cause the recipients extended options to become subject to unintended adverse tax consequences under section 409A. Accordingly, effective December 14, 2005, the Organization and Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors partially rescinded, in accordance with the regulations, the extensions of the regular term of these options, to provide as follows: (i) the regular term of options otherwise expiring in 2005 will expire 30 days after the options first become exercisable when our SEC filings have become current and an effective SEC Form S-8 Registration Statement has been filed with the SEC, and (ii) the regular term of options otherwise expiring in 2006 will expire on the later of: (1) 75 days after the regular term of the option as originally granted expires, or (2) December 31, 2006 (assuming the options become exercisable in 2006 for the reasons included in (i) above). These extensions are subject to our shareholders approving certain applicable plan amendments at our next annual shareholder meeting, tentatively scheduled for April 2006. If shareholders do not approve the plan amendments as currently posed in our proxy statement, these extension actions will become void. If such plan amendments are approved at our next annual shareholder meeting, the extensions will be considered as a stock modification for financial reporting purposes subject to the recognition of a non-cash compensation charge in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment . Our actual charge will be contingent upon many factors, including future share price volatility, risk free interest rate, option maturity, strike price, share price and dividend yield. The earlier extension actions also extended the option exercise period available following separation from employment for reasons of death, disability and termination not for cause or certain voluntary separations. These separate extensions were partially rescinded at the December 14, 2005, meeting of the Organization and Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors, and as so revised are currently effective and not subject to shareholder approval. The exercise period available following such employment separations has been extended to the later of (i) 30 days after the options first became exercisable when our SEC filings have become current and an effective SEC Form S-8 Registration Statement has been filed with the SEC, or (ii) the period available for exercise following separation from employment under the terms of the option as originally granted. This extension is considered for financial reporting purposes as a stock modification subject to the recognition of a non-cash compensation change in accordance with Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees, of approximately $1 million in 2005. The extension of the exercise period following separation from employment does not apply to option exercise periods governed by a separate separation contract or agreement. Completion of Refinancing In the third quarter of 2005, we refinanced our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes and indebtedness outstanding under our then existing credit facilities with the proceeds of borrowings under our new credit facilities. Further, we replaced the letter of credit agreement that guaranteed our European Investment Bank ( EIB ) credit facility with a letter of credit facility issued as part of the new credit facilities. The new credit facilities are comprised of a term loan of $600 million expiring in 2012 and a $400 million revolving line of credit, which can be utilized to provide up to $300 million in letters of credit, expiring in 2010, hereinafter collectively referred to as the New Credit Facilities. We recorded a total loss on extinguishment of approximately $27 million in 2005. As a result of the refinancing and based on the current interest rate 27 Table of Contents structure and amounts borrowed, we expect to reduce our interest expense by more than $20 million on an annual basis. For additional information on our New Credit Facilities, see the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis and Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Accounts Receivable Securitization In October 2004, one of our wholly owned subsidiaries entered into an accounts receivable securitization whereby we could obtain up to $75 million in financing by securitizing certain U.S.-based receivables with a third party. Our subordinate interest in receivables sold was $83.5 million at December 31, 2004. In October 2005, we terminated this accounts receivable securitization facility. In connection with the termination, we borrowed approximately $48 million under our New Credit Facilities to repurchase our receivables then held by such third party. See the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis and Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion on our securitization arrangement. Acquisitions and Divestitures In the first quarter of 2005, we made a definitive decision to sell certain non-core service operations, collectively called the General Services Group ( GSG ) and engaged an investment banking firm to commence marketing. As a result, we reclassified the operation to discontinued operations in the first quarter of 2005. Sales for GSG were $116 million in 2004. Total assets at December 31, 2004 ascribed to GSG were approximately $63 million. We performed an impairment analysis of long-lived assets on a held and used basis, and concluded that no impairment was warranted as of December 31, 2004. GSG was sold on December 31, 2005 for approximately $16 million in gross cash proceeds, subject to final working capital adjustments, while retaining approximately $12 million of net accounts receivable. We used approximately $11 million of the net cash proceeds to reduce our outstanding indebtedness. In 2005, we recorded an impairment loss of approximately $31 million related to GSG. In November 2004, we sold our Government Marine Business Unit ( GMBU ), a business within our Flowserve Pump Division, to Curtiss-Wright Electro-Mechanical Corporation for approximately $28 million, generating a pre-tax gain of $7.4 million after the allocation of approximately $8 million in goodwill and $1 million in intangible assets. GMBU, which provided pump technology and service for U.S. Navy submarines and aircraft carriers, did not serve our core market and represented a small part of our total pump business. We used net proceeds from the disposition of GMBU to reduce our outstanding indebtedness. As a result of this sale, we have presented the assets, liabilities and results of operations of GMBU as discontinued operations for all prior periods included. In March 2004, we acquired the remaining 75% interest in Thompson, Kelly & Lewis Pty. Ltd. ( TKL ) for approximately $12 million. TKL is a leading Australian designer, manufacturer and supplier of centrifugal pumps, railway track work products and steel castings. Prior to the acquisition, we held a 25% interest in TKL. As a result of this acquisition, we strengthened our product offering in the mining industry, broadened our manufacturing capacity in the Asia Pacific region and gained foundry capacity. TKL had total assets of approximately $24 million at the time of this acquisition and sales of approximately $36 million in 2003. BUSINESS OVERVIEW Our Company We believe that we are a world leading manufacturer and aftermarket service provider of comprehensive flow control systems. We develop and manufacture precision-engineered flow control equipment, such as pumps, valves and seals, for critical service applications that require high reliability. We use our manufacturing platform to offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services, such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. 28 Table of Contents We conduct our operations through three business segments: Flowserve Pump Division ( FPD ), for engineered pumps, industrial pumps and related services; Flow Control Division ( FCD ), for industrial valves, manual valves, control valves, nuclear valves, valve actuators and controls and related services; and Flow Solutions Division ( FSD ), for precision mechanical seals and related services. Our product portfolio is built on over 50 well-respected brand names, such as Durco, IDP, Valtek and Durametallic, which we believe is the most comprehensive in the industry. We sell our products and services to more than 10,000 companies, including some of the world leading engineering and construction firms, original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ), distributors and end users. Our Markets Our products and services are used in several distinct industries: oil and gas, chemical, power generation, water treatment and several other industries that we collectively refer to as general industries. Demand for most of our products depends on the level of new capital investment and maintenance expenditures by our customers. The level of capital expenditures by our customers depends, in turn, on the general economic conditions and conditions in their industries, which affect their profitability. The level of capital expenditures by our customers also depends on their liquidity, whether through cash flows from operations or access to financing. The oil and gas industry represented approximately 32% of our sales in 2004. High petroleum prices generally spur additional investment in upstream petroleum projects, and high prices in 2004 contributed to an increase in bookings for projects, particularly in Asia, Africa and South America. In the Middle East, however, the Iraq war and the post-war unrest softened the level of capital investments and demand for our products and services, notwithstanding the historically high crude oil prices. In contrast to their effect on the upstream petroleum projects, high crude oil prices often reduce the demand for our products and services from crude oil refineries and natural gas processors as they seek to take advantage of favorable refining margins by operating at high levels of capacity utilization and deferring maintenance. Clean fuel regulations, particularly in the U.S., led to some project business from crude oil refiners. The profitability of such projects, however, is typically lower than for maintenance related products and services. While high oil and gas prices are generally good for our oil and gas customers, they are generally adverse for chemical companies, since crude oil and natural gas are critical inputs in the manufacturing of their products. In 2004, the price of natural gas in the U.S. increased almost 25% from 2003. This significantly affected our chemical customers, who faced high feed stock costs. However, greater global demand is allowing companies to pass through pricing and strengthen the global market. If the economy improves, and demand for chemical-based products increases, we expect to see some improvement in the demand for our products in the chemical industry. Further, this industry improved profitability could spur new investment in other parts of the world such as Asia, and we would expect to benefit from those investments as well. In 2004, the chemical industry represented approximately 18% of our sales. Increased natural gas prices also diminished the profitability of many power generators that in recent years made significant investments in power plants that generate electricity from natural gas. While they have been able to recover a portion of their higher costs through rate increases, their liquidity is still challenged due to overinvestment in these power facilities in recent years. However, a number of nuclear power generators are planning significant maintenance activities. We have seen an increase in our orders for this area and it has been a positive contributor to 2005 orders, sales and earnings. In addition, there are several coal-fired power plants planned for the U.S., and we are actively pursuing the flow control opportunities for these projects. The revenue opportunity for our products at a coal-fired plant typically can be three times that of a natural gas power plant. The power industry represented approximately 16% of our sales in 2004. Worldwide demand for fresh water and water treatment continues to create demand for new facilities or for upgrades of existing systems, many of which require products that we offer, especially pumps. We believe 29 Table of Contents that we are a global leader in the desalination market, which is an important source of fresh water in the Mediterranean area and the Middle East. This is a significant market for our pumps and valve actuation products. In 2004, the water market represented approximately 6% of our sales. General industries represents a variety of different businesses, including mining, pulp and paper, food and beverage, steel and heating, ventilation and air-conditioning ( HVAC ), none of which individually represents more than 5% of total sales in 2004. General industries represented approximately 28% of our sales in 2004. Some of these businesses, such as mining, pulp and paper and steel, appear to have experienced troughs in 2004. Other industries, such as food and beverage, were relatively stable. HVAC was somewhat weaker due to a decline in the commercial real estate market. In 2005, some of these businesses that are tied to the economic recovery, particularly mining, have shown improvement. Our customers include engineering contractors, OEMs, end users and distributors. Sales to engineering contractors and OEMs are typically for large project orders, as are certain sales to distributors. Project orders generally have lead times in excess of three months. Project orders provide product to our customers either directly or indirectly for their new construction projects or facility enhancement projects. The quick turnaround business, which we also refer to as the book and ship business, is defined as orders that are received from the customer (booked) and shipped within three months of receipt. They are typically for more standard products, parts or services. Each of our three segments generates this type of business. We use our manufacturing platform to offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services, such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. Timelines of delivery, quality and the proximity of service centers are important considerations for our aftermarket products and services. In geographic regions where we are positioned to provide a quick response, customers have traditionally relied on us, rather than our competitors, for aftermarket products relating to our highly engineered and customized products. However, aftermarket competition for standard products has increased. Price competition tends to be more significant for OEMs than aftermarket services and generally has been increasing. In the sale of aftermarket products and services, we benefit from our large installed base of pumps and valves, which requires maintenance, repair and replacement parts. Our reporting of trends by product type, customer type and business type are based upon analytical review of individual operational results and our knowledge of their respective businesses, as we do not formally track revenues by any of these categories. These trends are analyzed as a secondary reporting mechanism that is not derived directly from our general ledger system. Our Strategies Our overarching objective is to grow our position as an integrated solutions provider in the flow control industry. Sustainable, profitable growth is being driven using six strategies that are communicated throughout our company. These strategies include: organic growth, globalization, process excellence, portfolio management, organizational capability and technology. The key elements of our strategies are outlined below. Organic Growth Organic growth is a key initiative to grow our revenues. Our goal is to grow revenues through the development of new products and services and customer partnering initiatives to maximize the capture of the aftermarket business. We seek to capture additional market share by creating win-win opportunities for us and our customers through sourcing and maintenance alliance programs pursuant to which we provide all or an agreed portion of a customers parts and servicing needs. Our customer alliances enable us to develop long-term professional relationships with our customers and serve as an effective platform for introducing new products and services to our customers and generating additional sales. We additionally seek to continue leveraging our substantial installed pump, seal and valve base to expand our aftermarket services business, as customers increasingly use third-party aftermarket service providers like 30 Table of Contents us to reduce their fixed costs and improve profitability. The aftermarket services business provides us with a steady source of revenues and cash flows at higher margins than original equipment sales and allows us to be in frequent contact with our customers, building our knowledge of customer needs and providing cross-selling opportunities. We have been installing Flow Solutions QRC globally to provide the immediate parts, service and technical support required to effectively manage and win the aftermarket business from our installed base. New product and service development is driven through our Product Management organization working in concert with engineering, operation and sales. Our goal is to increase our revenues from new products and services developed over the last five years. Our new product development process has made significant progress in demonstrating a pipeline of new and modified products and services. We expect our research and development costs to increase beginning in 2006 to support our goal of increased revenues from new products and services. Globalization The globalization initiative of our business has several facets that include: Expanding our global presence to capture business outside our traditional geographic market areas (China, Russia, South America and Africa), Utilizing low cost sourcing opportunities to remain competitive in the global economy, and Attract and retain the global intellectual capital required to support our global growth plans in the new geographical areas. We believe there are attractive OEM opportunities in international markets, particularly in South America and Asia Pacific, and we intend to continue to leverage our global presence to further penetrate these markets. Our recent successes in these markets include contracts worth more than $40 million for the supply of pumps and related equipment to the Nanhai petrochemicals project in China, and contracts worth more than $12 million for the Shenhua coal liquefaction project in China. In our aftermarket services business, we seek to strategically add sites as our customers and our customer base grow in order to provide our customers with rapid response, fast delivery and onsite field repair. We are focused on shifting, as appropriate, certain of our manufacturing and engineering functions to, and increasing our supply of raw materials and components from, lower cost areas such as India, China, Mexico, South America and Eastern Europe. In 2004, these areas accounted for approximately 17% of our direct material spending, compared to approximately 5% in 2001. We are also focused on utilizing supply chain management to reduce our procurement costs, including by expanding purchases through raw material auctions, further consolidating and standardizing our purchasing to receive higher quantity-based discounts and creating procurement alliances. In addition, we have expanded our China presence with additional sales people, new management, and growth plans that include acquisition or development of new capabilities that will enhance the penetration of programs in China for oil and gas and power projects as well as provide a base for the export of products. Process Excellence The process excellence initiative encapsulates ongoing programs that include: driving improved customer fulfillment across our company through metrics such as on-time delivery, cost reduction, quality, cycle time reduction and warranty reduction; and continuing to develop a culture of continuous improvement that delivers maximum productivity and cost efficiencies, implements consistent processes across our company and ensures our future success as an integrated company. We seek to increase our operational efficiency through our CIP initiative. It utilizes tools such as lean manufacturing, Six Sigma methodology and constraint management to improve quality and processes, reduce product cycle times and lower costs. Recognizing that our employees are our most valuable resource in 31 Table of Contents achieving our operational excellence goals, we have instituted broad CIP training, and to date over 800 of our employees are CIP certified or trained black belts or green belts , deployed on CIP projects throughout our company. As a result of our CIP initiatives, we have developed and implemented processes to shorten our engineering and manufacturing cycle times, improve on-time delivery and service response time, lower inventory levels and otherwise reduce costs. We have also experienced success in applying best practices achieved in any one of our businesses to our other businesses, and continue to look for opportunities to apply successful practices across our businesses. We seek to continue to improve our working capital utilization, with a particular focus on improving the management of our accounts receivable and inventory. See further discussion in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis. Portfolio Management The continued management of our portfolio of products and services is critical to our company success. We will continue to pursue selective acquisitions and rationalize our portfolio of products and services to ensure alignment with our shareholders and customers. We intend to continue to evaluate acquisition and investment opportunities as we seek to broaden our product portfolio and operational capabilities and to expedite our expansion into faster growing Asian, African and South American markets. In that regard, our additional investment in TKL in March 2004 strengthened our product offering in the mining industry and broadened our manufacturing capabilities in the Asia Pacific region, which includes China, Japan, Singapore, Korea, India, Australia, New Zealand and Thailand. We are seeking to divest operations that we consider non-core to our overall business, such as operations that do not serve our core customer base or provide limited synergies with our other businesses. For example, as discussed above, in November 2004 we sold GMBU and in December 2005 we sold GSG. Organizational Capability There are several elements to building an enhanced organizational capability: The development of a deeper talent pool through training and cross-divisional and functional assignments allows us the flexibility as we grow and expand the organization to fill positions internally. Career learning and development is critical to the building of an improved global organizational capability for the future. The need to capture the intellectual capital in our workforce and that of our customers and share it within our company is considered a competitive advantage, and Building an organization with improved compliance to mandatory and recommended processes and procedures and implementing the information systems that ensure compliance will be the backbone of our culture as we move forward. A multi-year agreement with the LRN Company was completed in 2005 to distribute electronic learning packages in multiple languages for the Flowserve Business Code of Conduct and other compliance programs globally throughout our company. This will be expanded to include export compliance, and regulatory compliance (U.S. and foreign), as well as other programs around harassment and employee behaviors. The emphasis on ethics and compliance was significantly strengthened in 2005 as a core organizational capability with a new Chief Compliance Officer. In 2005, we installed a Learning Management System ( LMS ) that allowed the development and tracking of the delivery of electronic learning systems. This system allows us to track our employees compliance and policy understanding through electronic means. LMS also permits the on-line enrollment for customer training as a means to share and improve their intellectual capital. Additional initiatives aimed at change management are evidenced in such programs as our Standardization, Teamwork And Results ( STAR ) initiative. STAR is aimed at developing and implementing an 32 Table of Contents information systems architecture that will be employed over a multi-year period. It will upgrade older enterprise resource planning applications to enable standardization of our processes and controls. Technology The infusion of new product technologies has become a core requirement as we look to improve the development of new products and services. Our internal goal is to improve the percentage of new products as a function of revenue over the next five years. The investment in technology will continue to increase in 2006. A cross-divisional technology council will ensure that the technologies developed are available for wide use across all divisions to maximize the investments. The development of an intelligent pumping system showcases the technologies available to maximize uptime and proactively identify anomalies before they become major issues. We were the sponsor for a national energy summit in 2005 that brought together major companies in the pursuit of energy management initiatives. The technologies available to decrease the energy usage for our customers are being infused into new services for customers. OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS In general, consolidated results of operations and FCD segment results of operations for 2004 and 2003 were higher than 2002 due to the impact of our acquisition of Invensys flow control division ( IFC ), which was completed on May 2, 2002. The results for IFC subsequent to that date are included in our consolidated results and the results for our Flow Control Division. Pro forma 2002 results of operations reflect the results of operations as if the IFC acquisition had occurred as of January 1, 2002. The IFC acquisition is discussed in further detail in the Restructuring and Acquisition Related Charges section of this Management Discussion and Analysis. The amounts discussed for 2003 and for 2002 reflect the 2004 Restatement discussed above and in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. As a result of selling our GMBU, an FPD business, in November 2004, we treated this disposition as a discontinued operation and reclassified the financial information reported for prior periods. Income from discontinued operations, net of tax, decreased $0.3 million in 2004, compared to a decrease of $0.7 million in 2003. Sales Pro Forma 2004 2003 2002 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Sales $ 2,638.2 $ 2,372.6 $ 2,228.0 $ 2,385.4 Sales in 2004 increased by $151.8 million, or 6.4%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $114 million, as compared with 2003. Currency benefits are the result of the strengthening of international currencies, particularly the Euro, against the U.S. dollar. The increase in sales includes new sales of $35.2 million resulting from our acquisition of TKL in March 2004, increased activities of our core markets served, including oil and gas, power and chemicals, and strong growth in the Asia Pacific region. Sales in 2003 decreased by $9.6 million, or 0.4%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $154 million, as compared with 2002. Currency benefits are the result of the strengthening of international currencies, particularly the Euro, against the U.S. dollar. Sales increased approximately $141 million due to a full year inclusion of IFC sales, but were more than offset by lower sales of quick turnaround business into the chemical and general industrial sectors attributable to the U.S. economic slowdown and, to a lesser extent, the European recession in the latter half of the year. Additionally, sales of replacement parts and services to the Middle East and Venezuela decreased in 2003 due to post-war unrest and political unrest. Sales into the water market also declined in 2003. Sales in 2003 declined 7.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $154 million, as compared to pro forma 2002, reflecting weakness in the chemical, power and general industrial markets in 2003 for valve products and services. 33 Table of Contents Sales to international customers, including export sales from the U.S., were approximately 63% of sales in 2004, compared with 60% of sales in 2003 and 55% of sales in 2002. IFC proportionately higher mix of international operations contributed to the 2003 increase. Sales into the Asia Pacific region were 13%, 9% and 12% in 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Sales into Europe, Middle East and Africa ( EMA ) were 40%, 40% and 33% in 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Excluding currency translation impacts, we believe that our sales to international customers will continue to increase as a percentage of total sales, as we believe our highest revenue growth opportunities are in Asia, South America and Africa. Bookings and Backlog Pro Forma 2004 2003 2002 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 2,657.4 $ 2,423.7 $ 2,184.1 $ 2,326.2 Backlog (at period end) 836.4 818.2 733.7 733.7 We define a booking as the receipt of a customer order that contractually engages us to perform activities on behalf of our customer with regard to manufacture, service or support. Bookings in 2004 increased by $118.9 million, or 4.9%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $115 million, as compared with 2003. Increased bookings are due to increases in the oil and gas market, one of our primary served markets, which was spurred by increased crude oil prices. Bookings in 2003 increased by $78.4 million, or 3.6%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $161 million, as compared with 2002. This increase is due to the impact from the IFC acquisition and an increase in upstream oil and gas projects, particularly in Asia, West Africa and Europe. Bookings in 2003 were unfavorably impacted by reduced demand for products and services to chemical, power and general industrial customers. Additionally, bookings in 2003 into the Middle East and Venezuela were lower due to the political and economic turmoil in those regions. Bookings in 2003 were approximately 2.7% lower than pro forma 2002, excluding currency benefits of approximately $161 million. Backlog represents the accumulation of uncompleted customer orders. We shipped approximately 97% of our backlog at December 31, 2004 during 2005. Backlog at December 31, 2004 decreased by $14.5 million, or 1.8%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $33 million, as compared with 2003. The decrease is due to improved customer delivery time. Backlog at December 31, 2003 increased by $18.3 million, or 2.5%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $66 million, as compared with 2002. The increase primarily reflects the IFC acquisition. Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin Pro Forma 2004 2003 2002 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Gross profit $ 778.8 $ 705.4 $ 666.3 $ 719.1 Gross profit margin 29.5 % 29.7 % 29.9 % 30.1 % Gross profit margin of 29.5% in 2004 decreased slightly as compared with 2003. Gross profit margin in 2004 was positively impacted by operational improvements attributable to our CIP initiative, which resulted in cost savings, synergies and a higher mix of aftermarket business, which generally has a higher margin. These were offset by a $14.1 million charge to cost of sales for the increase in the reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory in our Flow Control Division, as discussed below, and an $14.1 million increase in incentive compensation as compared to 2003. Gross profit margin of 29.7% in 2003 was slightly lower than 2002 due primarily to decreased sales in our Flowserve Pump Division, as discussed below. The positive impact of a full year of the IFC acquisition, in addition to the cost savings synergies resulting from the acquisition, were offset by a less profitable product mix. The product mix contained lower volumes of higher margin parts and quick turnaround business, 34 Table of Contents including lower volumes of historically more profitable chemical and industrial pumps, industrial valves and service related activities. The quick turnaround business is generally related to more standard products, parts and services. The volume of this business decreased due to reduced profitability of customers in chemical, general industrial, gas pipeline, power and refining industries. Selling, General and Administrative Expense ( SG&A ) Pro Forma 2004 2003 2002 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) SG&A $ 623.0 $ 540.8 $ 478.2 $ 514.1 SG&A as a percentage of sales 23.6 % 22.8 % 21.5 % 21.6 % SG&A in 2004 increased by $61.0 million, or 11.3%, excluding currency effects of approximately $21 million, as compared with 2003. The increase is due to a $29.9 million increase in annual incentive compensation and a $21.7 million increase in professional and consulting fees related primarily to the 2003 Restatement, 2004 and 2003 financial statement audits and compliance with Section 404. SG&A in 2003 increased by $33.4 million, or 7.0%, excluding currency effects of approximately $29 million, as compared with 2002. The increase is primarily attributable to a $21.6 million increase in legal fees and expenses resulting from increased legal accruals for anticipated lawsuit settlements. Integration and Restructuring Expense 2004 2003 2002 (Amounts in millions) Integration expense $ $ 19.8 $ 16.2 Restructuring expense 2.9 4.3 We did not incur integration or restructuring expenses in 2004. The integration and restructuring expenses in 2003 and 2002 relate to the integration of IFC into the Flow Control Division. We largely completed our restructuring and integration programs related to IFC during 2003, except for final severance payments and payments for other exit activities primarily related to European integration activities. See Restructuring and Acquisition Related Charges below for further discussion on integration and restructuring expenses. Operating Income Pro Forma 2004 2003 2002 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Operating income $ 155.8 $ 141.9 $ 167.6 $ 182.7 Operating income as percentage of sales 5.9 % 6.0 % 7.5 % 7.7 % Operating income in 2004 increased by $0.3 million, or 0.2%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $14 million, as compared with 2003. As discussed above, SG&A costs increased in 2004 as a result of increased incentive compensation and increased professional and consulting fees. The increase in SG&A costs is offset by the reduction in integration and restructuring costs. Operating income in 2003 decreased by $44.0 million, or 26.2%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $18 million, as compared with 2002. The decrease is primarily attributable to SG&A that increased as a result of the full year impact of the IFC acquisition and legal expenses discussed above. Operating income in 2003 decreased 32.3% from pro forma 2002, excluding currency benefits of approximately $18 million, primarily due to increased legal expenses in 2003. 35 Table of Contents Interest Expense and Loss on Repayment of Debt 2004 2003 2002 (Amounts in millions) Interest expense $ 81.0 $ 84.2 $ 95.5 Interest income 1.9 4.1 2.5 Loss on debt repayment and extinguishment 2.7 1.3 11.2 Interest expense decreased $3.2 million, or 3.8%, in 2004, and $11.3 million, or 11.8%, in 2003 due primarily to lower prevailing interest rates and reduced debt levels associated with optional and scheduled debt paydowns since the acquisition of IFC, as well as lower borrowing interest rate spreads associated with the renegotiation of our revolving credit facility in April 2002. At December 31, 2004 approximately 69% of our debt was at fixed rates, including the effects of $210.0 million of notional interest rate swaps. Interest income decreased $2.2 million in 2004 as compared to 2003 due to lower average cash balances. Interest income increased $1.6 million in 2003 as compared to 2002 due to higher cash balances. During 2004, we incurred a charge of $2.7 million on debt repayments and extinguishment related to the accelerated write-off of unamortized prepaid financing fees resulting from $327.9 million of optional and mandatory debt prepayments triggered by the GMBU divestiture, the issuance of the EIB credit facility and receivables securitization. Under the 2000 Credit Facilities (as described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis), we were required to use the proceeds of asset sales and new debt issuance, among other things, to pay down the principal amount outstanding under the credit facilities. In addition to mandatory repayments, we paid optional prepayments of principal from excess cash generated from operations. In 2003, we incurred losses of $1.3 million related to the accelerated write-off of unamortized prepaid financing fees resulting from $163.1 million of optional debt prepayments throughout the year. Other (Expense) Income, net 2004 2003 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Other (expense) income, net $ (14.4 ) $ (4.5 ) $ (1.1 ) Other expense, net increased $9.9 million in 2004 from $4.5 million in 2003 due primarily to increases in unrealized losses on forward contracts that did not qualify for hedge accounting, partially offset by foreign currency transaction gains. Other expense, net increased $3.4 million in 2003, from $1.1 million in 2002 due primarily to a $1.3 million decrease in unrealized gains on forward contracts that did not qualify for hedge accounting. Tax Expense and Tax Rate 2004 2003 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Provision for income taxes $ 39.5 $ 12.8 $ 29.7 Effective tax rate 66.2 % 22.9 % 47.6 % The 2004 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to Extraterritorial Income ( ETI ) exclusion benefits of $4.9 million and $23.3 million of net tax impact from foreign operations resulting from approximately $85 million in foreign earnings repatriation to pay down U.S. debt and increases in worldwide tax reserves. We increased total reserves approximately $11 million, primarily for non-U.S. exposures related to debt equity structures and transfer pricing. The 2003 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to ETI exclusion benefits of $2.5 million, changes in valuation allowances of $5.5 million primarily relating to foreign tax credits and the net impact of non U.S. operations of $2.2 million. 36 Table of Contents The 2002 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to ETI exclusion benefits of $4.7 million and higher non-U.S. statutory tax rates. We have operations in European and Asian countries that provide various tax incentives. In 2003, we were granted an indefinite preferential tax rate of approximately 10% in Switzerland for certain sales and marketing activities. During 2004, we received a 5 year, 10% tax rate in Singapore for income in excess of a prescribed base amount generated from certain regional headquarter activities, subject to certain employment and investment requirements. In India, we were granted 100% tax exemptions for profits derived from export sales and certain manufacturing operations in prescribed areas for a period of 10 years. The Indian tax exemptions expire in 2011 and 2008, respectively. On October 22, 2004, the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (the 2004 Act ) was signed into law, creating a temporary incentive for U.S. multinationals to repatriate accumulated income earned outside the U.S. at an effective tax rate of 5.25%, versus the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35%. During 2004, we repatriated approximately $46 million (as part of the $85 million discussed above) pursuant to a dividend reinvestment plan as described by the 2004 Act. We have not recognized the lower tax rate on these dividends in our financial statements due to uncertainties surrounding the interpretation of the 2004 Act. To the extent this uncertainty is favorably resolved in a future reporting period, the benefit associated with these dividends will be recognized in that period. The 2004 Act also provides for a phase out of the existing ETI exclusion for foreign export sales, as it was viewed to be inconsistent with the international trade protocols by the European Union. This phase out provides that the benefit for our otherwise qualifying export sales in 2005 and 2006 will be limited to approximately 80% and 60%, respectively. As a replacement for the loss of the ETI export incentive, the 2004 Act provides a deduction for income from qualified domestic production activities, which will be phased in from 2005 through 2010. The impact of this manufacturing deduction to our future tax rate has not yet been quantified. Under the guidance of Financial Accounting Standards Board Staff Position No. FAS 109-1, Application of FASB Statement No. 109 to the Tax Deduction on Qualified Production Activities Provided by the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, the tax deduction on qualified production activities will be treated as a special deduction, as described in SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes . As such, the special deduction will be reported in the period in which the deduction is claimed on our tax return. We expect our effective tax rate to be significantly lower in 2005 as compared with 2004 due to lower levels of dividend repatriation from our low taxed foreign subsidiaries. Our effective tax rate is based upon current earnings, estimates of future taxable earnings for each domestic and international location and the estimated impact of tax planning strategies. Changes in any of these and other factors, including our ability to utilize foreign tax credits and net operating losses or results from tax audits, could impact the tax rate in future periods. As of December 31, 2004 we have foreign tax credits of approximately $10 million, expiring in 2010 through 2012 against which we recorded no valuation allowances. Additionally, we have recorded net deferred tax assets for foreign net operating losses and other deferred tax assets of approximately $16 million, most of which have an indefinite expiration period. Should we not be able to utilize all or a portion of these credits and losses, our effective tax rate would be negatively impacted. Net Earnings and Earnings Per Share 2004 2003 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions, except per share) Income from continuing operations $ 20.2 $ 43.1 $ 32.7 Net earnings 24.2 44.5 34.8 Net earnings per share from continuing operations diluted 0.36 0.78 0.63 Net earnings per share diluted 0.43 0.80 0.67 Average diluted shares 55.7 55.3 52.2 Income from continuing operations decreased $22.9 million in 2004 to $20.2 million, or $0.36 per diluted share. In addition to the factors discussed above regarding operating income, 2004 income from continuing 37 Table of Contents operations was also impacted by increases in the effective tax rate, as compared to 2003, and losses on derivative contracts. Income from continuing operations increased $10.4 million in 2003 to $43.1 million, or $0.78 per diluted share. In addition to the factors discussed above regarding operating income, 2003 income from continuing operations was also impacted by decreased tax expense, as compared to 2002. Earnings per share in 2003 were negatively impacted by a 5.9% higher average diluted share count. The 2004 increase in average diluted shares reflected the issuance of stock awards and the dilutive effects of an increase in our stock price. The 2003 increase in average diluted shares reflects the full year weighted average impact from the equity offering completed in April 2002 to finance the IFC acquisition. Other Comprehensive Income (Expense) 2004 2003 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Other comprehensive income (expense) $ 15.1 $ 68.3 $ (11.0 ) Other comprehensive income (expense) declined to $15.1 million in 2004, which reflects a slight decrease in pension plan asset returns and a decline in currency translation adjustments, as compared to 2003. Other comprehensive income (expense) improved to income of $68.3 million in 2003 from an expense of $11.0 million in 2002, which reflects the strengthening of the Euro, improved pension plan asset returns and improved hedging results. Business Segments We conduct our business through three business segments that represent our major product areas. We evaluate segment performance and allocate resources based on each segment operating income excluding special items, such as restructuring and integration costs related to the IFC acquisition. We believe that special items, while indicative of efforts to integrate IFC in our business, do not reflect ongoing business results. We believe investors and other users of our financial statements can better evaluate and analyze historical and future business trends if special items are excluded from each segment operating income. Operating income before special items is not a recognized measure under GAAP and should not be viewed as an alternative to, or a better indicator of, GAAP measures of performance. Effective January 1, 2004, we realigned certain small sites between segments. Accordingly, the segment information for all periods presented herein has been reported under our revised organizational structure. See Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion of our segments. The key operating results for our three business segments, FPD, FCD and FSD are discussed below. Flowserve Pump Division Segment Results Through FPD, we design, manufacture, distribute and service engineered and industrial pumps and pump systems, replacement parts and related equipment, principally to industrial markets. FPD has 27 manufacturing facilities worldwide, of which nine are located in North America, 10 in Europe, and eight in South America and Asia. FPD also has 65 service centers, which are either free standing or co-located in a manufacturing facility. In 2004, FPD had sales of $1.3 billion, of which approximately 43% were from oil and gas, 20% power, 10% water, 8% chemical and 19% general industries. Flowserve Pump Division 2004 2003 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 1,339.1 $ 1,207.1 $ 1,123.8 Sales 1,329.8 1,164.6 1,181.5 Gross profit 341.3 282.9 314.9 Gross profit margin 25.7 % 24.3 % 26.7 % Segment operating income 110.1 85.9 121.3 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 8.3 % 7.4 % 10.3 % Backlog (at period end) 575.8 569.6 495.5 38 Table of Contents Bookings in 2004 increased by $74.0 million, or 6.1%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $58 million, as compared with 2003. The increase is due to additional bookings of $40.5 million resulting from our acquisition of the remaining 75% of TKL in March 2004, and an increase in aftermarket bookings. Aftermarket bookings represented 46.3% of total FPD bookings in 2004 as compared with 44.3% in 2003, as our primary served markets for the oil and gas and chemicals industries experienced growth and operated at near capacity levels due to continued increases in crude oil prices. Bookings in 2003 decreased by $1.3 million, or 0.1%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $85 million, as compared with 2002. Our EMA bookings increased approximately 7.2%, but was offset by a decline in North and South America bookings in 2003 of 2.5% and 19.4%, respectively, due to several large non-recurring projects that were substantially completed in 2002. Sales in 2004 increased by $105.8 million, or 9.1%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $59 million as compared with 2003. Sales improved in all regions and were most active in our core oil and gas markets. Water projects, especially those focusing on desalination, improved and chemical markets remained strong despite increasing feedstock prices. Of the 9.1% increase, 3.0% was directly attributable to increased sales from TKL. Offsetting these favorable sales was decreased business in our North American water market, where our sales were $14.5 million lower than the previous year as FPD was more selective in bidding opportunities. Sales in 2003 decreased by $95.4 million, or 8.1%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $79 million as compared with 2002. Sales from North and South America were lower by $81.9 million and $12.6 million, respectively. In North America, lower sales in 2003 were primarily attributable to a reduction in large project business in the U.S. and Canada. These declines in large project business were mostly offset by currency translation benefits of approximately $79 million. Gross profit margin increased to 25.7% in 2004 as compared with 24.3% in 2003. This increase is primarily a result of increased sales, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed costs, a higher mix of historically more profitable general industrial products and services and increased productivity. These were partially offset by an increase in incentive compensation of $7.4 million included in cost of sales. Gross profit margin decreased to 24.3% in 2003 as compared with 26.7% in 2002. This is primarily a result of the decrease in sales, which unfavorably impacts our absorption of fixed costs, as well as lower aftermarket shipments into the Middle East and Venezuela. Operating income in 2004 increased by $17.2 million, or 20.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $7 million, as compared with 2003. In addition to the increased sales and gross profit margin discussed above, operating income also increased due to $2.9 million in operating income resulting from the acquisition of TKL in March 2004 and a gain of $8.5 million from the involuntary conversion of patterns that were lost in a fire at one of our foundries. These were slightly offset by an increase in incentive compensation of $7.4 million included in cost of sales as discussed above and an incremental increase in incentive compensation of $9.1 million included in SG&A. Operating income in 2003 decreased by $44.4 million, or 36.6%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $9 million, as compared with 2002. The decrease is primarily a result of the decrease in gross profit margin discussed above. Flow Control Division Segment Results Through FCD, we design, manufacture and distribute industrial valves, manual valves, control valves, nuclear valves, actuators and related equipment, and provide a variety of flow control-related services. We manufacture valves and actuators through five major manufacturing plants in the U.S. and 17 major manufacturing plants outside the U.S. We have 51 valve service centers, of which 34 are related to GSG, that are generally free standing and principally based in the U.S. FCD had 2004 sales of $954.5 million, of which approximately 26% were from chemical, 15% power, 16% oil and gas, 3% water and 40% general industries. As a result of our 2002 acquisition of the flow control division of Invensys plc, we believe we are one of the world leading suppliers of valves and related products and services to the chemical industry. Based on independent industry sources, we believe that we are the second largest industrial valve supplier on a global basis. We 39 Table of Contents believe that our comprehensive portfolio of valve products and services is a key source of our competitive advantage. Further, our focus on service and severe corrosion and erosion applications is a key competency. Flow Control Division Pro Forma 2004 2003 2002 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 967.8 $ 890.5 $ 747.5 $ 889.7 Sales 954.5 881.4 727.5 884.8 Gross profit 273.0 262.0 204.2 257.0 Gross profit margin 28.6 % 29.7 % 28.1 % 29.0 % Segment operating income (before special items) 59.6 61.1 42.2 54.0 Integration expense 19.8 16.2 16.2 Restructuring expense 2.9 4.3 6.2 Purchase accounting adjustment for inventory 5.2 Segment operating income (after special items) 59.6 38.4 16.5 31.6 Segment operating income (after special items) as a percentage of sales 6.2 % 4.4 % 2.3 % 3.6 % Backlog (at period end) 227.6 215.5 210.8 210.8 Bookings in 2004 increased by $31.9 million, or 3.6%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $45 million, as compared with 2003. The increase is a result of strength in the chemical, oil and gas, and general services segments of the market. Bookings in 2003 increased by $80.8 million, or 10.8%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $62 million, as compared with 2002. The increase is primarily due to the full year impact of the IFC acquisition of $155 million partially offset by weaknesses in the chemical, power and general industrial markets. Approximately 70% of FCD bookings are in these markets, which declined in both 2003 and 2002. Bookings in 2003 declined 6.9%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $62 million, as compared to pro forma 2002 bookings, reflecting weakness in the chemical, power and general industrial markets in 2003. Sales in 2004 increased by $29.6 million, or 3.4%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $43 million, as compared with 2003. The increase is attributable to many of the major valve markets beginning to recover from several years of decline. Growth was particularly strong in the Asia Pacific region. Sales volumes in 2004 were positively affected by increased customer demand for valve products and services in the power, chemical and general industrial sectors of the business. Sales in 2003 increased by $92.3 million, or 12.7%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $62 million, as compared with 2002. The increase is primarily due to full year impact of the IFC acquisition of approximately $141 million. This increase is partially offset by a decrease in volumes due to weakness in the power and chemicals markets. Sales in 2003 declined 7.3%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $62 million, as compared to pro forma 2002 sales, reflecting reduced customer demand for valve products and services in the chemical, power and general industrial markets in 2003. Gross profit margin decreased to 28.6% in 2004 as compared to 29.7% in 2003 resulting primarily from a $14.1 million charge to cost of sales for the increase in the reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory. Our inventory reserve increased in 2004 primarily as a consequence of increases in reserves for inventory products acquired in the IFC acquisition. Our product marketing strategies for certain acquired IFC product lines did not produce the results we had originally anticipated, which resulted in recognition of an additional reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory. We continue to monitor inventory levels and movements and, based on our experience, may record changes to the inventory reserves, if needed. The decrease in 2004 gross profit margin is also due to a $2.7 million increase in annual incentive compensation included in cost of sales. Gross profit margin increased to 29.7% in 2003 as compared to 28.1% in 2002 due to approximately $10 million in synergy benefits from the IFC acquisition reflected in cost of sales. For 2003 these benefits are partially offset by the impact of lower unit volumes and an unfavorable mix of product sales. Gross profit margin of 29.7% was greater than pro forma 2002 gross profit margin of 29.0% due to the realization of synergy benefits in 2003 from the IFC acquisition. 40 Table of Contents Operating income (before special items) in 2004 decreased by $6.0 million, or 9.8%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $4 million, as compared with 2003. The decrease results primarily from a $14.1 million charge to income for the increase in the provision for obsolete and slow moving inventory as discussed above. The decrease is also due to the $2.7 million increase in incentive compensation included in cost of sales discussed above and an incremental $7.6 million increase in incentive compensation included in SG&A. Operating income (before special items) in 2003 increased by $12.9 million, or 30.6%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $6 million, as compared with 2002. The increase primarily reflects a full year effect of the IFC acquisition. The improvement in 2003 also reflects estimated synergy benefits from the IFC acquisition of approximately $10 million reflected in cost of sales as discussed above, and incremental synergy benefits of approximately $5 million reflected in SG&A. Special items during 2003 and 2002 are all associated with the acquisition and integration of IFC into FCD. Compared to the pro forma 2002 operating income (before special items), 2003 operating income (before special items), excluding currency benefits of approximately $6 million, increased 2.2%. Flow Solutions Division Segment Results Through FSD, we design, manufacture and distribute mechanical seals, sealing systems and parts and provide related services, principally to industrial markets. FSD has seven manufacturing operations, four of which are located in North America, two are in Europe and one is in Singapore. FSD operates 62 QRCs worldwide, including 24 such sites in North America, 14 in Europe, and the remainder located in South America and Asia. FSD had 2004 sales of $394 million, of which approximately 30% were from oil and gas, 27% chemical and 43% general industries. Our ability to turn around engineered seal products within 72 hours from the customer request, through design, engineering, manufacturing, testing and delivery, is our major source of competitive advantage. Based on independent industry sources, we believe that we are the second largest mechanical seal supplier on a global basis. Flow Solutions Division 2004 2003 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 395.0 $ 361.1 $ 343.2 Sales 394.0 357.7 348.6 Gross profit 170.3 160.1 151.0 Gross profit margin 43.2 % 44.8 % 43.3 % Segment operating income 72.6 73.9 64.6 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 18.4 % 20.7 % 18.5 % Backlog (at period end) 43.7 41.0 34.0 Bookings in 2004 increased by $22.6 million, or 6.2%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $11 million, as compared with 2003. Bookings in 2003 increased by $3.4 million, or 1.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $15 million, as compared with 2002. The bookings improvement in both years reflects FSD emphasis on end user business and its success in establishing longer-term customer alliance programs, including fixed fee alliances, despite weakened market conditions. Fixed fee alliances are contractual agreements with customers wherein the customer pays us a fixed amount each period (usually monthly) for the term of the agreement. In return for this fixed cost, the customer is entitled to new seals, repairs, upgraded equipment, replacements and maintenance services as defined within the scope of each agreement. We believe that this emphasis combined with heightened levels of service, reliability and innovation, has contributed to an increase in market share in 2004, 2003 and 2002. We are currently implementing this end user strategy in our other divisions. Sales in 2004 increased by $25.2 million, or 7.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $11 million, as compared with 2003. As discussed above, continuous focused improvements in our end user customer business, as well as meeting our strategic growth initiatives, led FSD to increased shipments in all regions in 2004. Sales in 2003 decreased by $4.9 million, or 1.4%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $14 million, as compared with 2002. The decrease is due to slightly weaker business conditions. 41 Table of Contents Gross profit margin for FSD decreased to 43.2% in 2004 as compared to 44.8% in 2003 primarily due to a $4.1 million increase in annual incentive compensation included in cost of sales, increases in worldwide metals pricing, and a charge to cost of sales resulting from an increase in the reserve for slow moving inventory. Gross profit margin increased to 44.8% in 2003 as compared to 43.3% in 2002 primarily as a result of a $2.4 million decrease in annual incentive compensation included in cost of sales. The improvement in 2003 also reflects the impact of CIP initiative projects, which resulted in cost savings, and increases in plant efficiencies resulting from bringing previously outsourced production in-house. Operating income in 2004 decreased by $3.7 million, or 5.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $2 million, as compared with 2003. The decrease in operating income is primarily a result of the decrease in gross profit margin discussed above and an increase in SG&A, resulting from an increase in annual incentive compensation of $4.1 million. Operating income in 2003 increased by $5.9 million, or 9.1%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $3 million, as compared to 2002. The improvement in 2003 primarily reflects the increase in gross profit margin discussed above. Operating income as a percentage of sales increased to 20.7% in 2003 from 18.5% in 2002 due primarily to cost of sales savings resulting from the CIP initiative. RESTRUCTURING AND ACQUISITION RELATED CHARGES Restructuring Costs IFC In conjunction with the IFC acquisition during 2002, we initiated a restructuring program designed to reduce costs and eliminate excess capacity by closing 18 valve facilities, including 10 service facilities, and reducing sales and related support personnel. Our actions, some of which were approved and committed to in 2002 with the remaining actions approved and committed to in 2003, resulted in a gross reduction of 847 positions and a net reduction of 633 positions. Net position eliminations represent the gross positions eliminated from the closed facilities offset by positions added at the receiving facilities, which are required to produce the products transferred into the receiving facilities. We established a restructuring program reserve of $11.0 million upon acquisition of IFC, and increased the reserve by a total of $9.6 million in the latter half of 2002. We recognized additional accruals of $4.5 million in 2003 for this program, primarily related to the closure of certain valve service facilities and the related reductions in workforce. Based upon revised forecasts of costs to be incurred, we recognized a reduction of $2.3 million to the IFC restructuring reserve during 2004. Since the portion of the reserve affected by the estimate was created through goodwill recognition, the reduction to the reserve was recorded via a decrease to goodwill. Cash expenditures against the accrual were $3.4 million in 2004, $11.6 million in 2003 and $4.2 million in 2002. The remaining accrual of $3.6 million reflects payments made in 2005 and beyond for severance obligations due to terminated personnel in Europe of $2.1 million as well as lease and other contract termination and other exit costs of $1.5 million. Cumulative costs of $7.2 million associated with the closure of our facilities through December 31, 2003, have been recognized as restructuring expense in operating results, whereas cumulative costs associated with the closure of IFC facilities of $17.9 million, including related deferred taxes of $6.2 million, became part of the purchase price allocation of the transaction. The effect of these closure costs increased the amount of goodwill otherwise recognizable as a result of the IFC acquisition. 42 Table of Contents The following illustrates activity related to the IFC restructuring reserve: Other Severance Exit Costs Total (Amounts in millions) Balance created on June 5, 2002 $ 6.9 $ 4.1 $ 11.0 Additional accruals 6.9 2.7 9.6 Cash expenditures (3.1 ) (1.1 ) (4.2 ) Balance at December 31, 2002 10.7 5.7 16.4 Additional accruals 3.8 0.7 4.5 Cash expenditures (8.8 ) (2.8 ) (11.6 ) Balance at December 31, 2003 5.7 3.6 9.3 Non-cash adjustments (1.4 ) (0.9 ) (2.3 ) Cash expenditures (2.2 ) (1.2 ) (3.4 ) Balance at December 31, 2004 $ 2.1 $ 1.5 $ 3.6 Integration Costs IFC We also incurred acquisition-related integration expense in 2003 and 2002 in conjunction with the acquisition of IFC, which is summarized below: 2003 2002 (Amounts in millions) Personnel and related costs $ 7.9 $ 8.4 Transfer of product lines 4.6 3.5 Asset impairments 4.2 0.8 Other 3.1 3.5 IFC integration expense $ 19.8 $ 16.2 Cash expense $ 15.6 $ 15.1 Non-cash expense 4.2 1.1 IFC integration expense $ 19.8 $ 16.2 The acquisition-related activities resulted in integration costs as categorized above and further defined as follows. Personnel and related costs include payroll, benefits, consulting fees, and retention and integration performance bonuses paid to our employees and contractors for the development, management and execution of the integration plan. Transfer of product lines includes costs associated with the transfer of product lines as well as realignment required in the receiving facilities. Asset impairments reflect the loss on disposal of property, plant and equipment at the IFC facilities closed and disposal of inventory for discontinued product lines when the remaining facilities were combined. The other category includes costs associated with information technology integration, legal entity consolidations, legal entity name changes, signage, new product literature and other. None of these other integration expense items individually exceeded $0.5 million. Remaining Restructuring and Integration Costs IFC We have largely completed our restructuring and integration programs related to IFC, except for payments for certain outstanding European activities. We expect to incur no additional restructuring and integration costs in connection with these programs. Payments from the restructuring accrual will continue into 2005 and beyond due to the timing of severance obligations committed to in Europe. 43 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES 2004 2003 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Net cash flows provided by operating activities $ 267.5 $ 181.3 $ 249.0 Net cash flows used by investing activities (14.1 ) (26.6 ) (557.2 ) Net cash flows (used) provided by financing activities (250.6 ) (162.8 ) 327.6 Cash Flow Analysis Cash generated by operations and borrowings available under our existing revolving line of credit are our primary sources of short-term liquidity. Our sources of operating cash include the sale of our products and services and the reduction of our working capital, particularly accounts receivable and inventories. Our cash balance at December 31, 2004 was $63.8 million, compared to $53.5 million in 2003 and $49.0 million in 2002. The increase in cash flows provided by operating activities in 2004 primarily relates to a net reduction in working capital, primarily as a result of increases in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and retirement obligations and other liabilities. The decrease in cash flows provided by operating activities in 2003 as compared to 2002 primarily relates to pension contributions, income taxes and outflows related to the IFC integration. In 2003, contributions to U.S. pension plans were $27.0 million, compared with $4.6 million in 2002. We increased our pension contributions in 2003 as a result of an increase in the number of employees due to the acquisition of IFC and increased funding requirement due to the underperformance of underlying plan assets in 2002. Contributions to our U.S. pension plan were $15.3 million in 2004. In 2002, we also benefited from receipt of a $23.2 million U.S. income tax refund compared with $4.9 million received in 2003. Cash outflows related to the IFC integration were $27.2 million in 2003 compared with $19.3 million in 2002. Working capital reductions provided operating cash flow of $152.5 million in 2004, compared with $70.1 million in 2003 and $120.6 million in 2002. The reduction in working capital for 2004 reflects increases of $46.6 million in accounts payable due to deferred payment of invoices at year-end in 2004, and $32.1 million in accrued liabilities due primarily to an increase of approximately $44 million in the bonus accrual for 2004. The reduction in working capital for 2004 also reflects our continued emphasis on improving accounts receivable collections and reducing inventory. Accounts receivable reductions in 2004 generated $39.4 million of cash flow compared with $23.8 million of cash flow in 2003 and $67.8 million in 2002. The improvement in accounts receivable primarily reflects improved collections and the impact of the accounts receivable securitization of $48.7 million discussed below. In addition, incremental factoring of certain non-U.S. receivables used $3.4 million in 2004, and contributed $15.5 million in 2003 and $32.1 million in 2002. Our goal for days sales receivables outstanding ( DSO ) is 60 days. For the fourth quarter of 2004, we achieved a DSO of 66 days as compared to 70 days for the same period in 2003. Including the effect of the securitization, DSO improved to 60 days at December 31, 2004. For reference purposes based on 2004 sales, an improvement of one day could provide approximately $8 million in cash. Inventory reductions contributed $25.5 million of cash flow for 2004 compared with $29.4 million of cash flow for 2003 and $36.4 million in 2002. The majority of the inventory reduction was in project-related work in process inventory required to support shipments of products in backlog, offset in part by an increase in raw materials. As a result of inventory reductions, inventory turns were 5.2 times at December 31, 2004, compared with 4.5 times and 4.4 times at December 31, 2003 and 2002 respectively. For reference purposes based on 2004 data, an improvement of one turn could yield approximately $65 million in cash. Cash outflows for investing activities were $14.1 million and $26.6 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively, due primarily to capital expenditures. Cash outflows of $557.2 million in 2002 primarily represent the acquisition of IFC for $535 million, net of cash acquired. Cash outflows for financing activities were $250.6 million in 2004 compared with $162.8 million in 2003 and with inflows of $327.6 million in 2002. The change in 2004 results primarily from increased mandatory 44 Table of Contents repayments of long-term debt triggered by the GMBU divestiture, the issuance of the EIB credit facility and accounts receivables securitization. The change in 2003 results from the absence of equity offerings in 2003 as compared with 2002. Our cash needs for the next 12 months are expected to be substantially similar to 2004, except for a decrease in debt payments required under our New Credit Facilities partially offset by an increase in pension contributions. We believe cash flows from operating activities, combined with availability under our revolving line of credit and our existing cash balances, will be sufficient to enable us to meet our cash flow needs for the next 12 months. However, cash flows from operations could be adversely affected by economic, political and other risks associated with sales of our products, operational factors, competition, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and fluctuations in interest rates, among other factors. We believe that cash flows from operating activities and our expectation of continuing availability to draw upon our revolving credit agreements are also sufficient to meet our cash flow needs for the periods exceeding the next 12 months. We generated $6.8 million and $16.9 million of cash flow related to the exercise of employee stock options in 2004 and 2002, respectively, which is reflected in financing activities of the consolidated statement of cash flows. Amounts generated from the exercise of employee stock options in 2003 were not significant. Payments for Acquisitions On May 2, 2002, we completed our acquisition of IFC for a contractual purchase price of $535 million, subject to adjustment pursuant to the terms of the purchase and sale agreement. A reduction of $2.2 million was agreed to and settled during the fourth quarter of 2003, which yielded a final contractual purchase price of $532.8 million. The reduction related to the finalization of balances at the date of acquisition for cash, related party activity and tax payments. In addition, we incurred $6.1 million of costs associated with consummation of the acquisition, including investment banking, legal, actuarial and accounting fees. The total purchase price including such costs was $538.9 million. After acquiring IFC, one of the world foremost manufacturers of valves, actuators and associated flow control products, we believe that we are the world second largest manufacturer of valves. We financed the acquisition and associated transaction costs by issuing 9.2 million shares of common stock in April 2002 for net proceeds of approximately $276 million and through new borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities. The purchase price was allocated to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on estimated fair value at the date of the acquisition. We substantially completed the purchase price allocation of IFC during 2003 and expect no further revisions. These final allocations included $45 million for amortizable intangibles, $25 million of indefinite lived intangible assets and $304 million recorded as goodwill. The operating results of IFC have been included in the consolidated statements of operations from May 2, 2002, the date of acquisition. We regularly evaluate acquisition opportunities of various sizes. The cost and terms of any financing to be raised in conjunction with any acquisition, including our ability to raise economical capital, is a critical consideration in any such evaluation. In March 2004, we acquired the remaining 75% interest in TKL for approximately $12 million. We paid for the acquisition with cash generated by operations. Prior to the acquisition, we held a 25% interest in TKL. As a result of this acquisition, we strengthened our product offering in the mining industry, broadened our manufacturing capacity in the Asia Pacific region and gained foundry capacity. Capital Expenditures 2004 2003 2002 (As restated) (As restated) (Amounts in millions) Capital expenditures $ 45.2 $ 28.8 $ 30.9 Depreciation expense 62.5 61.6 55.8 45 Table of Contents Capital expenditures were funded primarily by operating cash flows and, to a lesser extent, by bank borrowings. For each of the three years, capital expenditures were invested in new and replacement machinery and equipment, information technology and acquisition integration activities, including structures and equipment required at receiving facilities. In each year, capital expenditures were less than depreciation expense due to excess capacity and the upgrading of equipment through integration processes. Capital expenditures in 2004 include approximately $5 million for the purchase of a building we previously leased for the manufacture of valves. In 2005, our capital expenditures focused on new product development, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities and are expected to be approximately $45 million to $50 million. Certain of our facilities may face capacity constraints in the foreseeable future, which may lead to higher capital expenditure levels. Financing Debt, including capital lease obligations, consisted of: December 31 2004 2003 (As restated) (Amounts in thousands) Term Loan Tranche A: U.S. Dollar Tranche, interest rate of 5.02% in 2004 and 3.74% in 2003 $ 76,240 $ 200,004 Euro Tranche, interest rate of 4.69% in 2004 and 4.65% in 2003 13,257 12,292 Term Loan Tranche C, interest rate of 5.20% in 2004 and 4.00% in 2003 233,851 465,473 Senior Subordinated Notes net of discount, interest rate of 12.25%: U.S. Dollar denominated 187,004 186,739 Euro denominated 87,484 80,998 EIB loan, interest rate of 2.39% 85,000 Receivable securitization and factoring obligations 17,635 4,543 Capital lease obligations and other 1,373 752 Debt and capital lease obligations 701,844 950,801 Less amounts due within one year 44,098 71,035 Total debt due after one year $ 657,746 $ 879,766 Senior Credit Facilities 2000 Credit Facilities On August 8, 2000, we entered into senior credit facilities comprised of a $275.0 million Tranche A term loan, a $475.0 million Tranche B term loan and a $300.0 million revolving line of credit, hereinafter collectively referred to as our 2000 Credit Facilities. In connection with our acquisition of IFC in May 2002, we amended and restated our 2000 Credit Facilities to provide for (1) an incremental $95.3 million Tranche A term loan and (2) a $700.0 million Tranche C term loan. The proceeds of the incremental Tranche A term loan and the Tranche C term loan were used to finance a portion of the acquisition purchase price and to repay in full the Tranche B term loan. Borrowings under our 2000 Credit Facilities bore interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (1) the base rate (which was based on the prime rate most recently announced by the administrative agent under our 2000 Credit Facilities or the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50%) or (2) London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ), plus, in the case of Tranche A term loan and loans under the revolving line of credit, an applicable margin determined by reference to the ratio of our total debt to consolidated EBITDA, and, in the case of Tranche C term loan, an applicable margin based on our long-term debt ratings. 46 Table of Contents New Credit Facilities On August 12, 2005, we entered into New Credit Facilities comprised of a $600.0 million term loan maturing on August 10, 2012 and a $400.0 million revolving line of credit, which can be utilized to provide up to $300.0 million in letters of credit, expiring on August 12, 2010. We used the proceeds of borrowings under our New Credit Facilities to refinance our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes and indebtedness outstanding under our 2000 Credit Facilities. Further, we replaced the letter of credit agreement that guaranteed our EIB credit facility (described below) with a letter of credit issued as part of the New Credit Facilities. Borrowings under our New Credit Facilities bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (1) the base rate (which is based on greater of the prime rate most recently announced by the administrative agent under our New Credit Facilities or the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50%) or (2) LIBOR plus an applicable margin determined by reference to the ratio of our total debt to consolidated EBITDA, which as of September 30, 2005 was 1.75% for LIBOR borrowings. EIB Credit Facility On April 14, 2004, we and one of our European subsidiaries, Flowserve B.V., entered into an agreement with EIB, pursuant to which EIB agreed to loan us up to 70 million, with the ability to draw funds in multiple currencies, to finance in part specified research and development projects undertaken by us in Europe. Borrowings under the EIB credit facility bear interest at a fixed or floating rate of interest agreed to by us and EIB with respect to each borrowing under the facility. Loans under the EIB credit facility are subject to mandatory prepayment, at EIB discretion, upon the occurrence of certain events, including a change of control or prepayment of certain other indebtedness. In addition, the EIB credit facility contains covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to dispose of assets related to the financed project and require us to deliver to EIB our audited annual financial statements within 30 days of publication. In August 2004, we borrowed $85 million at a floating interest rate based on 3-month U.S. LIBOR that resets quarterly. As of December 31, 2004, the interest rate was 2.39%. The maturity of the loan is June 15, 2011, but may be repaid at any time without penalty. Additional discussion of our 2000 Credit Facilities, New Credit Facilities, and EIB credit facility is included in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. We have entered into interest rate and currency swap agreements to hedge our exposure to cash flows related to the credit facilities discussed above. These agreements are more fully described in Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk. Senior Subordinated Notes In 2000, we issued a principal amount of $290 million U.S. dollar tranche and 100 million Euro tranche of our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes, with an original issue discount resulting in a 12.50% yield. In 2001, we repurchased $101.5 million of the US dollar tranche notes and 35.0 million of the Euro tranche notes with the proceeds of an equity offering. As discussed above, in the third quarter of 2005 we repaid all of the remaining Senior Subordinated Notes, together with accrued interest thereon and a prepayment penalty, using the proceeds of borrowings under our New Credit Facilities. Debt Prepayments and Repayments The following summarizes our repayment of indebtedness obligations under our 2000 Credit Facilities: 2004 2003 2002 (Amounts in millions) Scheduled repayment $ 27.5 $ 0.9 $ 33.8 Mandatory repayment 167.9 Optional prepayment 160.0 163.1 170.0 Loss on debt repayment and extinguishment 2.7 1.3 11.2 47 Table of Contents Under our 2000 Credit Facilities, we were required to use the proceeds of asset sales and new debt issuance, among other things, to pay down the principal amount outstanding. In addition to mandatory repayments, we made optional prepayments of principal from excess cash generated from operations. Further, under our 2000 Credit Facilities, we were required to use a portion of our excess cash flow generated from operations during any fiscal year to repay term loans outstanding thereunder. Based on the annual calculations performed as of December 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, no repayments were due with respect to excess cash flow for the years then ended due to the high level of optional debt prepayment during the respective years. The loans under our New Credit Facilities are subject to mandatory repayment with, in general: 100% of the net cash proceeds of asset sales; and Unless we attain and maintain investment grade credit ratings: 75% of our excess cash flow, subject to a reduction based on the ratio of our total debt to consolidated EBITDA; 50% of the proceeds of any equity offerings; and 100% of the proceeds of any debt issuances (subject to certain exceptions). We may prepay loans under our New Credit Facilities in whole or in part, without premium or penalty. We incurred $9.3 million in fees related to the new facilities, of which $0.3 million were expensed in 2005. Prior to the refinancing, we had $11.8 million of unamortized deferred loan costs related to the 2000 Credit Facilities and the Senior Subordinated Notes. Based upon the final syndicate of financial institutions for the New Credit Facilities, we expensed $10.5 million of these unamortized deferred loan costs in 2005. In addition to the total loan costs of $10.8 million that were expensed, we recorded a charge of $16.5 million for premiums paid to call the Senior Subordinated Notes, for a total loss on extinguishment of $27.3 million recorded in 2005. The remaining $9.0 million of fees related to the new facilities were capitalized and combined with the remaining $1.3 million of previously unamortized deferred loan costs for a total of $10.3 million in deferred loan costs included in other assets, net. These costs will be amortized over the term of the New Credit Facilities. Accounts Receivable Securitization In October 2004, Flowserve US Inc., one of our wholly owned subsidiaries, and Flowserve Receivables Corporation ( FRC ), a wholly owned subsidiary of Flowserve US Inc., entered into a receivables purchase agreement ( RPA ) with two third party financial institutions whereby FRC could obtain up to $75 million in financing on a revolving basis by securitizing certain U.S.-based trade receivables. To obtain financing, Flowserve US Inc. transferred eligible receivables to FRC, which was formed solely for this accounts receivable securitization program. Pursuant to the RPA, FRC then sold undivided purchaser interests in these receivables to the third party financial institutions. Flowserve US Inc. continued to service the receivables for a servicing fee of 0.5% of the average net receivable balance. No servicing liability was recognized at December 31, 2004 because the amount was immaterial due to the short term average collection period of the securitized receivables. FRC has no recourse against Flowserve US Inc. for failure of the debtors to pay when due. As of December 31, 2004, FRC had secured $60 million in financing under the program. The proceeds were used to repay $16 million and $44 million of Tranche A and Tranche C bank term loans, respectively, outstanding under our 2000 Credit Facilities. At the time the purchaser interests were sold, $48.7 million of the receivables transferred to FRC were removed from FRC financial statements, and FRC further recorded short-term debt of $11.3 million. Borrowings under the RPA in excess of $11.3 million are excluded from our debt balance as presented in the consolidated balance sheets, but included for purposes of covenant calculations under the 2000 Credit Facilities. On October 31, 2005, we terminated the RPA. In connection with this, we borrowed approximately $48 million under our New Credit Facilities and repurchased outstanding receivable interests from the third 48 Table of Contents party financial institutions. See additional discussion of our accounts receivable securitization program in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Accounts Receivable Factoring Through our European subsidiaries, we engage in non-recourse factoring of certain accounts receivable. The various agreements have different terms, including options for renewal and mutual termination clauses. Under our 2000 Credit Facilities, such factoring was generally limited to $50 million, based on due date of the factored receivables. The limit on factoring was raised to $75 million under the New Credit Facilities entered into in August 2005. See additional discussion of our accounts receivable factoring program in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Debt Covenants and Other Matters Our 2000 Credit Facilities that have now been refinanced, the letter of credit facility guaranteeing our obligations under the EIB credit facility, and the agreements governing our domestic receivables program each required us to deliver to creditors thereunder our audited annual consolidated financial statements within a specified number of days following the end of each fiscal year. In addition, the indentures governing our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes required us to timely file with the SEC our annual and quarterly reports. As a result of the 2004 Restatement and the new obligations regarding internal controls attestation under Section 404, we did not timely issue our financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2004 and the quarterly periods ended June 30, 2004, September 30, 2004, March 31, 2005, June 30, 2005 and September 30, 2005, and were unable to timely file with the SEC our Annual Report on Form 10-K and Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for such periods. Prior to the refinancing of our 2000 Credit Facilities and the replacement of the standby letter of credit facility, we obtained waivers thereunder extending the deadline for the delivery of our financial statements to the lenders under our 2000 Credit Facilities and the letter of credit facility guaranteeing the EIB credit facility and, as a result of such waivers, were not in default due to the delay in the delivery of our financial statements. We did not seek or obtain a waiver under the indentures governing our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes with respect to our inability to timely file with the SEC the required reports and, prior to the refinancing of our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes, were in default thereunder. However, our debt is properly classified as non-current in our balance sheet as we have demonstrated our ability and intent to obtain new long-term credit facilities in August 2005. We have determined, utilizing our restated financial information, that on multiple occasions we did not comply with some of the financial covenants in our 2000 Credit Facilities, which are no longer in effect. We believe that we could have undertaken readily available actions to maintain compliance or obtained a waiver or amendment to the 2000 Credit Facilities had the new restated results then been known. We have complied with all other non-financial covenants under our 2000 Credit Facilities. We believe that these covenant violations have no impact on our New Credit Facilities and that the amounts outstanding under the 2000 Credit Facilities are properly classified in our consolidated balance sheet. Our New Credit Facilities contain covenants requiring us to deliver to lenders leverage and interest coverage financial covenants and our audited annual and unaudited quarterly financial statements. Under the leverage covenant, the maximum permitted leverage ratio steps down beginning with the fourth quarter of 2006, with a further step-down beginning with the fourth quarter of 2007. Under the interest coverage covenant, the minimum required interest coverage ratio steps up beginning with the fourth quarter of 2006, with a further step-up beginning with the fourth quarter of 2007. Compliance with these financial covenants under our New Credit Facilities is tested quarterly, and we have complied with the financial covenants as of September 30, 2005. Delivery of the December 31, 2004 audited consolidated financial statements is required by December 31, 2005 and delivery of the December 31, 2005 audited financial statements by May 30, 2006. We have received a waiver from our lenders to deliver the December 31, 2004 audited financial statements by February 28, 2006. Further, we are required to furnish within 50 days of the end of each of the first three quarters of each year our consolidated balance sheet, and related statements of operations, shareholders equity and cash flows. 49 Table of Contents Our New Credit Facilities also contain covenants restricting our and our subsidiaries ability to dispose of assets, merge, pay dividends, repurchase or redeem capital stock and indebtedness, incur indebtedness and guarantees, create liens, enter into agreements with negative pledge clauses, make certain investments or acquisitions, enter into sale and leaseback transactions, enter into transactions with affiliates, make capital expenditures, engage in any business activity other than our existing business or any business activities reasonably incidental thereto. With the waiver for delivery of the December 31, 2004 audited financial statements, we are currently in compliance with all debt covenants under the New Credit Facilities. COMMON STOCK OFFERINGS During 2002, we financed the acquisition of IFC and associated transaction costs with a combination of bank financing and net proceeds of approximately $276 million received from the issuance of 9.2 million shares of common stock during April 2002. CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS The following table presents a summary of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2004: Payments Due by Period Within Beyond 1 Year(3) 2-3 Years 4-5 Years 5 Years Total (Amounts in millions) Long-term debt(1)(2) $ 43.6 $ 99.2 $ 198.1 $ 359.5 $ 700.4 Capital lease obligations 0.5 0.5 0.4 1.4 Operating leases 19.4 24.9 13.9 16.2 74.4 Purchase obligations: Inventory 84.2 3.0 0.1 87.3 Non-inventory 5.2 0.5 0.4 0.2 6.3 (1) After giving effect to the refinancing, the termination of our accounts receivable securitization agreement, an optional prepayment of approximately $20 million that we made in December 2005, and a mandatory repayment of $10.9 million that we made in January 2006 using the net proceeds from the sale of GSG, our scheduled long-term debt obligations are $1.5 million due within one year, $5.7 million due within two to three years, $11.4 million due within four to five years, and $635.4 million due beyond five years. (2) Interest payments on scheduled long-term debt obligations under our New Credit Facilities are estimated to be $55.0 million due within one year, $86.4 million due within two to three years, $84.4 million due within four to five years, and $92.4 million due beyond five years. These estimates are based on fixed or synthetically fixed rate debt and floating rate debt assuming a base rate of three-month LIBOR as of December 31, 2005. (3) We have no minimum pension funding requirements in 2005, but we made voluntary contributions to our U.S. pension plan of approximately $43 million in 2005. The following table presents a summary of our commercial commitments at December 31, 2004: Commitment Expiration by Period Within Beyond 1 Year 2-3 Years 4-5 Years 5 Years Total (Amounts in millions) Standby letters of credit/bank guarantees $ 120.7 $ 71.2 $ 7.8 $ 0.5 $ 200.2 Surety bonds 44.8 21.2 66.0 We expect to satisfy these commitments through performance under our contracts. 50 Table of Contents PENSION AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS OBLIGATIONS Our pension plans and postretirement benefit plans are accounted for using actuarial valuations required by SFAS No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions, and SFAS No. 106, Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions. We consider accounting for retirement plans critical because management is required to make significant subjective judgments about a number of actuarial assumptions, including discount rates, salary growth, long-term return on plan assets, retirement, turnover, health care cost trend rates and mortality rates. Depending on the assumptions and estimates used, the pension and postretirement benefit expense could vary within a range of outcomes and have a material effect on reported earnings. In addition, the assumptions can materially affect accumulated benefit obligations and future cash funding. Plan Description We and certain of our subsidiaries have defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution plans for regular full-time and part-time employees. The defined benefit pension plan in the U.S. is the Flowserve Corporation Pension Plan and the defined contribution plan is the Flowserve Corporation Retirement Savings Plan. Approximately 64% of total defined benefit pension plan assets and 55% of benefit obligations are related to the U.S. plan as of December 31, 2004. The assets for the U.S. plan are held in a single trust with a common asset allocation. Unless specified otherwise, the references in this section are to total plans (i.e., the U.S. plan together with international plans). Benefits under our defined benefit pension plans are based primarily on years of credited service and on participants compensation. Assets under our defined benefit plans consist primarily of equity and fixed-income securities. At December 31, 2004, the fair market value of plan assets for our defined benefit plans increased to $276.3 million from $233.0 million at December 31, 2003. Assets were allocated as follows: U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Asset Category 2004 2003 2004 2003(1) Equity securities 64% 65% 45% 52% Debt securities 31% 35% 42% 48% Other 5% 13% (1) Non-U.S. plans in 2003 were adjusted to reflect certain non-U.S. pension plans that were not actuarially determined under GAAP in prior years. The projected benefit obligation for our defined benefit pension plans was $488.7 million and $420.3 million as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. None of our common stock is directly held by these plans. We sponsor defined benefit postretirement health care plan covering most current retirees and a limited number of future retirees in the U.S. This plan provides for medical and dental benefits and is administered through insurance companies. We fund the plan as benefits are paid, such that the plans hold no assets in any period presented. Accordingly, we have no investment strategy or targeted allocations for plan assets. The benefits under the plan are not available to new employees or most existing employees. The accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for our defined benefit postretirement health care plan was $88.7 million and $92.2 million as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Accrual Accounting and Significant Assumptions Consistent with the requirements of SFAS No. 87, we account for pension benefits using the accrual method, recognizing pension expense before the payment of benefits to retirees. The accrual method of 51 Table of Contents accounting for pension benefits necessarily requires actuarial assumptions concerning future events that will determine the amount and timing of the benefit payments. Our key assumptions used in calculating our cost of pension benefits are the discount rate, the rate of compensation increase, and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. We, in consultation with our actuaries, evaluate the key actuarial assumptions and other assumptions used in calculating the cost of pension benefits, such as discount rate, expected return on plan assets for funded plans, life expectancy of participants and assumed rate of wage increases, and determine such assumptions on December 31 of each year to calculate liability information as of that date and pension expense for the following year. Depending on the assumptions used, the pension expense could vary within a range of outcomes and have a material effect on reported earnings. In addition, the assumptions can materially affect accumulated benefit obligations and future cash funding. Actual results in any given year may differ from those estimated because of economic and other factors. The assumed discount rate used for determining future pension obligations is based on indices of AA-rated corporate bonds, except for two foreign locations which use government bonds. The assumed rate of compensation increase used for determining future pension obligations reflects an estimate of the change in actual future compensation levels due to general price levels, productivity, seniority and other factors. In 2004, net pension expense for our defined benefit pension plans included in income from continuing operations was $22.9 million compared to $20.0 million in 2003 and $14.2 million in 2002. The postretirement benefit expense for the postretirement health care plan was $3.8 million in 2004 compared to $4.1 million in 2003 and $5.5 million in 2002. The following are assumptions related to our defined benefit pension plans for the year ended December 31, 2004: U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Weighted average assumptions used to determine benefit obligations: Discount rate 5.75 % 5.12 % Rate of increase in compensation levels 4.50 % 3.04 % Weighted average assumptions used to determine net cost: Long-term rate of return on assets 8.75 % 6.86 % Discount rate 6.25 % 5.51 % Rate of increase in compensation levels 4.50 % 3.00 % The following provides a sensitivity analysis of alternative assumptions on the U.S. qualified and aggregate non-U.S. pension plans and U.S. postretirement plans. Effect of Discount Rate Changes and Constancy of Other Assumptions: Increase Decrease of 0.5% of 0.5% (Amounts in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plan: Effect on pension expense $ (0.7 ) $ 0.7 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (9.3 ) 10.0 Non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans: Effect on pension expense $ (0.5 ) $ 0.8 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (14.6 ) 15.6 U.S. Postretirement medical plans: Effect on postretirement medical expense $ (0.2 ) $ 0.2 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (3.6 ) 3.7 52 Table of Contents Effect of Changes in the Expected Return on Assets and Constancy of Other Assumptions: Increase Decrease of 0.5% of 0.5% (Amounts in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plan: Effect on pension expense $ (1.0 ) $ 1.0 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A Non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans: Effect on pension expense $ (0.3 ) $ 0.3 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A U.S. Postretirement medical plans: Effect on postretirement medical expense N/A N/A Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A As discussed below, GAAP provides that differences between expected and actual returns are recognized over the average future service of employees. At December 31, 2004, we lowered our assumed discount rate for U.S. plan from 6.25% to 5.75% and our average rate for non-U.S. plans from 5.5% to 5.1%. We maintained our average assumed rate of compensation increase at 4.5% and 3.0% for U.S. and non-U.S. plans, respectively. The reduction in the discount rate had the effect of increasing the present value of benefit obligations and, accordingly, will have the effect of increasing pension expense for 2005. Following many years of strong performance, the global equity market fell sharply in 2000 through 2002 (e.g., the S&P 500 declined by a cumulative 37.6%). This was reversed in 2003 through 2004 (e.g., the S&P 500 rose by a cumulative 42.7%). We reduced the expected rate of return on U.S. plan assets from 8.75% in 2004 to 8.25% for 2005. This revision will have the effect of increasing pension expense for 2005. We expect that the net pension expense for our defined benefit pension plans included in earnings before income taxes will be approximately $4.5 million higher in 2005 than the $22.9 million in 2004, reflecting, among other things, the decrease in the assumed discount rate. We expect the 2005 expense for the postretirement health care plan to be $1.0 million. We have used the same assumed discount rates of 5.75% and 6.25% at December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, in calculating our cost of pension benefits and our cost of other postretirement benefits for U.S. plans. U.S. health care costs for the retiree population are assumed to increase 7.0% in 2005 and then trend down to an expected increase of 5.0% per year by 2007. If actual costs are higher than those assumed, this will likely put modest upward pressure on our expense for retiree health care. On December 8, 2003, President Bush signed into law the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 (the Medicare Act ). The effects of the Medicare Act are reflected in 2004 net periodic postretirement benefit cost (a reduction of $0.7 million) and accumulated postretirement benefit obligation at December 31, 2004 (a reduction of $4.5 million). Delayed Recognition of Actuarial Gains and Losses At December 31, 2004 and 2003, unrecognized net actuarial losses for our defined benefit plans were $132.2 million and $113.8 million, respectively, based on the fair market value of plan assets. These unrecognized net actuarial losses reflect in large part the steady reduction of the weighted-average discount rate over the years. SFAS No. 87 provides for delayed recognition of actuarial gains and losses, including amounts arising from changes in the estimated plan benefit obligations due to changes in the assumed discount rate, differences between the actual and expected returns on plan assets, and other assumption changes. 53 Table of Contents SFAS No. 87 requires that unrecognized net actuarial gain or loss, determined based on the market-related value of plan assets (which differs from fair market value and is a calculated value that recognizes changes in fair value in a systematic and rational manner over five years), be amortized in pension expense for the year to the extent that such unrecognized net actuarial loss or gain exceeds 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligation or the market-related value of plan assets at the beginning of the year. These net gains and losses are recognized as pension expense prospectively over a period that approximates the average remaining service period of active employees expected to receive benefits under the plans to the extent that they are not offset by losses and gains in subsequent years. For example at December 31, 2004, the unrecognized net actuarial loss for the U.S. plan subject to amortized recognition, determined based on the market-related value of plan assets, was $89.8 million. This amount exceeded 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligation or the market related value of plan assets by $62.2 million. Unless offset by future unrecognized gains from higher discount rates or higher than expected returns on plan assets, amortization of this unrecognized loss is expected to increase pension expense for each of the following 13 years by approximately $5 million per year, which amount is reflected in the higher expense expected in 2005. In the event the fair market value of pension plan assets of a particular plan is less than the accumulated benefit obligation for such plan at year-end, GAAP may require an additional minimum liability, and in such circumstances, a reduction in shareholders equity or an establishment of an intangible asset. At December 31, 2004, the fair market value of our defined benefit pension plan assets was $276.3 million and the related accumulated benefit obligation was $473.6 million. We recognized an additional minimum liability of $97.4 million at December 31, 2004, which was offset by a $62.1 million charge in other comprehensive income included in stockholders equity, a $34.6 million deferred tax asset, and a $0.7 million reduction in the intangible asset. At December 31, 2003, the fair market value of our defined benefit pension plan assets was $233.0 million and the related accumulated benefit obligation was $410.5 million. We recognized an additional minimum liability of $84.2 million at December 31, 2003, which was offset by a $53.9 million charge in other comprehensive income included in shareholders equity, a $29.5 million deferred tax asset, and $0.8 million reduction in the intangible asset. Plan Funding Our funding policy for defined benefit plans is to contribute at least the amounts required under applicable laws and local customs. We contributed $23.4 million, $34.7 million, and $9.1 million to our defined benefit plans in 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. In 2005, we contributed approximately $43 million to our qualified U.S. pension plan, and we estimate contributing approximately $9 million to our non-U.S. pension plans. For further discussions on retirement benefits, see Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The process of preparing financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires the use of estimates and assumptions to determine reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of related contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and assumptions are based upon information available at the time of the estimates or assumptions, including our historical experience, where relevant. The most significant estimates made by management include timing and amount of revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory costing and related fair value allowances, deferred tax asset realization, restructuring charges and expected payments reflected in related reserves, legal and environmental claims estimates, warranty provisions, pension and postretirement benefits obligations and the fair value of indefinite-lived assets (including goodwill) and other long-lived assets. The significant estimates are reviewed quarterly by management with oversight by our Disclosure Control Committee, an internal committee comprised of members of senior management, and the Disclosure Control Committee presents its views to the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Because 54 Table of Contents of the uncertainty of factors surrounding the estimates, assumptions and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements, actual results may differ from the estimates, and the difference may be material. Our critical accounting policies are those policies that are both most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments on the part of management in their application, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe that the following represent our critical accounting policies. For a summary of all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Management and our external auditors have discussed our critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Revenues for products and short-term contracts are recognized based on the shipping terms agreed to with the customer and fulfillment of all but inconsequential or perfunctory actions required, which is generally the point of title transfer. If the customer order requires formal acceptance, revenue is not recognized until formal acceptance has been received. For contracts containing multiple products, each having separable value, we generally recognize revenue on individual product shipments equal to the shipped products pro rata share of the contract fair value upon the fulfillment of all but inconsequential or perfunctory actions of the individual product shipment. For multiple deliverables under a single contract or arrangement, such as product delivery and installation, we separate the fair value of the product from the installation and recognize revenue on each element independently upon fulfillment of all but inconsequential or perfunctory actions. Our estimates mainly relate to the fair value determination of the underlying services or products. Revenue on service contracts is recognized after the services have been rendered and accepted by the customer. All revenue for products, short-term projects and service contracts require, prior to recognition, the persuasive evidence of an arrangement, a fixed or determinable sales price and reasonable assurance of collectibility. Revenue for long-term large contracts (which we define as longer than nine-months in duration, with contract values over $750,000 and progress billings from the customer) are recorded on the percentage of completion method calculated on a cost-to -cost basis, in instances where reliable cost estimates exist. Percentage of completion revenue represents less than 5% of our consolidated revenues for each year presented, and is most prevalent in FPD. The percentage of completion method of revenue recognition requires us to prepare estimates of costs to complete contracts in progress, and in doing so we make judgments to evaluate contingencies such as potential variances in scheduled delivery and the cost of materials, labor costs and productivity, the impact of change orders, potential warranty liabilities and liquidated damage claims, contract disputes, and achievement of contractual performance standards. Changes in total estimated contract costs and resultant contract losses, if any, are recognized in the period in which they are determined. Revenue generated under fixed fee service and repair contracts are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract. These contracts can range in duration, but generally extend for five years. Fixed fee service and repair contracts represent less than 5% of our consolidated revenue for each year presented, and are most prevalent in FSD. In certain instances, we provide guaranteed completion dates under the terms of our contracts. Failure to meet schedule or agreed upon delivery dates can result in unrealized incentive fees or non-recoverable costs. In instances where the payments of such costs are likely, we perform project profitability analysis using such costs to reduce revenues realizable, which could cause estimated project costs to exceed projected revenues realized from the project. In such instances, we would record reserves to cover such excesses in the period they are determined, which would adversely affect our results of operations and financial position. In instances where the reduced revenues still exceed costs, the incurrence of the costs generally reduces profitability of the project at the time of subsequent revenue recognition. Our reported results would change if different estimates were used for contract costs or if different estimates were used for contractual contingencies. 55 Table of Contents Accounts Receivable and Related Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts based on estimates of the amount of uncollectible accounts receivable. The amount of the allowance is determined principally based upon the aging of the receivable, as well as on customer credit history, significant customer disputes, outstanding industry and market segment information, economic trends and conditions, credit reports and customer financial condition. We consider our collection history and specifically known uncollectible accounts in establishing our allowance. Customer credit issues, customer bankruptcies, general economic conditions or other matters largely beyond our control can affect the collectibility of our accounts receivable. If our customers financial conditions worsened or if customer disputes increased beyond levels currently provided for, we might be required to recognize additional allowances or incur additional write-offs, which would adversely impact our results of operation, cash flows and financial position. Our credit risk may be mitigated by our large number of customers across many different geographic regions. For all of 2003 and most of 2004, we had a credit insurance policy for many of our European subsidiaries, whereby we were entitled to remuneration from the third party insurer, net of deductible, in instances where customers covered by this policy were unable to pay. We cancelled this policy in late 2004 due to minimal claims sought. Inventories and Related Reserves Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. We primarily determine cost for the majority of our U.S. inventories by the last-in, first-out method and for other inventories by the first-in, first-out method. We estimate the market value of our inventory based on an assessment of recent or committed sales prices, and provide for excess and obsolete inventories based on historical usage, estimated future demand and related pricing. In determining excess quantities, we consider recent sales activity, related margins and market positioning of our products. These estimates are generally not subject to significant volatility, due to the long life cycles of our product lines, except for product rationalizations generally associated with acquisition integration programs. However, factors beyond our control, such as demand levels, technological advances and pricing competition, could change from period to period. If such factors had an adverse effect on us, we might be required to reduce the value of our inventory, which would adversely affect our results of operations, cash flows and financial position. Deferred Tax Asset Valuation We recognize valuation allowances to reduce the carrying value of deferred tax assets to amounts that we expect are more likely than not to be realized. Our valuation allowances primarily relate to the deferred tax assets established for certain tax credit carryforwards, net operating and capital loss carryforwards for U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries, and we evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing the related valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of these allowances, if necessary. We assess such factors as our forecast of future taxable income and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets in determining the sufficiency of our valuation allowances. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income in the applicable tax jurisdictions could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and could result in an increase in our effective tax rate on future earnings. Tax Reserves The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which often result in proposed assessments. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions. We establish reserves for open tax years for certain positions that are subject to challenge by various tax authorities. The consolidated tax provision and related accruals include the impact of such reasonably estimable losses and related interest as deemed appropriate. We believe we have adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these matters, and our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities. To the 56 Table of Contents extent that the expected tax outcome of these matters changes, such changes in estimate will impact the income tax provision in the period in which such determination is made. Restructuring and Integration Expense Restructuring and integration expenses have generally been recognized in conjunction with our acquisitions. Such expenses reflect many estimates including costs pertaining to employee severance payments, fulfillment of outstanding contractual obligations and other matters associated with exiting a facility. Restructuring costs related to facilities and employees of acquired businesses generally become a component of goodwill, whereas non-acquisition related restructuring costs are recorded as restructuring expense in the consolidated statements of operations. Integration costs are recognized as a reduction to the results of operations as a component of current earnings. Reserves created for each restructuring plan are assessed quarterly and adjusted for any revisions of cost estimates or other changes in planned restructuring activities. Prior to January 1, 2003, we recognized restructuring reserves when the related restructuring plans had been both approved and communicated to affected employees. In conjunction with adopting SFAS No. 146, Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities, on January 1, 2003, we now record restructuring reserves as the related liability is incurred. Legal and Environmental Accruals The costs relating to legal and environmental liabilities are estimated and liabilities recorded when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and such loss is estimable. We have a formal process for assessing the facts and recording any required reserves on a case-by-case basis. Assessments of legal and environmental reserves are based on information obtained from our independent and in-house experts, including recent legal decisions and loss experience in similar situations. The recorded legal reserves are susceptible to changes due to new developments regarding the facts and circumstances of each matter, changes in political environments, legal venue and other factors. Recorded environmental reserves could change based on further analysis of our properties, technological innovation and regulatory environment changes. Warranty Accruals Warranty obligations are based upon product failure rates, materials usage and service delivery costs, an analysis of all identified or expected claims and an estimate of the cost to resolve such claims. The estimates of expected claims are generally a factor of historical claims and known product issues. Warranty obligations based on these factors are adjusted based on historical sales trends for the preceding 24 months. Changes in claim rates, differences between actual and expected warranty costs, sales trends, and facility rationalization activities could impact warranty obligation estimates, which might have adverse effects to our consolidated results of operations and financial position. Pension and Postretirement Benefits Obligations Determination of the value of our pension and postretirement benefits liabilities is based on actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions which are assessed annually in the fourth quarter and which include: discount rates; expected return on plan assets for funded plans; life expectancy of participants; assumed rate of wage increases; and assumed rate of health care cost increases. We evaluate, in conjunction with our professional advisors, prevailing market conditions in countries where plans are maintained, including appropriate rates of return, interest rates and medical inflation rates. Specifically for our U.S. plan, we assess such market factors as changes in the cash balance interest crediting 57 Table of Contents rate, borrowing rates for investment grade corporate and industrial companies, assumptions used by Fortune 500 companies, our actual wage increases in recent years, expected rates of return for each targeted asset class held by the plans and return premiums generated by active investment management. For the non-U.S. plans we perform similar analyses, but also factor in local laws and requirements. We also compare our significant assumptions with our peers and discuss our key assumptions, prior to their incorporation into actuarial calculations, with the Finance Committee of our Board of Directors. We evaluate the funded status of each retirement plan using current assumptions and determine the appropriate funding level considering applicable regulatory requirements, tax deductibility, reporting considerations, cash flow requirements and other factors. Valuation of Goodwill, Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets Our business acquisitions typically generate goodwill and other intangible assets, which affect prospective amortization expense and possible impairment expense we might incur. We test the value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment as of December 31 each year or whenever events or circumstances indicate such assets may be impaired. Impairment losses for goodwill are recognized whenever the implied fair value of goodwill is less than the carrying value. Impairment losses for intangibles are recognized whenever the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value. The test for goodwill impairment involves significant judgment in estimating projections of fair value generated through future performance of each of the reporting units, which correlate to our operating segments. The test of indefinite-lived intangibles involves significant judgment in estimating projections of future sales levels. In calculating the fair value of the reporting units using the present value of expected future cash flows, we rely on a number of factors including operating results, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows and market data used in discounting those cash flows. Inherent uncertainties exist in determining and applying such factors. The net realizable value of other long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, is reviewed periodically, when indicators of potential impairments are present, based upon an assessment of the estimated future cash flows related to those assets, utilizing methodologies similar to that for goodwill and indefinite-lived assets. Additional considerations related to our long-lived assets include expected maintenance and improvements, changes in expected uses and ongoing operating performance and utilization. Due to uncertain market conditions and potential changes in strategy and product portfolio, it is possible that forecasts used to support asset carrying values may change in the future, which could result in non-cash charges that would adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS We have presented the information about accounting pronouncements not yet implemented in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. SUMMARY OVERVIEW OF 2005 We experienced strengthening in our 2005 markets and we remain optimistic about our markets and our performance over the long-term, considering that the economic opportunities for many of our geographic and core industrial markets have improved in 2005 however, these increases will be offset by additional professional fees related to closing our 2004 audit and other costs as discussed below. As a result of these factors, our revenues are expected to increase from 2004, excluding currency fluctuations. For additional discussion on our markets, see the Business Overview section of this Management Discussion and Analysis. As noted below our bookings have increased 13.9% for the year ending December 31, 2005 as compared to the same period in 2004. However, as a booking represents a contract that can be modified or canceled, there is no guarantee that the increase in bookings will result in the same increase in revenues. 58 Table of Contents Percentage increase Bookings 2004 2005 (decrease) (Cumulative amounts in millions) First quarter $ 662.8 $ 712.6 7.5% Second quarter 1,333.0 1,435.8 7.7% Third quarter 1,997.7 2,230.1 11.6% Fourth quarter 2,657.4 3,026.1 13.9% We expect our operating income to increase in 2005 as compared with 2004. Our operating income in 2005 will benefit from a number of operational improvement programs, including procurement and the CIP initiative, as well as other operational improvements in several of our facilities. In addition, continuation of our end user strategy, selective contract bidding and an increase in our quick turnaround products, which historically are more profitable, should also positively contribute to our operating income in 2005. However, a number of significant costs and certain other expenses will negatively impact our operating income in 2005. These include increased professional fees related to the completion of the 2004 Restatement and 2004 audit, Section 404 assessment, IRS tax audit, senior executive transition costs, loss associated with the refinancing of our debt, non-cash expenses related to modifications of our stock plans and higher wage and benefit costs due to inflation. At December 31, 2004, 69% of our debt was fixed rate debt. Following the refinancing of the 2000 Credit Facilities and the 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes in August 2005, 100% of our debt carried a floating rate of interest. As of December 31, 2005 we had $410 million of derivative contracts to convert a portion of floating interest rates to fixed interest rates to reduce our exposure to interest rate volatility. As a result of our refinancing and lower levels of debt in 2005, we expect our interest expense will be lower in 2005 as compared to 2004. However, this decrease will be more than offset by losses on debt extinguishment incurred in connection with the refinancing. We expect our effective tax rate to be significantly lower in 2005 than in 2004 due to lower levels of dividend repatriation. The 2005 effective tax rate is dependent upon the mix of earnings between our domestic and international locations, our tax planning strategies and our ability to utilize foreign tax credits and other factors. For a discussion of the factors impacting our 2004 effective tax rate of 66.2%, see the Results of Operations section of this Management Discussion and Analysis. Assuming these factors occurred as we have described, we expect that net earnings and net earnings per share to improve in 2005. However, because our year-end close procedures are not yet completed, our actual results could differ from those described above. We generated sufficient cash from operations to fund our business, capital expenditures, pension plan contribution obligations and costs of compliance, and we continue to reduce debt levels. We expect to improve working capital utilization by reducing DSO and increasing inventory turns. However, the amount of cash generated from working capital could be dependent on the level of revenues and other factors. Capital expenditures in 2005 are primarily focused on new product development, new production and service facilities, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities and should approximate $45 million to $50 million. While current pension regulations allow us significant latitude in the amount of contributions, we contributed approximately $43 million to our qualified U.S. pension plan in 2005. We made scheduled repayments and optional prepayments under the New Credit Facilities in 2005 of $1.5 million and approximately $20 million, respectively. We expect to comply with our leverage and interest coverage financial covenants under our New Credit Facilities in 2005. See the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis for further discussion of our debt covenants. 59 Table of Contents 
