CIK: 30625
Company Name: FLOWSERVE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-06-30


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS. The following discussion and analysis is provided to increase the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. See Item 1A. Risk Factors and Forward-Looking Information sections for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements. Unless otherwise noted, all amounts discussed herein are consolidated. EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW We are an established leader in the fluid motion and control business, with a strong portfolio of pumping systems, valves, sealing solutions, automation and services in support of the power, oil and gas, chemical, and other process markets. These products are mission critical in the movement, control and protection of fluids in our customers critical processes, whether it is a refinery, a power generation facility or a transportation pipeline. Our business model is heavily influenced by the capital spending of these industries for the placement of new products in service. The worldwide installed base of our products is another important source of revenue where our products are expected to ensure the maximum operating time of the many key industrial processes. The aftermarket business is generally a higher margin business and a key component to our profitable growth. We have experienced steadily improving conditions in 2004 and 2005 in several core markets, including oil and gas, chemical, and numerous general industries. The rise and continued elevation of the price of crude oil and natural gas in particular has spurred capital investment in the oil and gas market, resulting in many new projects and expansion opportunities. Although feedstock costs are increasing in the chemical market, greater global demand is allowing companies to pass through pricing and strengthen the global market. The opportunity to increase our installed base of new products and drive recurring aftermarket business in future years is a critical by-product of these market conditions. We have six key strategies that have been well communicated throughout the business. One of our key strategies is the globalization of our business. See Our Strategies section of this Management Discussion and Analysis for a discussion of our six key strategies. We currently have approximately 13,000 employees in more than 56 countries. We continue to implement new Quick Response Centers ( QRCs ) to be better positioned as near to our customers as possible for service and support, as a means to capture this important aftermarket business. Our markets have improved and we see corresponding growth in our business, much of which is in non-traditional areas of the world where new oil and gas reserves have been discovered. We and our customers are seeing rapid growth in Asia, with China providing a source of significant project growth. We have a strategy in place to increase our presence in China to capture the aftermarket business with our current installed base as well as new projects and process plant expansions. Along with ensuring that we have the local capability to sell, install and service our equipment in remote regions, it becomes more imperative to continuously improve our global operations. Our global supply chain capability is being expanded to meet the global customer demands and ensure the quality and timely delivery of our products. Significant efforts are underway to reduce the supply base and drive processes across the divisions to find areas of synergy and cost reduction. In addition, we are improving our supply chain management capability to insure we meet global customer demands. We continue to focus on improving on-time delivery and quality, while reducing warranty costs across our global operations through a focused Continuous Improvement Process ( CIP ) 27 Table of Contents initiative. The goal of the CIP initiative is to maximize service fulfillment to our customers (such as on-time delivery, reduced cycle time and quality) at the highest internal productivity. This program is a key factor in our margin expansion plans. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS SEC Matters On February 4, 2004, we received an informal inquiry from the SEC requesting the voluntary production of documents and information related to our February 3, 2004 announcement that we would restate our financial results for the nine months ended September 30, 2003 and the full years 2002, 2001 and 2000. On June 2, 2004, we were advised that the SEC had issued a formal order of private investigation into issues regarding this restatement and any other issues that arise from the investigation. On May 31, 2006, we were informed by the staff of the SEC that it had concluded this investigation without recommending any enforcement action against us. On February 7, 2006, we received a subpoena from the SEC regarding goods and services that certain foreign subsidiaries delivered to Iraq from 1996 through 2003 during the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program. This investigation includes a review of whether any inappropriate payments were made to Iraqi officials in violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. The investigation includes periods prior to, as well as subsequent to our acquisition of the foreign operations involved in the investigation. We may be subject to liabilities if violations are found regardless of whether they relate to periods before or subsequent to our acquisition. In addition, one of our foreign subsidiary operations is cooperating with a foreign governmental investigation of that site involvement in the United Nations Oil-for-Food program. This cooperation has included responding to an investigative trip by foreign authorities to the foreign subsidiary site, providing relevant documentation to these authorities and answering their questions. We are unable to predict how or if the foreign authorities will pursue this matter in the future. We believe that both the SEC and this foreign authority are investigating other companies from their actions arising from the United Nations Oil-for-Food program. We are in the process of reviewing and responding to the SEC subpoena and assessing the implications of the foreign investigation, including the continuation of a thorough internal investigation. Our investigation is in the early stages and has included and will include a detailed review of contracts with the Iraqi government during the period in question and certain payments associated therewith. Additionally, we have and will continue to conduct interviews with employees with knowledge of the contracts and payments in question. We are in the early phases of our internal investigation and as a result are unable to make any definitive determination whether any inappropriate payments were made and accordingly are unable to predict the ultimate outcome of this matter. We will continue to fully cooperate in both the SEC and the foreign investigations. Both investigations are in progress but, at this point, are incomplete. Accordingly, if the SEC and/or the foreign authorities take enforcement action with regard to these investigations, we may be required to pay fines, consent to injunctions against future conduct or suffer other penalties which could potentially materially impact our business, financial statements and cash flows. Legal Matters On March 14, 2006, a shareholder derivative lawsuit was filed purportedly on our behalf in federal court in the Northern District of Texas. The lawsuit names as defendants C. Scott Greer, our former Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Ren e J. Hornbaker, our former Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, and current board members Hugh K. Coble, George T. Haymaker, Jr., Lewis M. Kling, William C. Rusnack, Michael F. Johnston, Charles M. Rampacek, Kevin E. Sheehan, Diane C. Harris, James O. Rollans and Christopher A. Bartlett. We are named as a nominal defendant. Based primarily on certain of the purported misstatements alleged in the federal securities case filed on September 30, 2003 and described in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report, the plaintiff asserts claims against the defendants for breaches of fiduciary duty. The plaintiff alleges that the purported breaches of fiduciary duty occurred between 2000 and 2004. The plaintiff seeks on behalf of us an unspecified amount of damages, disgorgement by Mr. Greer and 28 Table of Contents Ms. Hornbaker of salaries, bonuses, restricted stock and stock options, and recovery of attorneys fees and costs. We strongly believe that the suit was improperly filed and intend to file a motion seeking dismissal of the case. For additional information regarding other pending securities class action and derivative lawsuits, see Item 3. Legal Proceedings. In March 2006, we initiated a process to determine our compliance posture with respect to U.S. export control laws and regulations. Upon initial investigation, it appears that some product transactions and technology transfers may technically not be in compliance with U.S. export control laws and regulations and require further review. With assistance from outside counsel, we are currently involved in a systematic process to conduct further review, which we believe will take approximately 18 months to complete given the complexity of the export laws and the scope of our investigation. Any potential violations of U.S. export control laws and regulations that are identified may result in civil or criminal penalties, including fines and/or other penalties. Because our review into this issue is ongoing, we are currently unable to determine the full extent of potential violations or the nature or amount of potential penalties to which we might be subject to in the future. Given that the resolution of this matter is uncertain at this time, we are not able to reasonably estimate the maximum amount of liability that could result from final resolution of this matter. We cannot currently predict whether the ultimate resolution of this matter will have a material adverse affect on our business, including our ability to do business outside the U.S., or on our financial condition. IRS Audits We have recently concluded an Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) audit of our U.S. federal income tax returns for the years 1999 through 2001. Based on its audit work, the IRS has issued proposed adjustments to increase taxable income during 1999 through 2001 by $12.8 million, and to deny foreign tax credits of $2.4 million in the aggregate. The tax liability resulting from these proposed adjustments will be offset with foreign tax credit carryovers and other refund claims, and therefore should not result in a material future cash payment, pending final review by the Joint Committee on Taxation. We anticipate this review will be completed by December 31, 2006. The effect of the adjustments to current and deferred taxes has been reflected in previously filed consolidated financial statements for the applicable periods. During 2006, the IRS will commence an audit of our U.S. federal income tax returns for the years 2002 through 2004. While we expect that the upcoming IRS audit will be similar in scope to the recently completed examination, the upcoming audit may be broader. Furthermore, the preliminary results from the audit of 1999 through 2001 are not indicative of the future result of the audit of 2002 through 2004. The audit of 2002 through 2004 may result in additional tax payments by us, the amount of which may be material, but will not be known until the IRS audit is finalized. In the course of the IRS audit of 1999 through 2001, we identified record keeping and other material internal control weaknesses, which caused us to incur significant expense to substantiate our tax return items and address information and document requests made by the IRS. We expect to incur similar expense with respect to the upcoming IRS audit of the years 2002 through 2004. The IRS has issued a Notice of Inadequate Records for the years 1999 through 2001, and may issue a similar notice for the years 2002 through 2004. While the IRS has agreed not to assess penalties for inadequacy of records with respect to the years 1999 through 2001, no assurances can be made that the IRS will not seek to assess such penalties or other types of penalties with respect to the years 2002 through 2004. Such penalties could result in a material impact to the consolidated results of operations. Additionally, the record keeping issues noted above may result in future U.S. state and local tax assessments of tax, penalties and interest, which could have a material impact to our consolidated results of operations. Management Changes and Other Employee Matters During the past two years, following resignations of several of our senior executives, we hired Lewis M. Kling as our Chief Operating Officer and subsequently appointed him as our President and Chief Executive Officer, hired Mark A. Blinn as our Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Richard J. Guiltinan, Jr. as our Controller and Chief Accounting Officer, Deborah K. Bethune as our Vice President of Taxes, Thomas L. Pajonas as our President 29 Table of Contents of our Flow Control Division, Linda P. Jojo as Vice President and Chief Information Officer, and Joseph R. Pinkston, as our Vice President of Human Resources, appointed Mark D. Dailey as our Chief Compliance Officer and Paul W. Fehlman as our Treasurer, and created and staffed new positions responsible for accounting policy and procedures, financial reporting, tax compliance and internal audit. To promote continuity of senior management, in March 2005 our Board of Directors approved a Transitional Executive Security Plan, which provides cash and stock-based incentives to key management personnel to remain employed by us for the near term. As a result of this plan, we recorded additional compensation expenses in 2005 of $2.6 million and an expense of approximately $2 million will be recorded in 2006. See Transitional Executive Security Plan in Item 11. Executive Compensation of this Annual Report for a detailed discussion on this plan. Divestitures In an effort to better align our business portfolio with our core strategic objectives, in the first quarter of 2005, we made a definitive decision to divest the General Services Group ( GSG ), non-core service operations which provide online repair and other third-party services, and we engaged an investment banking firm to commence marketing. As a result, we reclassified the group to discontinued operations in the first quarter of 2005. Sales for GSG were $103 million and $116 million in 2005 and 2004, respectively. Total assets at March 31, 2005, ascribed to GSG, inclusive of approximately $12 million of allocated goodwill, were approximately $60 million. We performed an impairment analysis of GSG at March 31, 2005 on a held for sale basis and, after the allocation of goodwill, we recognized an impairment charge of approximately $6 million during the first quarter of 2005. The initial estimated fair value at March 31, 2005 was based upon investment banker valuation of GSG estimated fair value as well as initial bids received from potential purchasers. As the year progressed, the number of potential buyers diminished to one potential purchaser and the business underperformed due to the pending sale. As a result, the lone bidder reduced its initial offer and accordingly, we recognized additional impairment charges aggregating approximately $24 million throughout 2005, for total impairment charges in 2005 of approximately $30 million. GSG was sold on December 31, 2005 for approximately $16 million in gross cash proceeds, subject to final working capital adjustments that remain under negotiation, while retaining approximately $12 million of net accounts receivable. We used approximately $11 million of the net cash proceeds to reduce our outstanding indebtedness. BUSINESS OVERVIEW Our Company We believe that we are a world leading manufacturer and aftermarket service provider of comprehensive flow control systems. We develop and manufacture precision-engineered flow control equipment, such as pumps, valves and seals, for critical service applications that require high reliability. We use our manufacturing platform to offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services, such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. We conduct our operations through three business segments: Flowserve Pump Division ( FPD ), for engineered pumps, industrial pumps and related services; Flow Control Division ( FCD ), for industrial valves, manual valves, control valves, nuclear valves, valve actuators and controls and related services; and Flow Solutions Division ( FSD ), for precision mechanical seals and related services. Our product portfolio is built on over 50 well-respected brand names, such as Durco, IDP, Valtek and Durametallic, which we believe is the most comprehensive in the industry. We sell our products and services to more than 10,000 companies, including some of the world leading engineering and construction firms, original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ), distributors and end users. Our Markets Our products and services are used in several distinct industries: oil and gas, chemical, power generation, water treatment and several other industries that we collectively refer to as general industries. 30 Table of Contents Demand for most of our products depends on the level of new capital investment and maintenance expenditures by our customers. The level of capital expenditures by our customers depends, in turn, on the general economic conditions and conditions in their industries, which affect their profitability. The level of capital expenditures by our customers also depends on their liquidity, whether through cash flows from operations or access to financing. The oil and gas industry represented approximately 35% and 32% of our sales in 2005 and 2004, respectively. High petroleum prices generally spur additional investment in upstream petroleum projects, and high prices in 2005 and 2004 contributed to an increase in bookings for projects, particularly in Asia, Africa, the Middle East and South America. In contrast to their effect on the upstream petroleum projects, high crude oil prices often reduce the demand for our products and services from crude oil refineries and natural gas processors as they seek to take advantage of favorable refining margins by operating at high levels of capacity utilization and deferring maintenance. Clean fuel regulations, particularly in the U.S., led to some project business from crude oil refiners. The profitability of such projects, however, is typically lower than for maintenance related products and services as these are generally large projects obtained through a competitive bidding process. While high oil and gas prices are generally good for our oil and gas customers, they are generally adverse for chemical companies, since crude oil and natural gas are critical inputs in the manufacturing of their products. In 2005, the price of natural gas in the U.S. increased almost 50% as compared with 2004, and increased 25% in 2004 as compared with 2003. This significantly affected our chemical customers, who faced high feed stock costs. However, greater global demand is allowing companies to pass through pricing and strengthen the global market. The demand for chemical-based products appears to be increasing, so we expect to see some improvement in the demand for our products in the chemical industry. Further, this industry improved profitability could spur new investment in other parts of the world such as Asia, and we would expect to benefit from those investments as well. In 2005 and 2004, the chemical industry represented approximately 19% and 18%, respectively, of our sales. Increased natural gas prices also diminished the profitability of many power generators that in recent years made significant investments in power plants that generate electricity from natural gas. While they have been able to recover a portion of their higher costs through rate increases, their liquidity is still challenged due to overinvestment in these power facilities in recent years. However, a number of nuclear power generators are planning significant maintenance activities. We have seen an increase in our orders for this area and it has been a positive contributor to 2005 orders, sales and earnings. In addition, there are several coal-fired power plants planned for the U.S., and we are actively pursuing the flow control opportunities for these projects. The revenue opportunity for our products at a coal-fired plant typically can be three times that of a natural gas power plant. The power industry represented approximately 14% and 16% of our sales in 2005 and 2004, respectively. Worldwide demand for fresh water and water treatment continues to create demand for new facilities or for upgrades of existing systems, many of which require products that we offer, especially pumps. We believe that we are a global leader in the desalination market, which is an important source of fresh water in the Mediterranean area and the Middle East. This is a significant market for our pump and valve actuation products. In 2005 and 2004, the water market represented approximately 7% and 6%, respectively, of our sales. General industries represents a variety of different businesses, including mining, pulp and paper, food and beverage, steel and heating, ventilation and air-conditioning ( HVAC ), none of which individually represents more than 5% of total sales in 2005 and 2004. General industries represented approximately 25% and 28% of our sales in 2005 and 2004, respectively. We started to see some improvement in these businesses in 2005, most notably mining and steel, after they experienced what appeared to be troughs in 2004. Other industries, such as food and beverage and HVAC, were relatively stable. Our customers include engineering contractors, OEMs, end users and distributors. Sales to engineering contractors and OEMs are typically for large project orders, as are certain sales to distributors. Project orders generally have lead times in excess of three months. Project orders provide product to our customers either directly or indirectly for their new construction projects or facility enhancement projects. 31 Table of Contents The quick turnaround business, which we also refer to as the book and ship business, is defined as orders that are received from the customer (booked) and shipped within three months of receipt. They are typically for more standard products, parts or services. Each of our three segments generates this type of business. We use our manufacturing platform to offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services, such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. Timelines of delivery, quality and the proximity of service centers are important considerations for our aftermarket products and services. In geographic regions where we are positioned to provide a quick response, customers have traditionally relied on us, rather than our competitors, for aftermarket products relating to our highly engineered and customized products. However, aftermarket for standard products is very competitive and price competition has generally been increasing. Price competition tends to be more significant for OEMs than aftermarket services and generally has been increasing. In the sale of aftermarket products and services, we benefit from our large installed base of pumps, seals and valves, which require maintenance, repair and replacement parts. Our reporting of trends by product type, customer type and business type are based upon analytical review of individual operational results and our knowledge of their respective businesses, as we do not formally track revenues by any of these categories. These trends are analyzed as a secondary reporting mechanism that is not derived directly from our general ledger system. Our Strategies Our overarching objective is to grow our position as an integrated solutions provider in the flow control industry. This objective includes continuing to sell products by building on existing sales relationships and marketing the power of our portfolio of products. It also includes delivering specific end user solutions that help customers attain their business goals by ensuring maximum reliability at a decreased cost of ownership. Sustainable, profitable growth is being driven using six strategies that are communicated throughout our company. These strategies include: organic growth, globalization, process excellence, portfolio management, organizational capability and technology/innovation. The key elements of our strategies are outlined below. Organic Growth Organic growth is a key long-term initiative to grow our top line revenues. This goal is to develop and launch new products and solutions as well as customer partnering initiatives that maximize the capture of the product total life cycle. We are one of the few pump, valve and seal companies who can offer our customers a differentiated option of not only products and services, but can also offer an additional option that includes any combination of products and solution support packages across our portfolio. Our combined pump and seal end user teams have been particularly successful in delivering new solution programs and increasing organic aftermarket growth. We seek to capture additional market share by creating win-win opportunities for us and our customers through sourcing and maintenance alliance programs pursuant to which we provide all or an agreed portion of a customers parts and servicing needs. Our customer alliances enable us to develop long-term professional relationships with our customers and serve as an effective platform for introducing new products and services to our customers and generating additional sales. We additionally seek to continue to review our substantial installed pump, seal and valve base as a means to expand our aftermarket services business, as customers increasingly use third-party aftermarket service providers like us to reduce their fixed costs and improve profitability. The aftermarket services business provides us with a steady source of revenues and cash flows at higher margins than original equipment sales and allows us to be in frequent contact with our customers, building our knowledge of customer needs and providing cross-selling opportunities. We are building on our established presence through an extensive QRC global network to provide the immediate parts, service and technical support required to effectively manage and win the aftermarket business from our installed base. New product and service development is driven through our Product Management organization working in concert with engineering, operations and sales. Our goal is to increase our revenues from new products and services developed over the last five years. Our new product development process has made significant progress in 32 Table of Contents demonstrating a pipeline of new and modified products and services. We expect our research and development costs to increase beginning in 2006 to support our goal of increased revenues from new products and services. Globalization The globalization initiative of our business has several facets that include: expanding our global presence to capture business outside our traditional geographic market areas (China, Russia, South America, Middle East and Africa), utilizing low cost sourcing opportunities to remain competitive in the global economy, and attract and retain the global intellectual capital required to support our global growth plans in the new geographical areas. We believe there are attractive OEM opportunities in international markets, particularly in South America, the Middle East and Asia Pacific, and we intend to continue to utilize our global presence to further penetrate these markets. Our recent successes in these markets include contracts worth more than $40 million for the supply of pumps and related equipment to the Nanhai petrochemicals project in China, and contracts worth more than $12 million for the Shenhua coal liquefaction project in China. In our aftermarket services business, we seek to strategically add sites as our customers and our customer base grow in order to provide our customers with rapid response, fast delivery and onsite field repair. We are focused on shifting, as appropriate, certain of our manufacturing and engineering functions to, and increasing our supply of materials and components from, lower cost areas such as India, China, Mexico, South America and Eastern Europe. In 2005, these areas accounted for approximately 20% of our direct material spending, compared to approximately 5% in 2001. We are also focused on utilizing supply chain management to reduce our procurement costs, including by expanding purchases through reverse auctions, further consolidating our procurement of goods at a better value. In addition, we have expanded our China presence with additional sales and supply chain professionals, new management and growth plans that include acquisition or development of new capabilities that will enhance the penetration of products in China for oil and gas and power projects as well as provide a base for the export of products. Process Excellence The process excellence initiative encapsulates ongoing programs that drive increased customer fulfillment at the lowest cost. This initiative includes: driving improved customer fulfillment across our company through metrics such as on-time delivery, cost reduction, quality, cycle time reduction and warranty reduction; and continuing to develop a culture of continuous improvement that delivers maximum productivity and cost efficiencies, implements consistent processes across our company and ensures our future success as an integrated company. We seek to increase our operational efficiency through our CIP initiative. It utilizes tools such as Six Sigma methodology, lean manufacturing, and constraint management to improve quality and processes, reduce product cycle times and lower costs. Recognizing that our employees are our most valuable resource in achieving our operational excellence goals, we have instituted broad CIP training, and to date over 900 of our employees are CIP trained or certified as Green Belts or Black Belts , deployed on CIP projects throughout our company. As a result of our CIP initiatives, we have developed and implemented processes to reduce our engineering and manufacturing process cycle time, improve on-time delivery and service response time, lower inventory levels and otherwise reduce costs. We have also experienced success in sharing and applying best practices achieved in one of our businesses and deployed to another Flowserve business, and we continue to look for opportunities to apply the CIP tools for improved performance. 33 Table of Contents We seek to continue to improve our working capital utilization, with a particular focus on improving the management of our accounts receivable and inventory. See further discussion in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis. Portfolio Management The continued management of our portfolio of products and services is critical to our company success. We will continue to pursue selective acquisitions and rationalize our portfolio of products and services to ensure alignment with our customers and shareholders. We intend to continue to evaluate acquisition and investment opportunities as we seek to broaden our product portfolio and operational capabilities and to expedite our expansion into faster growing Asian, African and South American markets. In that regard, our additional investment in Thompsons, Kelly & Lewis Pty. Ltd. ( TKL ) in March 2004 strengthened our product offering in the mining industry and broadened our manufacturing capabilities in the Asia Pacific region, which includes China, Japan, Singapore, Korea, India, Australia, New Zealand and Thailand. See further discussion of the TKL acquisition in Our Results of Operations section of this Management Discussion and Analysis and in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. We are seeking to divest operations that we consider non-core to our overall business, such as operations that do not serve our core customer base or provide limited synergies with our other businesses. For example, in November 2004 we sold our Government Marine Business Unit ( GMBU ), and in December 2005 we sold GSG. See further discussion of these discontinued operations in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. Organizational Capability We believe there are several elements to building an enhanced organizational capability: The development of a deeper talent pool through training and cross-divisional and functional assignments allows us the flexibility as we grow and expand the organization to fill positions internally. We believe career learning and development is critical to the building of an improved global organizational capability for the future. The need to capture the intellectual capital in our workforce and that of our customers and share it within our company is considered a competitive advantage, and Building an organization with improved compliance to mandatory and recommended processes and procedures and implementing the information systems that ensure compliance will be the backbone of our culture as we move forward. A multi-year agreement was completed in 2005 to distribute electronic learning packages in multiple languages for the Flowserve Code of Business Conduct and other compliance programs globally throughout our company. This will be expanded to include export compliance, and regulatory compliance (U.S. and foreign), as well as other programs around harassment and employee behaviors. The emphasis on ethics and compliance was significantly strengthened in 2005 as a core organizational capability with a new Chief Compliance Officer. In 2005, we installed a Learning Management System ( LMS ) that allowed the development and tracking of the delivery of electronic learning systems. This system allows us to track our employees compliance and policy understanding through electronic means. LMS also permits the on-line enrollment for customer training as a means to share and improve their intellectual capital. Technology/Innovation The infusion of new product technologies has become a core requirement as we look to improve the development of new products and services. Our internal goal is to improve the percentage of new products as a function of revenue over the next five years. The investment in technology will continue to increase in 2006. A 34 Table of Contents cross-divisional technology team is in place to ensure that the technologies developed are available for wide use across all divisions to maximize the return on investments. The development of an intelligent pumping system showcases the technologies available to maximize uptime and proactively identify anomalies before they become major issues. We were the sponsor for a national energy summit in 2005 that brought together major companies in the pursuit of energy management initiatives. The technologies available to decrease the energy usage for our customers are being infused into new services for customers. OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS As a result of selling GSG, which was included in FCD, in December 2005, and GMBU, an FPD business, in November 2004, we treated these dispositions as discontinued operations and reclassified the financial information reported for all periods presented. The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, increased $32.7 million in 2005, compared to a loss of $1.7 million in 2004. The increase is due primarily to the impairment of GSG, which is more fully discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. Sales 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Sales $ 2,695.3 $ 2,522.5 $ 2,248.9 Sales in 2005 increased by $164.5 million, or 6.5%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $8 million, as compared with 2004. The increase in sales is attributable to all three of our segments. These increases are due primarily to continued growth in the oil and gas industry, which has positively impacted our Flowserve Pump and Flow Solutions Divisions, and the continued recovery and strengthening of major valve markets. Sales in 2004 increased by $159.8 million, or 7.1%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $114 million, as compared with 2003. Currency benefits were the result of the strengthening of international currencies, particularly the Euro, against the U.S. dollar. The increase in sales includes new sales of $35.2 million resulting from our acquisition of TKL in March 2004, increased activities of our core markets served, including oil and gas, power and chemicals, and strong growth in the Asia Pacific region. Sales to international customers, including export sales from the U.S., were approximately 65% of sales in 2005 compared with 68% of sales in 2004 and 60% of sales in 2003. Sales into the Asia Pacific region were approximately 14%, 14% and 9% in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Sales into Europe, Middle East and Africa ( EMA ) were approximately 39%, 43% and 40% in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Excluding currency translation impacts, we believe that our sales to international customers will continue to increase as a percentage of total sales, as we believe our highest revenue growth opportunities are in Asia, South America and Africa. Bookings and Backlog 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 3,022.3 $ 2,657.4 $ 2,423.7 Backlog (at period end) 994.1 836.4 818.2 We define a booking as the receipt of a customer order that contractually engages us to perform activities on behalf of our customer with regard to manufacture, service or support. Amounts presented above include bookings related to discontinued operations of $95.4 million, $136.8 million and $159.5 million for 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Bookings in 2005 increased by $396.5 million, or 15.7%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $10 million and discontinued operations, as compared with 2004. Bookings for TKL, which was acquired in March 2004, increased $28.8 million in 2005 as compared with 2004. Increased bookings are also attributable to improved bookings in EMA for our Flowserve Pump Division and improved bookings in Asia Pacific for our Flowserve Pump and Flow Control Divisions. Establishment of customer alliances has resulted in increased bookings in our Flow 35 Table of Contents Solutions Division as described below. Bookings have also been positively impacted by continued strength in the oil and gas industry and recovery of major valve markets. Bookings in 2004 increased by $141.6 million, or 6.3%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $115 million and discontinued operations, as compared with 2003. Bookings for TKL, which was acquired in March 2004, were $40.5 million in 2004 Increased bookings were due to increases in the oil and gas industry, one of our primary served markets, which was spurred by increased crude oil prices. Backlog represents the accumulation of uncompleted customer orders. Amounts presented above include backlog related to discontinued operations of $0, $11.2 million and $34.1 million for 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Backlog at December 31, 2005 increased by $235.5 million, or 28.5%, excluding negative currency effects of approximately $67 million and discontinued operations, as compared with 2004, primarily attributable to the strong bookings performance in 2005, as well as an increase in large oil and gas project orders in EMA for our Flowserve Pump Division. By the end of 2006, we expect to ship over 94% of this backlog. Backlog at December 31, 2004 decreased by $14.5 million, or 1.8%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $33 million, as compared with 2003. The decrease is due to improved customer delivery time. Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Gross profit $ 861.8 $ 758.6 $ 682.9 Gross profit margin 32.0 % 30.1 % 30.4 % Gross profit margin of 32.0% in 2005 increased as compared with 2004. Gross profit margin in 2005 was positively impacted by operational improvements attributable to our CIP initiative, which resulted in cost savings, a higher mix of aftermarket business, which generally has a higher margin, and increased sales, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed costs. Additionally, the charge to cost of sales to increase the reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory was significantly lower in 2005 than the charge recorded in 2004, which had a favorable impact on gross profit margin. Gross profit margin of 30.1% in 2004 decreased slightly as compared with 2003. Gross profit margin in 2004 was positively impacted by operational improvements attributable to our CIP initiative, which resulted in cost savings, synergies and a higher mix of aftermarket business, which generally has a higher margin. These were offset by a significant charge to cost of sales for the increase in the reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory in our Flow Control Division, as discussed below, and a $14.1 million increase in incentive compensation as compared to 2003. Selling, General and Administrative Expense ( SG&A ) 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) SG&A expense $ 671.7 $ 597.1 $ 511.4 SG&A expense as a percentage of sales 24.9 % 23.7 % 22.7 % In each of the three years presented, at least 55% of SG&A consisted of employee-related costs, which includes payroll, benefits and incentive payments, and at least 10% of SG&A consisted of professional fees, which includes audit, legal, contractor and consulting fees. SG&A in 2005 increased by $71.6 million, or 12.0%, excluding currency effects of approximately $3 million, as compared with 2004. The increase in SG&A is due primarily to the following: employee-related costs of $38.5 million including sales commissions, incentive compensation and equity incentive programs arising from improved performance and the higher stock price ($11.1 million); severance and transition expenses ($8.1 million); and modification of stock options expiration terms for former executives, current and retired employees and board of directors ($7.2 million). See further discussion of stock modifications in Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. The increase in SG&A is also attributable to increases in professional fees resulting from the restatement of 2002, 2003 and the first quarter of 2004, which includes a $24.1 million increase in audit fees and a $13.8 million increase in other professional fees related to tax consulting, accounting and internal audit assistance. These increases in 36 Table of Contents professional fees were partially offset by a $15.5 million decrease in legal fees and expenses and a $6.8 million decrease in costs incurred related to Section 404 compliance. SG&A in 2004 increased by $64.4 million, or 12.6%, excluding currency effects of approximately $21 million, as compared with 2003. The increase is due to a $29.9 million increase in annual incentive compensation and a $21.7 million increase in professional and consulting fees related primarily to the restatement of our consolidated financial results for 2003 and prior years, 2004 and 2003 financial statement audits and compliance with Section 404. Integration and Restructuring Expense 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Integration expense $ $ $ 15.8 Restructuring expense 2.2 The integration and restructuring expenses relate to the integration of Invensys flow control division ( IFC ) into our Flow Control Division. In conjunction with the acquisition of IFC in 2002, we initiated a restructuring program designed to reduce costs and eliminate excess capacity by closing some existing facilities, and reducing sales and related support personnel. We did not incur integration or restructuring expenses in 2005 or 2004 as we had largely completed our restructuring and integration programs related to IFC during 2003, except for final severance payments and payments for other exit activities primarily related to European integration activities. Approximately $4.0 million and $0.7 million of integration and restructuring expenses, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2003 are included in discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of operations and are related to GSG facilities affected by the restructuring program. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report for further discussion on integration and restructuring expenses. Operating Income 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Operating income $ 190.1 $ 161.5 $ 153.6 Operating income as a percentage of sales 7.1 % 6.4 % 6.8 % Operating income in 2005 increased by $28.6 million, or 17.7% as compared with 2004, primarily as a result of the increases in gross profit margin, partially offset by the increases in SG&A discussed above. Currency had a nominal effect in 2005. Operating income in 2004 decreased by $5.6 million, or 3.6%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $14 million, as compared with 2003. As discussed above, SG&A costs increased in 2004 as a result of increased incentive compensation and increased professional and consulting fees. The increase in SG&A costs is partially offset by the reduction in integration and restructuring costs. Interest Expense and Loss on Repayment of Debt 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Interest expense $ (74.1 ) $ (80.4 ) $ (83.7 ) Interest income 3.4 1.9 4.1 Loss on debt repayment and extinguishment (27.7 ) (2.7 ) (1.3 ) Interest expense decreased $6.3 million in 2005 as compared with 2004 primarily as a result of the refinancing of our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes with the proceeds of borrowings under our New Credit Facilities. See further discussion of our refinancing in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis and in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Interest expense decreased $3.3 million in 2004 due primarily to lower prevailing interest rates and reduced debt levels associated with optional and scheduled debt paydowns since the acquisition of IFC, as well as lower 37 Table of Contents borrowing interest rate spreads associated with the renegotiation of our revolving line of credit in April 2002. At December 31, 2005 approximately 62% of our debt was at fixed rates, including the effects of $410 million of notional interest rate swaps. Interest income increased $1.5 million in 2005 as compared with 2004 due to significantly higher average cash balances. Interest income decreased $2.2 million in 2004 as compared to 2003 due to lower average cash balances. During 2005, we incurred a charge of $27.7 million as a result of debt repayments and extinguishment related to the refinancing. Expenses incurred as a result of the refinancing are more fully described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis. Under the 2000 Credit Facilities (as described in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report), we were required to use the proceeds of asset sales and new debt issuance, among other things, to pay down the principal amount outstanding under the credit facilities. In addition to mandatory repayments, we paid optional prepayments of principal from excess cash generated from operations. During 2004, we incurred a charge of $2.7 million on debt repayments and extinguishment related to the accelerated write-off of unamortized prepaid financing fees resulting from $160.0 million of optional debt prepayments and $167.9 million of mandatory debt prepayments triggered by the GMBU divestiture ($22.9 million), the issuance of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) credit facility ($85.0 million) and receivables securitization ($60.0 million). In 2003, we incurred losses of $1.3 million related to the accelerated write-off of unamortized prepaid financing fees resulting from $163.1 million of optional debt prepayments throughout the year. Other Expense, net 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Other expense, net $ (8.4 ) $ (14.1 ) $ (4.4 ) Other expense, net decreased $5.7 million in 2005, from an expense of $14.1 million in 2004 due primarily to a $2.6 million decrease in unrealized losses on forward contracts and foreign currency transaction losses. Other expense, net increased $9.7 million in 2004 from a loss of $4.4 million in 2003 due primarily to a $9.2 million increase in unrealized losses on forward contracts. Tax Expense and Tax Rate 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Provision for income taxes $ 37.1 $ 40.4 $ 17.7 Effective tax rate 44.5 % 60.9 % 26.0 % The 2005 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to Extraterritorial Income ( ETI ) exclusion benefits of $1.9 million, state income tax benefits of $2.7 million resulting primarily from net reductions in valuation allowances and $12.7 million of net tax impact from foreign operations. The 2004 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to ETI exclusion benefits of $4.9 million, $22.0 million of net tax impact from foreign operations resulting primarily from approximately $85 million in foreign earnings repatriation to pay down U.S. debt. The 2003 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to ETI exclusion benefits of $2.5 million, changes in valuation allowances of $5.5 million primarily relating to foreign tax credits and the net impact of non U.S. operations of $2.8 million. We have operations in European and Asian countries that provide various tax incentives. In 2003, we were granted an indefinite preferential tax rate of approximately 10% in Switzerland for certain sales and marketing activities. During 2004, we received a 5-year, 10% tax rate in Singapore for income in excess of a prescribed base amount generated from certain regional headquarter activities, subject to certain employment and investment requirements. In India, we were granted tax exemptions for profits derived from export sales and certain 38 Table of Contents manufacturing operations in prescribed areas for a period of 10 years. The Indian tax exemptions expire in 2007 and 2011, respectively. On October 22, 2004, the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (the 2004 Act ) was signed into law, creating a temporary incentive for U.S. multinationals to repatriate accumulated income earned outside the U.S. at an effective tax rate of 5.25%, versus the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35%. During 2004, we repatriated approximately $46 million (as part of the $85 million discussed above) pursuant to a dividend reinvestment plan as described by the 2004 Act. We have not recognized the lower tax rate on these dividends in our financial statements due to uncertainties surrounding the interpretation of the 2004 Act. To the extent this uncertainty is favorably resolved in a future reporting period, the benefit associated with these dividends will be recognized in that period. The 2004 Act also provides for a phase out of the existing ETI exclusion for foreign export sales, as it was viewed to be inconsistent with the international trade protocols set by the European Union. This phase out provides that the benefit for our otherwise qualifying export sales in 2005 and 2006 will be limited to approximately 80% and 60%, respectively. As a replacement for the loss of the ETI export incentive, the 2004 Act provides a deduction for income from qualified domestic production activities, which will be phased in from 2005 through 2010. This manufacturing deduction had no impact to our 2005 tax rate, and the impact to our future tax rate has not yet been quantified. Under the guidance of Financial Accounting Standards Board Staff Position No. FAS 109-1, Application of FASB Statement No. 109 to the Tax Deduction on Qualified Production Activities Provided by the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, the tax deduction on qualified production activities will be treated as a special deduction, as described in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes . As such, the special deduction will be reported in the period in which the deduction is claimed on our tax return. On May 17, 2006, the Tax Increase Prevention and Reconciliation Act of 2005 was signed into law, creating an exclusion from U.S. taxable income for certain types of foreign related party payments of dividends, interest, rents, and royalties which, prior to 2006, have been subject to U.S. taxation. This exclusion applies for the years 2006 through 2008, and may apply to certain of our related party payments. We expect our effective tax rate in 2006 to be similar to or lower than 2005 due to lower levels of U.S. income inclusions from our low taxed foreign subsidiaries. Our effective tax rate is based upon current earnings, estimates of future taxable earnings for each domestic and international location and the estimated impact of tax planning strategies. Changes in any of these and other factors, including our ability to utilize foreign tax credits and net operating losses or results from tax audits, could impact the tax rate in future periods. As of December 31, 2005 we have foreign tax credits of approximately $21.3 million, expiring in 2010 through 2015 against which we recorded no valuation allowances. Additionally, we have recorded U.S. net deferred tax assets of $111.8 million, which relate to net operating losses, tax credits and other deductible temporary differences which are available to reduce taxable income in future periods, most of which do not have a definite expiration. Should we not be able to utilize all or a portion of these credits and losses, our effective tax rate would be negatively impacted. Net Earnings and Earnings Per Share 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Income from continuing operations $ 46.2 $ 25.9 $ 50.5 Net earnings 11.8 24.2 44.5 Net earnings per share from continuing operations diluted 0.82 0.46 0.91 Net earnings per share diluted 0.21 0.43 0.80 Average diluted shares 56.7 55.7 55.3 Income from continuing operations increased $20.3 million in 2005 to $46.2 million, or $0.82 per diluted share, primarily as a result of the factors discussed above regarding operating income. Net earnings declined in 2005 as compared to with 2004 primarily as a result of impairment charges of $30.1 million related to GSG, which is included in discontinued operations and is more fully discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Earnings per share in 2005 were negatively impacted by a 1.7% higher average diluted share count. 39 Table of Contents Income from continuing operations decreased $24.6 million in 2004 to $25.9 million, or $0.46 per diluted share. In addition to the factors discussed above regarding operating income, 2004 income from continuing operations was also impacted by increases in the effective tax rate, as compared to 2003, and losses on derivative contracts. The 2005 and 2004 increases in average diluted shares reflect the issuance of stock awards and the dilutive effects of increases in our stock price. Other Comprehensive Income (Expense) 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Other comprehensive (expense) income $ (63.7 ) $ 15.1 $ 68.3 Other comprehensive income declined to expense of $63.7 million in 2005 from income of $15.1 million in 2004. The decline is primarily a result of a decrease of $56.3 million in currency translation adjustments as compared with 2004. The decrease is due primarily to the devaluation of the Euro and the British pound versus the U.S. dollar during 2005. Minimum pension liability expense of $31.9 million in 2005 increased as compared with expense of $8.2 million in 2004, primarily as a result of a decreased discount rate. Other comprehensive income declined to $15.1 million in 2004 as compared with 2003. The decrease is primarily a result of a decrease of $36.5 million in currency translation adjustments as compared with 2003. The decline in currency translation adjustment income is due primarily to the devaluation of the U.S. dollar versus the Euro and the British pound during 2004. In addition, the minimum pension liability decreased $16.7 million as compared with 2003, primarily as a result of a slight decrease in pension plan asset returns. Business Segments We conduct our business through three business segments that represent our major product areas. We evaluate segment performance and allocate resources based on each segment operating income excluding special items, such as restructuring and integration costs related to the IFC acquisition. We believe that special items, while indicative of efforts to integrate IFC in our business, do not reflect ongoing business results. We believe investors and other users of our financial statements can better evaluate and analyze historical and future business trends if special items are excluded from each segment operating income. Operating income before special items is not a recognized measure under GAAP and should not be viewed as an alternative to, or a better indicator of, GAAP measures of performance. See Note 17 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion of our segments. The key operating results for our three business segments, FPD, FCD and FSD are discussed below. Flowserve Pump Division Segment Results Through FPD, we design, manufacture, distribute and service engineered and industrial pumps and pump systems, replacement parts and related equipment, principally to industrial markets. FPD has 27 manufacturing facilities worldwide, of which nine are located in North America, 11 in Europe, four in South America and three in Asia. FPD also more than 50 service centers, which are either free standing or co-located in a manufacturing facility. In March 2004, we acquired the remaining 75% interest in TKL, a leading Australian designer, manufacturer and supplier of centrifugal pumps, railway track work products and steel castings. As a result of this acquisition, we strengthened our product offering in the mining industry, broadened our manufacturing capacity in the Asia Pacific region and gained foundry capacity. 40 Table of Contents Flowserve Pump Division 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 1,575.7 $ 1,339.1 $ 1,207.1 Sales 1,398.4 1,329.8 1,164.6 Gross profit 390.6 341.3 282.9 Gross profit margin 27.9 % 25.7 % 24.3 % Segment operating income 144.6 110.1 85.9 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 10.3 % 8.3 % 7.4 % Backlog (at period end) 703.5 575.8 569.6 Bookings in 2005 increased by $233.4 million, or 17.4%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $3 million, as compared with 2004 due to increases in all regions: EMA bookings increased approximately $139.2 million, excluding currency effects; North and South America bookings increased by $42.5 million and $19.7 million, respectively and excluding currency effects, due to several large engineered projects; and Asia Pacific increased $33.1 million due primarily to TKL. The increase is also attributable to continued growth in the oil and gas industry. Bookings in 2004 increased by $74.0 million, or 6.1%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $58 million, as compared with 2003. The increase is due to additional bookings of $40.5 million resulting primarily from TKL, and an increase in aftermarket bookings. Aftermarket bookings represented 46.3% of total FPD bookings in 2004 as compared with 44.3% in 2003, as our primary served markets for the oil and gas and chemicals industries experienced growth and operated at near capacity levels due to continued increases in crude oil prices. Sales in 2005 increased by $65.1 million, or 4.9%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $4 million, as compared with 2004. Sales in North and South America increased by $20.8 million and $14.2 million, respectively, and excluding currency benefits. In North America, higher sales were primarily attributable to an improvement in general industrial products as well as in parts and service in the U.S. and Canada. Asia Pacific increased $16.7 million due primarily to TKL. Of the $1.4 billion of sales in 2005, approximately 49% were from oil and gas, 18% power, 12% water, 8% chemical and 13% general industries. Sales in 2004 increased by $105.8 million, or 9.1%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $59 million as compared with 2003. Sales improved in all regions and were most active in our core oil and gas markets. Water projects, especially those focusing on desalination, improved and chemical markets remained strong despite increasing feedstock prices. Of the 9.1% increase, 3.0% was directly attributable to increased sales from TKL. Offsetting these favorable sales was decreased business in our North American water market, where our sales were $14.5 million lower than the previous year as FPD was more selective in bidding opportunities. Of the $1.3 billion of sales in 2004, approximately 43% were from oil and gas, 20% power, 10% water, 8% chemical and 19% general industries. Gross profit margin increased to 27.9% in 2005 as compared with 25.7% in 2004 and 24.3% in 2003. The increase in both years is primarily a result of the increase in sales, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed costs, a higher mix of historically more profitable general industrial products and services and increased productivity. In 2004, these positive effects were partially offset by an increase in incentive compensation of $7.4 million included in cost of sales. Operating income in 2005 increased by $35.7 million, or 32.4%, excluding unfavorable currency effects of approximately $1 million, as compared with 2004. The increase is primarily a result of the increase in gross profit margin discussed above. Operating income in 2004 increased by $17.2 million, or 20.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $7 million, as compared with 2003. In addition to the increased sales and gross profit margin discussed above, operating income also increased due to $2.9 million in operating income from TKL and a gain of $8.5 million from the involuntary conversion of patterns that were lost in a fire at one of our foundries. These were slightly offset by an 41 Table of Contents increase in incentive compensation of $7.4 million included in cost of sales as discussed above and an incremental increase in incentive compensation of $9.1 million included in SG&A. Backlog in 2005 increased by $179.8 million, or 31.2%, excluding negative currency effects of approximately $52 million, as compared with 2004. The increase is primarily attributable to the strong bookings performance in 2005 across all regions, as well as an increase in large oil and gas project orders in EMA. Flow Control Division Segment Results Our second largest business segment is FCD, which designs, manufactures and distributes a broad portfolio of industrial valve products, including modulating and finite valves, actuators and controls. In addition, FCD leverages its experience and application know-how by offering a complete menu of engineered services to complement its expansive product portfolio. FCD has more than 4,000 employees at its manufacturing and service facilities in 19 countries around the world, with only five of its 22 manufacturing operations located in the U.S. In 2005, focus on execution coupled with strong operational performance in FCD key end-markets, yielded financial results above prior years. In an effort to better align our business portfolio with our core strategic objectives, FCD made the decision to divest GSG, which provides online repair and other third-party services. Effective December 31, 2005, we sold the assets of GSG to Furmanite, a unit of Dallas-based Xanser Corporation. We believe this divestiture allows us to continue our focus on our core end-user objectives. Flow Control Division 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 936.0 $ 851.8 $ 764.6 Sales 894.3 838.7 757.7 Gross profit 284.9 252.7 239.5 Gross profit margin 31.9 % 30.1 % 31.6 % Operating income (before special items) 89.2 65.3 68.0 Integration expense 15.8 Restructuring expense 2.2 Segment operating income (after special items) 89.2 65.3 50.0 Segment operating income (after special items) as a percentage of sales 10.0 % 7.8 % 6.6 % Backlog (at period end) 240.6 216.5 205.7 In 2005, FCD bookings increased by $81.5 million, or 9.6%, excluding currency effects of approximately $3 million, as compared with 2004. This growth is primarily attributable to increases in order volume, particularly in Asia Pacific coupled with what we believe to be sustainable price increases in all of FCD core end-markets including the oil and gas, power and chemical industries. Bookings in 2004 increased by $41.8 million, or 5.5%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $45 million, as compared with 2003. The increase is a result of strengthening in the chemical and the oil and gas segments of the market. FCD sales in 2005, increased by $53.4 million, or 6.4%, excluding currency effects of approximately $2 million, as compared with 2004. The recovery of major valve markets that began in 2004 strengthened as 2005 progressed and drove sales increases to our process and power valve customers. Sales performance in 2005 reflects an increase in sales volume, improvement in worldwide power markets and U.S. chemical markets. Sales in 2005 also reflect improvement in the Asian and Russian markets. Of the $894.3 million of sales in 2005, approximately 38% were general industry sales, 32% were sales to chemical companies, 15% were oil and gas industry sales and 15% were sales to power industry customers. Sales in 2004 increased by $37.6 million, or 5.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $43 million, as compared with 2003. The increase is primarily attributable to many of the major valve markets beginning to recover from several years of decline. Increased customer demand for valve products and services in the power, chemical and general industrial markets helped drive the 2004 sales increases. Of the $838.7 million of sales in 2004, approximately 43% were general industry sales, 26% were sales to chemical companies, 16% were oil and gas industry sales and 15% were sales to power industry customers. 42 Table of Contents Gross profit margin of 31.9% in 2005 increased as compared with 2004. The increase is due to our efforts to continuously monitor inventory levels, coupled with successful management of aged inventory, which resulted in a charge to cost of sales to increase the reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory of $3.7 million in 2005, which was significantly lower as compared with the $14.1 million charge recorded in 2004. Further, the aforementioned volume and sales price increases with a more favorable mix of aftermarket sales, which typically have a higher margin, positively impacted gross profit margin. Gross profit margin of 30.1% in 2004 decreased as compared with 2003. This resulted primarily from a $14.1 million charge to cost of sales for the increase in the reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory, which resulted when a comparatively large portion of inventory purchased in our acquisition of IFC in 2002 did not sell at anticipated rates, thus triggering recognition of additional obsolescence reserves. In 2005, operating income (before special items) increased $23.2 million, or 35.6%, excluding currency effects of less than $1 million, driven primarily by the increase in the gross profit margin discussed above. Operating income was negatively impacted by higher sales commissions incurred to generate the sales increase, higher costs associated with Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, costs incurred in expanding our footprint in Asia. Operating income (before special items) in 2004 decreased by $7.2 million, or 10.6% excluding currency benefits of approximately $4 million, as compared with 2003. The decrease results primarily from a $14.1 million charge to income for the increased provision for obsolete and slow moving inventory, as discussed above, plus an incremental $7.6 million increase in incentive compensation included in SG&A. Special items during 2003 were associated with the acquisition and integration of IFC into FCD. Backlog in 2005 increased by $36.5 million, or 16.9%, excluding negative currency effects of approximately $12 million, as compared with 2004. The increase is primarily attributable to the strong bookings performance in 2005. Flow Solutions Division Segment Results Through FSD, we design, manufacture and distribute mechanical seals, sealing systems and parts, and provide related services, principally to industrial markets. FSD has seven manufacturing operations, three of which are located in the U.S. FSD operates 64 QRCs worldwide, including 25 sites in North America, 14 in Europe, and the remainder in South America and Asia. Our ability to manufacture engineered seal products within 72 hours from the customer request through design, engineering, manufacturing, testing and delivery is a significant competitive advantage. Based on independent industry sources, we believe that we are the second largest mechanical seal supplier in the world. Flow Solutions Division 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 463.4 $ 395.0 $ 361.1 Sales 443.6 394.0 357.7 Gross profit 193.4 170.3 160.1 Gross profit margin 43.6 % 43.2 % 44.8 % Segment operating income 86.0 72.6 73.9 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 19.4 % 18.4 % 20.7 % Backlog (at period end) 61.2 43.7 41.0 Bookings in 2005 increased by $64.5 million, or 16.3%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $4 million, as compared with 2004. Bookings in 2004 increased by $22.5 million, or 6.2%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $11 million, as compared with 2003. This bookings growth reflects increased business in projects, which includes OEMs, and the aftermarket. We experienced strong growth in compressor and pump seals in the project business and continued success with end users due to a focus on servicing customers locally through our increasing network of QRCs. In addition, the bookings improvement reflects FSD success in establishing longer-term customer alliance programs, including fixed fee alliances. Fixed fee alliances are contractual agreements with customers wherein the customer pays us a fixed amount each period (usually monthly) for the term of the agreement. In return for this fixed cost, the customer is entitled to new seals, repairs, upgraded equipment, 43 Table of Contents replacements and maintenance services as defined within the scope of each agreement. We believe the fixed fee strategy coupled with higher levels of customer service, reliability, drive for repair business, equipment upgrades, replacements and maintenance services have led to increases in market share in 2005 and 2004. Sales in 2005 increased by $47.0 million, or 11.9%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $3 million, as compared with 2004. The increase is due to the following: strength in the oil and gas industry led by oil prices and high demand; share growth in the mineral and ore processing industry due to strong demand; and increased sales in the gas compressor business due to growth in the natural gas industry. Of the $443.6 million of sales in 2005, approximately 33% was from oil and gas, 26% from chemical and 41% from general industries. Sales in 2004 increased by $25.2 million, or 7.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $11 million, as compared with 2003. Continuous improvements focused on our end user customer business, as well as meeting our strategic growth initiatives, led FSD to increased shipments in all regions in 2004. Of the $394.0 million of sales in 2004, approximately 30% was from oil and gas, 27% chemical and 43% general industries. Gross profit margin increased to 43.6% in 2005 as compared with 2004 primarily as a result of the ability to pass along price increases and improved product mix in the aftermarket, which typically has a higher margin. Gross profit margin for FSD decreased to 43.2% in 2004 as compared with 44.8% in 2003, primarily due to a $4.1 million increase in annual incentive compensation included in cost of sales, increases in worldwide metals pricing, and a charge to cost of sales resulting from an increase in the reserve for slow moving inventory. Operating income in 2005 increased by $12.8 million, or 17.6%, excluding currency benefits of less than $1 million, as compared with 2004. The improvement in 2005 reflects increased gross profit margins discussed above and greater control of SG&A. Operating income in 2004 decreased by $3.7 million, or 5.0%, excluding currency benefits of approximately $2 million, as compared with 2003. The decrease in operating income is primarily a result of the decrease in gross profit margin discussed above and an increase in SG&A, resulting from an increase in annual incentive compensation of $4.1 million. Backlog in 2005 increased by $19.7 million, or 45.1%, excluding negative currency effects of approximately $2 million, as compared with 2004. The increase is primarily attributable to the strong bookings performance in 2005, as well as one significant contract in which the final shipment is not due until 2008. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Net cash flows provided by operating activities $ 127.4 $ 267.5 $ 181.3 Net cash flows used by investing activities (39.3 ) (14.1 ) (26.6 ) Net cash flows used by financing activities (53.3 ) (250.6 ) (162.8 ) Cash Flow Analysis Cash generated by operations and borrowings available under our existing revolving line of credit are our primary sources of short-term liquidity. Our sources of operating cash include the sale of our products and services and the reduction of our working capital, particularly accounts receivable and inventories. Our total cash balance at December 31, 2005 was $96.5 million, compared to $63.8 million in 2004 and $53.5 million in 2003. The cash flows provided by operating activities in 2005 primarily reflect an increase in working capital, particularly higher accounts receivable of $37.2 million from the impact of the termination of our accounts receivable securitization agreement of $48.7 million. The increase in cash flows provided by operating activities in 2004 primarily relates to the implementation of the accounts receivable securitization agreement and increases in accounts payable, accrued liabilities and retirement obligations and other liabilities. In 2003, we also benefited from receipt of a $4.9 million U.S. income tax refund. Cash outflows related to the IFC integration were $27.2 million in 2003. Further, operating cash flows in 2005 reflect increased funding of pension plans of approximately $30 million as compared with 2004. The reduction in working capital for 2004 reflects increases of $46.6 million in accounts payable due to deferred payment of invoices at year-end in 2004, and $32.1 million in accrued liabilities due 44 Table of Contents primarily to an increase of approximately $44 million in the bonus accrual for 2004. The reduction in working capital for 2004 also reflects our continued emphasis on improving accounts receivable collections and reducing inventory. The improvement in accounts receivable in 2004 as compared to 2003 primarily reflects improved collections and the impact of the accounts receivable securitization of $48.7 million discussed below. In addition, incremental factoring of certain non-U.S. receivables contributed $0.7 million in 2005, used $3.4 million in 2004 and contributed $15.5 million in 2003. Our goal for days sales receivables outstanding ( DSO ) is 60 days. For the fourth quarter of 2005, we achieved a DSO of 58 days as compared to 59 days for the same period in 2004. For reference purposes based on 2005 sales, an improvement of one day could provide approximately $8 million in cash. Inventory reductions contributed $4.7 million of cash flow for 2005 compared with $25.5 million of cash flow for 2004 and $29.4 million in 2003. The majority of the inventory reduction in 2004 was in project-related work in process inventory required to support shipments of products in backlog, offset in part by an increase in raw materials. As a result of inventory reductions, inventory turns were 5.6 times at December 31, 2005, compared with 5.1 times and 4.4 times at December 31, 2004 and 2003 respectively. For reference purposes based on 2005 data, an improvement of one turn could yield approximately $55 million in cash. Cash outflows for investing activities were $39.3 million, $14.1 million and $26.6 million in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively, due primarily to capital expenditures. Cash outflows for financing activities were $53.3 million in 2005 compared with $250.6 million in 2004 and $162.8 million in 2003. The change in 2005 is primarily a result of the debt paydown. The change in 2004 results primarily from increased mandatory repayments of long-term debt triggered by the GMBU divestiture, the issuance of the EIB credit facility and accounts receivables securitization. Our cash needs for the next 12 months are expected to be substantially similar to 2005, except for a decrease in debt payments required under our New Credit Facilities partially offset by an increase in pension contributions and increases in capital expenditures related to information technology infrastructure and capacity expansion. We believe cash flows from operating activities, combined with availability under our revolving line of credit and our existing cash balances, will be sufficient to enable us to meet our cash flow needs for the next 12 months. However, cash flows from operations could be adversely affected by economic, political and other risks associated with sales of our products, operational factors, competition, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and fluctuations in interest rates, among other factors. We believe that cash flows from operating activities and our expectation of continuing availability to draw upon our revolving credit agreements are also sufficient to meet our cash flow needs for the periods exceeding the next 12 months. We generated $1.1 million and $6.8 million of cash flow related to the exercise of employee stock options in 2005 and 2004, respectively, which is reflected in financing activities of the consolidated statement of cash flows. Amounts generated from the exercise of employee stock options in 2003 were not significant. Stock option shares are not currently exercisable due to the temporary suspension of our stock option exercise program, as a result of which current employees, including executive officers, qualified retirees and our directors are unable to exercise their vested options. The stock option exercise program was temporarily suspended due to the fact that we were not able to timely file our annual and quarterly periodic reports with the SEC, which made it impossible to issue registered shares upon option exercises. We have a substantial number of outstanding stock options granted in past years to employees under our stock option plans which have been unexercisable for an extended period due to our non-current filing status of all our SEC financial reports. These outstanding options include options for 809,667 shares held by our former Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, C. Scott Greer. Given the significant increase in our share price during the period in which optionees have been unable to exercise their options, it is possible that many holders may want to exercise soon after they are first able to do so. We will reopen our stock option exercise program and allow optionees to exercise their options once we become current with our SEC financial reporting obligations and have registered the issuance of our common shares upon exercise of such stock options with the SEC. We currently expect this to occur in 2006. If the holders of a large number of these options promptly exercise following such reopening, there would be some dilutive impact on our earnings per share. We anticipate that a significant number of stock option exercises at one time would positively impact our cash flow, however, we are still evaluating the extent of such 45 Table of Contents impact and alternatives to satisfy our obligation under the stock option program, up to and including repurchasing shares on the market to offset some or all of the dilutive impact on our earnings per share which could negatively impact our cash flow. The impacts on our cash flow and earnings per share are dependent upon share price, number of shares and strike price of shares exercised. Payments for Acquisitions We regularly evaluate acquisition opportunities of various sizes. The cost and terms of any financing to be raised in conjunction with any acquisition, including our ability to raise economical capital, is a critical consideration in any such evaluation. In March 2004, we acquired the remaining 75% interest in TKL for approximately $12 million. We paid for the acquisition with cash generated by operations. Prior to the acquisition, we held a 25% interest in TKL. As a result of this acquisition, we strengthened our product offering in the mining industry, broadened our manufacturing capacity in the Asia Pacific region and gained foundry capacity. Capital Expenditures 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Capital expenditures $ 49.3 $ 45.2 $ 28.8 Depreciation expense 59.8 62.5 61.6 Capital expenditures were funded primarily by operating cash flows and, to a lesser extent, by bank borrowings. In 2005, our capital expenditures focused on new product development, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities. In 2003 and 2004, capital expenditures were invested in new and replacement machinery and equipment, information technology and acquisition integration activities, including structures and equipment required at receiving facilities. Capital expenditures in 2004 include approximately $5 million for the purchase of a building we previously leased for the manufacture of valves. In each year, capital expenditures were less than depreciation expense due to excess capacity and the upgrading of equipment through integration processes. In 2006, our capital expenditures are focused on capacity expansion, enterprise resource planning application upgrades (Project STAR: Simplification and Teamwork Accelerates Results), information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities and are expected to be between $70 million and $75 million. Certain of our facilities may face capacity constraints in the foreseeable future, which may lead to higher capital expenditure levels. 46 Table of Contents Financing Debt, including capital lease obligations, consisted of: 2005 2004 (Amounts in thousands) Term Loan, interest rate of 6.36% $ 578,500 $ Term Loan Tranche A: U.S. Dollar Tranches, interest rate of 5.02% 76,240 Euro Tranche, interest rate of 4.69% 13,257 Term Loan Tranche C, interest rate of 5.20% 233,851 Senior Subordinated Notes, net of discount, coupon of 12.25%: U.S. Dollar denominated 187,004 Euro denominated 87,484 EIB loan, interest rate of 4.42% in 2005 and 2.39% in 2004 85,000 85,000 Receivable securitization and factoring obligations 17,635 Capital lease obligations and other 1,636 1,373 Debt and capital lease obligations 665,136 701,844 Less amounts due within one year 12,367 44,098 Total debt due after one year $ 652,769 $ 657,746 New Credit Facilities On August 12, 2005, we entered into New Credit Facilities comprised of a $600.0 million term loan maturing on August 10, 2012 and a $400.0 million revolving line of credit, which can be utilized to provide up to $300.0 million in letters of credit, expiring on August 12, 2010. We used the proceeds of borrowings under our New Credit Facilities to refinance our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes and indebtedness outstanding under our 2000 Credit Facilities. Further, we replaced the letter of credit agreement that guaranteed our EIB credit facility (described below) with a letter of credit issued as part of the New Credit Facilities. Borrowings under our New Credit Facilities bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (1) the base rate (which is based on greater of the prime rate most recently announced by the administrative agent under our New Credit Facilities or the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50%) or (2) London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) plus an applicable margin determined by reference to the ratio of our total debt to consolidated Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ( EBITDA ), which as of December 31, 2005 was 1.75% for LIBOR borrowings. EIB Credit Facility On April 14, 2004, we and one of our European subsidiaries, Flowserve B.V., entered into an agreement with EIB, pursuant to which EIB agreed to loan us up to 70 million, with the ability to draw funds in multiple currencies, to finance in part specified research and development projects undertaken by us in Europe. Borrowings under the EIB credit facility bear interest at a fixed or floating rate of interest agreed to by us and EIB with respect to each borrowing under the facility. Loans under the EIB credit facility are subject to mandatory prepayment, at EIB discretion, upon the occurrence of certain events, including a change of control or prepayment of certain other indebtedness. In addition, the EIB credit facility contains covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to dispose of assets related to the financed project and require us to deliver to EIB our audited annual financial statements within 30 days of publication. In August 2004, we borrowed $85 million at a floating interest rate based on 3-month U.S. LIBOR that resets quarterly. As of December 31, 2005, the interest rate was 4.42%. The maturity of the loan is June 15, 2011, but may be repaid at any time without penalty. 47 Table of Contents Additional discussion of our New Credit Facilities, the EIB credit facility and other debt instruments no longer in effect as of December 31, 2005 is included in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. We have entered into interest rate and currency swap agreements to hedge our exposure to cash flows related to the credit facilities discussed above. These agreements are more fully described in Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk. Debt Prepayments and Repayments The following summarizes our repayment of obligations under our various credit facilities: 2005 2004 2003 (Amounts in millions) Scheduled repayment $ 1.5 $ 27.5 $ 0.9 Mandatory repayment 167.9 Optional prepayment(1) 38.4 160.0 163.1 Loss on debt repayment and extinguishment 27.7 2.7 1.3 (1) Optional prepayment excludes the proceeds from our New Credit Facilities that were used to repay our outstanding obligations under our 2000 Credit Facilities and our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes. Loans under our New Credit Facilities are subject to mandatory repayment with, in general: 100% of the net cash proceeds of asset sales; and Unless we attain and maintain investment grade credit ratings: 75% of our excess cash flow, subject to a reduction based on the ratio of our total debt to consolidated EBITDA; 50% of the proceeds of any equity offerings; and 100% of the proceeds of any debt issuances (subject to certain exceptions). We made a mandatory debt repayment of $10.9 million in January 2006 using the net cash proceeds from the sale of GSG and we will make a mandatory repayment of $0.9 million in July 2006 using excess cash flows. We may prepay loans under our New Credit Facilities in whole or in part, without premium or penalty. We incurred $9.3 million in fees related to the New Credit Facilities, of which $0.8 million were expensed in 2005. Prior to the refinancing, we had $11.8 million of unamortized deferred loan costs related to previous credit facilities and Senior Subordinated Notes, which were called immediately following our refinancing. Based upon the final syndicate of financial institutions for the New Credit Facilities, we expensed $10.5 million of these unamortized deferred loan costs in 2005. In addition to the total loan costs of $11.3 million that were expensed, we recorded a charge of $16.4 million for premiums paid to call our Senior Subordinated Notes, for a total loss on extinguishment of $27.7 million recorded in 2005. The remaining $8.5 million of fees related to the New Credit Facilities were capitalized and combined with the remaining $1.3 million of previously unamortized deferred loan costs for a total of $9.8 million in deferred loan costs included in other assets, net. These costs are being amortized over the term of the New Credit Facilities using the effective interest method. Accounts Receivable Securitization In October 2004, Flowserve US Inc., one of our wholly owned subsidiaries, and Flowserve Receivables Corporation ( FRC ), a wholly owned subsidiary of Flowserve US Inc., entered into a receivables purchase agreement ( RPA ) with two third party financial institutions whereby FRC could obtain up to $75 million in financing on a revolving basis by securitizing certain U.S.-based trade receivables. To obtain financing, Flowserve US Inc. transferred eligible receivables to FRC, which was formed solely for this accounts receivable securitization program. Pursuant to the RPA, FRC then sold undivided purchaser interests 48 Table of Contents in these receivables to the third party financial institutions. Flowserve US Inc. continued to service the receivables for a servicing fee of 0.5% of the average net receivable balance. No servicing liability was recognized at December 31, 2004 because the amount was immaterial due to the short term average collection period of the securitized receivables. FRC had no recourse against Flowserve US Inc. for failure of the debtors to pay when due. As of December 31, 2004, FRC had secured $60 million in financing under the program. The proceeds were used to repay $16 million and $44 million of Tranche A and Tranche C bank term loans, respectively, outstanding under our prior credit facilities. At the time the purchaser interests were sold, $48.7 million of the receivables transferred to FRC were removed from FRC financial statements, and FRC further recorded short-term debt of $11.3 million. Borrowings under the RPA in excess of $11.3 million are excluded from our debt balance as presented in the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2004. On October 31, 2005, we terminated the RPA. In connection with this, we borrowed approximately $48 million under our New Credit Facilities and repurchased outstanding receivable interests from the third party financial institutions. See additional discussion of our accounts receivable securitization program in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Accounts Receivable Factoring Through our European subsidiaries, we engage in non-recourse factoring of certain accounts receivable. The various agreements have different terms, including options for renewal and mutual termination clauses. Under our previous credit facilities, such factoring was generally limited to $50 million, based on due date of the factored receivables. The limit on factoring was raised to $75 million under the New Credit Facilities entered into in August 2005. See additional discussion of our accounts receivable factoring program in Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Debt Covenants and Other Matters Our New Credit Facilities contain covenants requiring us to deliver to lenders leverage and interest coverage financial covenants and our audited annual and unaudited quarterly financial statements. Under the leverage covenant, the maximum permitted leverage ratio steps down beginning with the fourth quarter of 2006, with a further step-down beginning with the fourth quarter of 2007. Under the interest coverage covenant, the minimum required interest coverage ratio steps up beginning with the fourth quarter of 2006, with a further step-up beginning with the fourth quarter of 2007. Compliance with these financial covenants under our New Credit Facilities is tested quarterly. Delivery of the December 31, 2005 audited financial statements is required by May 30, 2006. We have received a waiver from our lenders to deliver the December 31, 2005 audited annual financial statements by July 31, 2006. Further, we are required to furnish within 50 days of the end of each of the first three quarters of each year our consolidated balance sheet, and related statements of operations, shareholders equity and cash flows. Our New Credit Facilities also contain covenants restricting our and our subsidiaries ability to dispose of assets, merge, pay dividends, repurchase or redeem capital stock and indebtedness, incur indebtedness and guarantees, create liens, enter into agreements with negative pledge clauses, make certain investments or acquisitions, enter into sale and leaseback transactions, enter into transactions with affiliates, make capital expenditures, engage in any business activity other than our existing business or any business activities reasonably incidental thereto. With the waiver for delivery of the December 31, 2005 audited financial statements, we are in compliance with all debt covenants under the New Credit Facilities. 49 Table of Contents CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS The following table presents a summary of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2005: Payments Due By Period Within Beyond 5 1 Year 2-3 Years 4-5 Years Years Total (Amounts in millions) Long-term debt $ 11.7 $ 11.5 $ 11.5 $ 628.8 $ 663.5 Fixed interest payments(1) 6.2 10.4 10.8 2.7 30.1 Variable interest payments(2) 36.9 73.2 71.6 47.2 228.9 Capital lease obligations 0.6 0.7 1.3 Operating leases 21.4 30.4 17.4 13.6 82.8 Purchase obligations:(3) Inventory 200.1 11.7 211.8 Non-inventory 23.3 9.0 0.3 32.6 Retirement and postretirement benefits(4) 37.9 80.4 84.7 226.9 429.9 (1) Fixed interest payments include payments on fixed and synthetically fixed rate debt. (2) Variable interest payments under our New Credit Facilities were estimated using a base rate of three-month LIBOR as of December 31, 2005. (3) Purchase obligations are presented at the face value of the purchase order, excluding the effects of early termination provisions. Actual payments could be less than amounts presented herein. (4) Retirement and postretirement benefits represent estimated benefit payments for our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit plans, as more fully described in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. The following table presents a summary of our commercial commitments at December 31, 2005: Commitment Expiration By Period Within 1 Beyond 5 Year 2-3 Years 4-5 Years Years Total (Amounts in millions) Letters of credit $ 277.0 $ 55.1 $ 9.5 $ 0.6 $ 342.2 Surety bonds 23.1 10.5 0.3 33.9 We expect to satisfy these commitments through performance under our contracts. PENSION AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS OBLIGATIONS Our pension plans and postretirement benefit plans are accounted for using actuarial valuations required by SFAS No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions, and SFAS No. 106, Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions. We consider accounting for retirement plans critical because management is required to make significant subjective judgments about a number of actuarial assumptions, including discount rates, salary growth, long-term return on plan assets, retirement, turnover, health care cost trend rates and mortality rates. Depending on the assumptions and estimates used, the pension and postretirement benefit expense could vary within a range of outcomes and have a material effect on reported earnings. In addition, the assumptions can materially affect accumulated benefit obligations and future cash funding. Plan Description We and certain of our subsidiaries have defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution plans for regular full-time and part-time employees. The defined benefit pension plan in the U.S. is the Flowserve Corporation Pension Plan and the defined contribution plan is the Flowserve Corporation Retirement Savings Plan. 50 Table of Contents Approximately 66% of total defined benefit pension plan assets and 57% of benefit obligations are related to the U.S. plan as of December 31, 2005. The assets for the U.S. plan are held in a single trust with a common asset allocation. Unless specified otherwise, the references in this section are to total plans (i.e., the U.S. plan together with international plans). Benefits under our defined benefit pension plans are based primarily on years of credited service and on participants compensation. Assets under our defined benefit pension plans consist primarily of equity and fixed-income securities. At December 31, 2005, the fair market value of plan assets for our defined benefit plans increased to $311.6 million from $276.3 million at December 31, 2004. Assets were allocated as follows: U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Asset category 2005 2004 2005 2004 Equity securities 66 % 64 % 48 % 45 % Fixed income 30 % 31 % 41 % 42 % Other 4 % 5 % 11 % 13 % The projected benefit obligation for our defined benefit pension plans was $520.6 million and $488.7 million as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. None of our common stock is directly held by these plans. We sponsor a defined benefit postretirement health care plan covering most current retirees and a limited number of future retirees in the U.S. This plan provides for medical and dental benefits and is administered through insurance companies. We fund the plan as benefits are paid, such that the plans hold no assets in any period presented. Accordingly, we have no investment strategy or targeted allocations for plan assets. The benefits under the plan are not available to new employees or most existing employees. The accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for our defined benefit postretirement health care plan was $73.8 million and $88.7 million as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The decrease is primarily a result of plan amendments in 2005 that reduced our obligation from full coverage to a capped amount at two facilities and a higher than expected decrease in plan participants. Accrual Accounting and Significant Assumptions Consistent with the requirements of SFAS No. 87, we account for pension benefits using the accrual method, recognizing pension expense before the payment of benefits to retirees. The accrual method of accounting for pension benefits necessarily requires actuarial assumptions concerning future events that will determine the amount and timing of the benefit payments. Our key assumptions used in calculating our cost of pension benefits are the discount rate, the rate of compensation increase, and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. We, in consultation with our actuaries, evaluate the key actuarial assumptions and other assumptions used in calculating the cost of pension benefits, such as discount rate, expected return on plan assets for funded plans, life expectancy of participants and assumed rate of wage increases, and determine such assumptions as of December 31 of each year to calculate liability information as of that date and pension expense for the following year. Depending on the assumptions used, the pension expense could vary within a range of outcomes and have a material effect on reported earnings. In addition, the assumptions can materially affect accumulated benefit obligations and future cash funding. Actual results in any given year may differ from those estimated because of economic and other factors. The assumed discount rate used for determining future pension obligations is based on indices of AA-rated corporate bonds, except for two foreign locations which use government bonds. The assumed rate of compensation increase used for determining future pension obligations reflects an estimate of the change in actual future compensation levels due to general price levels, productivity, seniority and other factors. In 2005, net pension expense for our defined benefit pension plans included in income from continuing operations was $26.5 million compared to $22.9 million in 2004 and $20.0 million in 2003. The postretirement benefit expense for the postretirement health care plan was $0.8 million in 2005 compared to $3.8 million in 2004 51 Table of Contents and $4.1 million in 2003. The decline in 2005 is primarily attributable to plan amendments capping our liabilities and to a decrease in the number of participants. The following are assumptions related to our defined benefit pension plans for the year ended December 31, 2005: U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Weighted average assumptions used to determine benefit obligations: Discount rate 5.50 % 4.43 % Rate of increase in compensation levels 4.50 3.19 Weighted average assumptions used to determine net cost: Long-term rate of return on assets 8.25 % 6.00 % Discount rate 5.75 5.12 Rate of increase in compensation levels 4.50 3.05 The following provides a sensitivity analysis of alternative assumptions on the U.S. qualified and aggregate non-U.S. pension plans and U.S. postretirement plans. Effect of Discount Rate Changes and Constancy of Other Assumptions: 0.5% Increase 0.5% Decrease (Amounts in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plan: Effect on pension expense $ (1.0 ) $ 1.0 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (12.2 ) 12.7 Non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans: Effect on pension expense (1.1 ) 2.4 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (19.8 ) 22.0 U.S. Postretirement medical plans: Effect on postretirement medical expense (0.7 ) 0.2 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (3.1 ) 3.2 Effect of Changes in the Expected Return on Assets and Constancy of Other Assumptions: 0.5% Increase 0.5% Decrease (Amounts in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plan: Effect on pension expense $ (1.0 ) $ 1.0 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A Non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans: Effect on pension expense (0.5 ) 0.5 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A U.S. Postretirement medical plans: Effect on postretirement medical expense N/A N/A Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A As discussed below, GAAP provides that differences between expected and actual returns are recognized over the average future service of employees. At December 31, 2005, we lowered our assumed discount rate for the U.S. plan from 5.75% to 5.50% consistent with decreased 10-year bond yields and our average rate for non-U.S. plans from 5.12% to 4.43%. We maintained our average assumed rate of compensation increase at 4.5% for the U.S. plan and slightly increased the assumed rate of compensation increase to 3.19% for non-U.S. plans. The reduction in the discount rate had the 52 Table of Contents effect of increasing the present value of benefit obligations and, accordingly, increased pension expense for 2005. We lowered the expected rate of return on U.S. plan assets from 8.75% for 2004 to 8.25% for 2005, primarily to reflect reduced expected long-term equity returns. Further reductions to the assumed discount rate and expected rate of return will have the effect of increasing pension expense for 2006. We expect that the net pension expense for our defined benefit pension plans included in earnings before income taxes will be approximately $4.4 million higher in 2006 than the $26.5 million in 2005, reflecting, among other things, the decrease in the assumed discount rate and expected reduction in the rate of return on plan assets. We expect the 2006 expense for the postretirement health care plan to be $0.8 million. We have used the same assumed discount rates of 5.50% and 5.75% at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively, in calculating our cost of pension benefits and our cost of other postretirement benefits for U.S. plans. The assumed ranges for the annual rates of increase in per capita costs for periods prior to Medicare were 8.0% for 2005, 9.0% for 2004 and 10.0% for 2003, with a gradual decrease to 5.0% for 2007 and future years. If actual costs are higher than those assumed, this will likely put modest upward pressure on our expense for retiree health care. On December 8, 2003, President Bush signed into law the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 (the Medicare Act ). The effects of the Medicare Act are reflected in 2004 net periodic postretirement benefit cost (a reduction of $0.7 million) and accumulated postretirement benefit obligation at December 31, 2004 (a reduction of $4.5 million). Delayed Recognition of Actuarial Gains and Losses At December 31, 2005 and 2004, unrecognized net actuarial losses for our defined benefit plans were $163.0 million and $132.2 million, respectively, based on the fair market value of plan assets. These unrecognized net actuarial losses primarily reflect in large part the steady reduction of the weighted-average discount rate over the years. SFAS No. 87 provides for delayed recognition of actuarial gains and losses, including amounts arising from changes in the estimated plan benefit obligations due to changes in the assumed discount rate, differences between the actual and expected returns on plan assets, and other assumption changes. SFAS No. 87 requires that unrecognized net actuarial gain or loss, determined based on the market-related value of plan assets (which differs from fair market value and is a calculated value that recognizes changes in fair value in a systematic and rational manner over five years), be amortized in pension expense for the year to the extent that such unrecognized net actuarial loss or gain exceeds 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligation or the market-related value of plan assets at the beginning of the year. These net gains and losses are recognized as pension expense prospectively over a period that approximates the average remaining service period of active employees expected to receive benefits under the plans to the extent that they are not offset by losses and gains in subsequent years. At December 31, 2005, the unrecognized net actuarial loss for the U.S. plan subject to amortized recognition, determined based on the market-related value of plan assets, was $105.8 million. This amount exceeded 10% of the greater of the projected benefit obligation or the market related value of plan assets by $77.0 million. Unless offset by future unrecognized gains from higher discount rates or higher than expected returns on plan assets, amortization of this unrecognized loss is expected to increase pension expense for each of the following 13 years by approximately $6.0 million per year, which amount is reflected in the higher expense expected in 2006. In the event the fair market value of pension plan assets of a particular plan is less than the accumulated benefit obligation for such plan at year-end, GAAP may require an additional minimum liability, and in such circumstances, a reduction in shareholders equity or an establishment of an intangible asset. At December 31, 2005, the fair market value of our defined benefit pension plan assets was $311.6 million and the related accumulated benefit obligation was $501.9 million. We recognized an additional minimum liability of $137.4 million at December 31, 2005, which was recorded as a $93.2 million charge in other comprehensive income included in shareholders equity, a $43.5 million deferred tax asset, and a $0.7 million intangible asset. At December 31, 2004, the fair market value of our defined benefit pension plan assets was $276.3 million and the related accumulated benefit obligation was $473.6 million. We recognized an additional minimum liability of $97.4 million at December 31, 2004, which 53 Table of Contents was recorded as a $62.1 million charge in other comprehensive income included in stockholders equity, a $34.6 million deferred tax asset, and a $0.7 million increase in the intangible asset. Plan Funding Our funding policy for defined benefit plans is to contribute at least the amounts required under applicable laws and local customs. We contributed $53.1 million, $23.4 million and $34.7 million to our defined benefit plans in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. In 2006, we expect to contribute approximately $36 million to our qualified U.S. pension plan, and we expect to contribute approximately $8 million to our non-U.S. pension plans. For further discussions on retirement benefits, see Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES The process of preparing financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires the use of estimates and assumptions to determine reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of related contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and assumptions are based upon information available at the time of the estimates or assumptions, including our historical experience, where relevant. The most significant estimates made by management include timing and amount of revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory costing and related fair value allowances, deferred tax asset realization, restructuring charges and expected payments reflected in related reserves, legal and environmental claims estimates, warranty provisions, pension and postretirement benefits obligations and the fair value of indefinite-lived assets (including goodwill) and other long-lived assets. The significant estimates are reviewed quarterly by management with oversight by our Disclosure Control Committee, an internal committee comprised of members of senior management, and the Disclosure Control Committee presents its views to the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Because of the uncertainty of factors surrounding the estimates, assumptions and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements, actual results may differ from the estimates, and the difference may be material. Our critical accounting policies are those policies that are both most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments on the part of management in their application, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe that the following represent our critical accounting policies. For a summary of all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Management and our external auditors have discussed our critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Revenues for products and short-term projects are recognized based on the shipping terms agreed to with the customer and fulfillment of all but inconsequential or perfunctory actions required, which is generally the point of title transfer. If the customer order requires formal acceptance, revenue is not recognized until formal acceptance has been received. For contracts containing multiple products, each having separable value, we generally recognize revenue on individual product shipments equal to the shipped products pro rata share of the contract fair value upon the fulfillment of all but inconsequential or perfunctory actions of the individual product shipment. For multiple deliverables under a single contract or arrangement, such as product delivery and installation, we separate the fair value of the product from the installation and recognize revenue on each element independently upon fulfillment of all but inconsequential or perfunctory actions. Our estimates mainly relate to the fair value determination of the underlying services or products. Revenue on service contracts is recognized after the services have been rendered and accepted by the customer. All revenue for products, short-term projects and service contracts require, prior to recognition, the persuasive evidence of an arrangement, a fixed or determinable sales price and reasonable assurance of collectibility. Revenue for certain long-term large contracts is recorded on the percentage of completion method calculated on a cost-to-cost basis, in instances where reliable cost estimates exist. Percentage of completion revenue represents 54 Table of Contents less than 5% of our consolidated revenues for each year presented, and is most prevalent in FPD. The percentage of completion method of revenue recognition requires us to prepare estimates of costs to complete contracts in progress, and in doing so we make judgments to evaluate contingencies such as potential variances in scheduled delivery and the cost of materials, labor costs and productivity, the impact of change orders, potential warranty liabilities and liquidated damage claims, contract disputes, and achievement of contractual performance standards. Changes in total estimated contract costs and resultant contract losses, if any, are recognized in the period in which they are determined. Revenue generated under fixed fee service and repair contracts are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract. These contracts can range in duration, but generally extend for five years. Fixed fee service and repair contracts represent less than 5% of our consolidated revenue for each year presented, and are most prevalent in FSD. In certain instances, we provide guaranteed completion dates under the terms of our contracts. Failure to meet schedule or agreed upon delivery dates can result in unrealized incentive fees or non-recoverable costs. In instances where the payments of such costs are likely, we perform project profitability analysis using such costs to reduce revenues realizable, which could cause estimated project costs to exceed projected revenues realized from the project. In such instances, we would record reserves to cover such excesses in the period they are determined, which would adversely affect our results of operations and financial position. In instances where the reduced revenues still exceed costs, the incurrence of the costs generally reduces profitability of the project at the time of subsequent revenue recognition. Our reported results would change if different estimates were used for contract costs or if different estimates were used for contractual contingencies. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts based on estimates of the amount of uncollectible accounts receivable. The amount of the allowance is determined principally based upon the aging of the receivable, as well as on customer credit history, significant customer disputes, outstanding industry and market segment information, economic trends and conditions, credit reports and customer financial condition. We consider our collection history and specifically known uncollectible accounts in establishing our allowance. Customer credit issues, customer bankruptcies, general economic conditions or other matters largely beyond our control can affect the collectibility of our accounts receivable. If our customers financial conditions worsened or if customer disputes increased beyond levels currently provided for, we might be required to recognize additional allowances or incur additional write-offs, which would adversely impact our results of operation, cash flows and financial position. Our credit risk may be mitigated by our large number of customers across many different geographic regions. For all of 2003 and most of 2004, we had a credit insurance policy for many of our European subsidiaries, whereby we were entitled to remuneration from the third party insurer, net of deductible, in instances where customers covered by this policy were unable to pay. We cancelled this policy in late 2004 due to minimal claims sought. Inventories and Related Reserves Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. We primarily determine cost for the majority of our U.S. inventories by the last-in, first-out method and for other inventories by the first-in, first-out method. We estimate the market value of our inventory based on an assessment of recent or committed sales prices, and provide for excess and obsolete inventories based on historical usage, estimated future demand and related pricing. In determining excess quantities, we consider recent sales activity, related margins and market positioning of our products. These estimates are generally not subject to significant volatility, due to the long life cycles of our product lines, except for product rationalizations generally associated with acquisition integration programs. However, factors beyond our control, such as demand levels, technological advances and pricing competition, could change from period to period. If such factors had an adverse effect on us, we might be required to reduce the value of our inventory, which would adversely affect our results of operations, cash flows and financial position. 55 Table of Contents Deferred Taxes and Tax Valuation Allowances We recognize valuation allowances to reduce the carrying value of deferred tax assets to amounts that we expect are more likely than not to be realized. Our valuation allowances primarily relate to the deferred tax assets established for certain net operating loss carryforwards for U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries, and we evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing the related valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of these allowances, if necessary. We assess such factors as our forecast of future taxable income and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets in determining the sufficiency of our valuation allowances. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income in the applicable tax jurisdictions could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and could result in an increase in our effective tax rate on future earnings. Implementation of different tax structures in certain jurisdictions could, if successful, result in future reductions of certain valuation allowances. Tax Reserves The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which often result in proposed assessments. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions. We establish reserves for open tax years for certain positions that are subject to challenge by various tax authorities. The consolidated tax provision and related accruals include the impact of such reasonably estimable losses and related interest as deemed appropriate. We believe we have adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these matters, and our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities. To the extent that the expected tax outcome of these matters changes, such changes in estimate will impact the income tax provision in the period in which such determination is made. Restructuring and Integration Expense Restructuring and integration expenses have generally been recognized in conjunction with our acquisitions. Such expenses reflect many estimates including costs pertaining to employee severance payments, fulfillment of outstanding contractual obligations and other matters associated with exiting a facility. Restructuring costs related to facilities and employees of acquired businesses generally become a component of goodwill, whereas non-acquisition related restructuring costs are recorded as restructuring expense in the consolidated statements of operations. Integration costs are recognized as a reduction to the results of operations as a component of current earnings. Reserves created for each restructuring plan are assessed quarterly and adjusted for any revisions of cost estimates or other changes in planned restructuring activities. Prior to January 1, 2003, we recognized restructuring reserves when the related restructuring plans had been both approved and communicated to affected employees. In conjunction with adopting SFAS No. 146, Accounting for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities, on January 1, 2003, we now record restructuring reserves as the related liability is incurred. Legal and Environmental Accruals The costs relating to legal and environmental liabilities are recorded when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and such loss is estimable. We have a formal process for assessing the facts and recording any required reserves on a case-by-case basis. Assessments of legal and environmental reserves are based on information obtained from our independent and in-house experts, including recent legal decisions and loss experience in similar situations. The recorded legal reserves are susceptible to changes due to new developments regarding the facts and circumstances of each matter, changes in political environments, legal venue and other factors. Recorded environmental reserves could change based on further analysis of our properties, technological innovation and regulatory environment changes. Warranty Accruals Warranty obligations are based upon product failure rates, materials usage and service delivery costs, an analysis of all identified or expected claims and an estimate of the cost to resolve such claims. The estimates of expected claims are generally a factor of historical claims and known product issues. Warranty obligations based on 56 Table of Contents these factors are adjusted based on historical sales trends for the preceding 24 months. Changes in claim rates, differences between actual and expected warranty costs, sales trends, and facility rationalization activities could impact warranty obligation estimates, which might have adverse effects to our consolidated results of operations and financial position. Retirement and Postretirement Benefits Determination of the value of our retirement and postretirement benefits liabilities is based on actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions which are assessed annually in the fourth quarter and which include: discount rates; expected return on plan assets for funded plans; life expectancy of participants; assumed rate of wage increases; and assumed rate of health care cost increases. We evaluate, in conjunction with our professional advisors, prevailing market conditions in countries where plans are maintained, including appropriate rates of return, interest rates and medical inflation rates. Specifically for our U.S. plan, we assess such market factors as changes in the cash balance interest crediting rate, borrowing rates for investment grade corporate and industrial companies, assumptions used by Fortune 500 companies, our actual wage increases in recent years, expected rates of return for each targeted asset class held by the plans and return premiums generated by active investment management. For the non-U.S. plans we perform similar analyses, but also factor in local laws and requirements. We also compare our significant assumptions with our peers and discuss our key assumptions, prior to their incorporation into actuarial calculations, with the Finance Committee of our Board of Directors. We evaluate the funded status of each retirement plan using current assumptions and determine the appropriate funding level considering applicable regulatory requirements, tax deductibility, reporting considerations, cash flow requirements and other factors. Valuation of Goodwill, Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets Our business acquisitions typically generate goodwill and other intangible assets, which affect prospective amortization expense and possible impairment expense we might incur. We test the value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment as of December 31 each year or whenever events or circumstances indicate such assets may be impaired. Impairment losses for goodwill are recognized whenever the implied fair value of goodwill is less than the carrying value. Impairment losses for intangibles are recognized whenever the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value. The test for goodwill impairment involves significant judgment in estimating projections of fair value generated through future performance of each of the reporting units, which correlate to our operating segments. The test of indefinite-lived intangibles involves significant judgment in estimating projections of future sales levels. In calculating the fair value of the reporting units using the present value of estimated future cash flows, we rely on a number of factors including operating results, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows and market data used in discounting those cash flows. Inherent uncertainties exist in determining and applying such factors. The discount rate used in the projection of fair value represents a weighted average cost of capital of 8.65%, which is applicable to our company and industry based on published data. The net realizable value of other long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, is reviewed periodically, when indicators of potential impairments are present, based upon an assessment of the estimated future cash flows related to those assets, utilizing methodologies similar to that for goodwill and indefinite-lived assets. Additional considerations related to our long-lived assets include expected maintenance and improvements, changes in expected uses and ongoing operating performance and utilization. Due to uncertain market conditions and potential changes in strategy and product portfolio, it is possible that forecasts used to support asset carrying values may change in the future, which could result in non-cash charges that would adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. 57 Table of Contents ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS We have presented the information about accounting pronouncements not yet implemented in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. OUTLOOK FOR 2006 We experienced strengthening in our markets in 2005 and we remain optimistic about our markets and our performance in 2006, considering that the economic opportunities in many of our geographic and core industrial markets continue to be strong. As a result of these factors, our revenues are expected to increase from 2005, excluding currency fluctuations. For additional discussion on our markets, see the Business Overview Our Markets section of this Management Discussion and Analysis. Our bookings have increased 23.3% for the three months ended March 31, 2006 as compared to the same period in 2005. However, as a booking represents a contract that can be modified or canceled, there is no guarantee that the increase in bookings will result in the same increase in revenues. We expect our operating income to increase in 2006 as compared with 2005, although there are a numbers of factors that could have a significant impact on our operating income in 2006. Our 2006 operating income should continue to benefit from a number of operational improvement programs, including the procurement program and the CIP initiative, as well as other operational improvements in several of our facilities. In addition, continuation of our end user strategy, selective contract bidding and an increase in our quick turnaround products, which are historically more profitable, should also positively contribute to our operating income in 2006. However, a number of significant costs and certain other expenses will negatively impact our operating income in 2006. These include selected investments in technology infrastructure to consolidate our ERP systems; enhancements to our CIP initiative; professional fees incurred in the development of tax strategies and enhancement of our compliance programs; an increase in research and development spending; a continued high level of professional fees primarily related to the restatement of our financial results for 2002, 2003 and the first quarter of 2004, and the 2004 and 2005 audits, including Section 404 assessments, which were all completed in the first half of 2006; initiation of the 2006 audit and Section 404 assessment; non-cash stock compensation expenses primarily related to the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment and re-measurement and modification of certain stock options; and higher wage and benefit costs due to inflation. In addition, we may experience capacity constraints at several of our plant locations in 2006 which could cause delays in shipping and payment of liquidated damages. If these factors occur as we have described, we expect net earnings and net earnings per share to improve in 2006. There is potential for the exercise of a significant amount of stock options in 2006 which will become exercisable after we become current with our required filings with the SEC. The exercise of the stock options could have a dilutive effect on net earnings per share. See the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis for further discussion. Following the refinancing of the 2000 Credit Facilities and the 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes in August 2005, 100% of our debt carries a floating rate of interest. As of December 31, 2005 we had $410 million of derivative contracts to convert a portion of floating interest rates to fixed interest rates to reduce our exposure to interest rate volatility. As a result of our refinancing and lower levels of debt in 2006, we expect our interest expense will be lower in 2006 as compared to 2005. However, because a large portion of our debt carries a floating rate of interest, the debt is subject to volatility in rates, which could negatively affect interest expense. In addition, we do not expect to incur losses on debt extinguishment in 2006 as were incurred during the re-financing during 2005. We expect to generate sufficient cash from operations to fund our business, capital expenditures, pension plan contribution obligations and costs of compliance, and continue to reduce debt levels. We expect to improve working capital utilization by reducing DSO and increasing inventory turns. However, the amount of cash generated from working capital is dependent on the level of revenues and other factors. In 2006 our capital expenditures are focused on capacity expansion, enterprise resource planning application upgrades, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities and are expected to be between $70 million and $75 million, before consideration of any acquisition activity. Currently, no significant acquisitions are imminent. While current pension regulations allow us latitude in the amount of contributions, we currently anticipate that our contributions to our qualified U.S. pension plan will be between $35 million and $40 million in 2006. We currently anticipate that our 58 Table of Contents contributions to our non-U.S. pension plans will be approximately $8 million in 2006. We have no scheduled repayments in 2006 under the New Credit Facilities, however we made a mandatory repayment of $10.9 million in January 2006 using the net cash proceeds from the sale of GSG and we will make a mandatory repayment of $0.9 million in July 2006 using excess cash flows. We expect to comply with the covenants under our New Credit Facilities in 2006. See the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Management Discussion and Analysis for further discussion of our debt covenants. The potential exercise of a significant amount of stock options in 2006 (see preceding paragraph) could generate a significant amount of cash in 2006. 
