CIK: 30625
Company Name: FLOWSERVE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-25


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion and analysis is provided to increase the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. Please see Risk Factors and Forward-Looking Statements sections for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements. Unless otherwise noted, all amounts discussed herein are consolidated. EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW We are an established industry leader with a strong product portfolio of pumps, valves, seals, automation and aftermarket services in support of global infrastructure industries, including oil and gas, chemical, power generation and water management, as well as general industrial markets where our products add value. Our products are integral to the movement, control and protection of the flow of materials in our customers critical processes. Our business model is influenced by the capital spending of these industries for the placement of new products into service and aftermarket services for existing operations. The worldwide installed base of our products is an important source of aftermarket revenue, where products are expected to ensure the maximum operating time of many key industrial processes. Over the past several years, we have significantly invested in our aftermarket strategy to provide local support to maximize our customers investment in our offerings, as well as to provide business stability during various economic periods. The aftermarket business, which is served by more than 150 of our Quick Response Centers ( QRCs ) located around the globe, provides a variety of service offerings for our customers including spare parts, service solutions, product life cycle solutions and other value added services, and is generally a higher margin business and a key component to our profitable growth. We experienced favorable conditions in 2008 in our key industries. The demand growth from developing markets and the optimization and refurbishment needs from mature markets increased investments in oil and gas, power and water infrastructure. The growth of industrialization in the developing markets increased the demand for primary chemicals, which drove investment growth in chemical manufacturing facilities, particularly in Asia and the Middle East. In the oil and gas industry, advancements in recovery and processing technologies created opportunities in heavy oil processing, deep water production and natural gas liquefaction and regasification, where our products are well positioned. In the power industry, we provide products and services for all forms of power generation, and we are one of a limited number of manufacturers with existing N-stamp certifications required to support the nuclear power generation industry. The global demand growth over the past several years has provided us the opportunity to increase our installed base of new products and drive recurring aftermarket business. We continue to execute on our strategy to increase our presence in all regions of the global market to capture this aftermarket business opportunity, as well as to secure new capital projects and process plant expansions. Although we have experienced strong demand for our products and services in recent periods, we face challenges affecting many companies in our industry with a significant multinational presence, such as economic, political and other risks. We currently employ more than 15,000 employees in more than 55 countries who are focused on key strategies that reach across the business. See the Our Strategies section of this Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) for a discussion of our key strategies. We continue to build on our geographic breadth through our QRC network with the goal to be positioned as near to the customers as possible for service and support in order to capture this important aftermarket business. Along with ensuring that we have the local capability to sell, install and service our equipment in remote regions, it is equally imperative to continuously improve our global operations. We continue to expand our global supply chain capability to meet global customer demands and ensure the quality and timely delivery of our products. Significant efforts are underway to improve the supply chain processes across our divisions to find areas of synergy and cost reduction. In addition, we are improving our supply chain management capability to ensure it can meet global customer demands. We continue to focus on improving on-time delivery and quality, while reducing warranty costs as a percentage of sales across our global operations, through the assistance of a focused Continuous Improvement Process ( CIP ) initiative. The goal of the CIP initiative, which includes lean manufacturing, six sigma business management strategy and value engineering, is to maximize service fulfillment to customers through on-time delivery, reduced 27 Table of Contents cycle time and quality at the highest internal productivity. This program is a key factor in our margin expansion plans. Recent disruptions in global financial markets and banking systems are making credit and capital markets more difficult for companies to access, and are generally driving up the costs of newly raised debt. We continue to assess the implications of these factors on our current business and the state of the global economy. While we believe that these financial market disruptions have not directly had a disproportionate impact on our financial position, results of operations or liquidity as of December 31, 2008, continuing volatility in the credit and capital markets could potentially impair our and our customers ability to access these markets and increase associated costs. There can be no assurance that we will not be materially adversely affected by these financial market disruptions and the global economic recession as economic events and circumstances continue to evolve. Only 1% of our term loan is due to mature in each of 2009 and 2010, and after the effects of $385.0 million of notional interest rate swaps, approximately 70% of our term debt was at fixed rates at December 31, 2008. Our revolving line of credit and our European Letter of Credit Facility are committed and are held by a diversified group of financial institutions. Further, we increased our cash balance by $101.2 million to $471.8 million as of December 31, 2008 as compared with December 31, 2007, after significant cash uses in 2008, including $165.0 million of share repurchases, $126.9 million in capital expenditures, $51.5 million in dividend payments, $50.8 million in contributions to our U.S. pension plans and the funding of increased working capital requirements. We monitor the depository institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents on a regular basis, and we believe that we have placed our deposits with creditworthy financial institutions. See the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this MD&A for further discussion. BUSINESS OVERVIEW Our Company We believe that we are a world-leading manufacturer and aftermarket service provider of comprehensive flow control systems. We develop and manufacture precision-engineered flow control equipment, such as pumps, valves and seals, for critical service applications that require high reliability. We use our manufacturing platform to offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. Operations are conducted through three business segments that are referenced throughout this MD&A: Flowserve Pump Division ( FPD ): engineered and industrial pumps, pump systems, submersible motors and related services; Flow Control Division ( FCD ): engineered and industrial valves, control valves, actuators, controls and related services; and Flow Solutions Division ( FSD ): mechanical seals, auxiliary systems and parts and related services. Our product portfolio is built on more than 50 well-respected brand names such as Worthington, IDP, Valtek, Limitorque and Durametallic, which we believe to be one of the most comprehensive in the industry. The products and services are sold either directly or through designated channels to more than 10,000 companies, including some of the world leading engineering and construction firms, original equipment manufacturers, distributors and end users. Our Markets Our products and services are used in several distinct industries: oil and gas; chemical; power generation; water management; and a number of other industries that are collectively referred to as general industries. Demand for most of our products depends on the level of new capital investment and planned and unplanned maintenance expenditures by our customers. The level of capital expenditures depends, in turn, on capital infrastructure projects driven by the need for oil and gas, power and water, as well as general economic conditions. These demands are related to the phase of the cycle in their respective industries and the expectations of future market behavior. The levels of maintenance expenditures are driven by the reliability of the equipment, planned and unplanned downtime for maintenance and the required capacity utilization of the process. 28 Table of Contents Our customers include engineering contractors, original equipment manufacturers, end users and distributors. Sales to engineering contractors and original equipment manufacturers are typically for large project orders and critical applications, as are certain sales to distributors. Project orders are typically procured for customers either directly from us or indirectly through contractors for new construction projects or facility enhancement projects. The quick turnaround business, which we also refer to as the book and ship business, is defined as orders that are received from the customer (booked) and shipped within three months of receipt. These orders are typically for more standard products, parts or services. Each of our three business segments generates certain levels of this type of business. In the sale of aftermarket products and services, we benefit from a large installed base of our pumps, valves and seals, which require maintenance, repair and replacement parts. We use our manufacturing platform to offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services, such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. In geographic regions where we are positioned to provide quick response, we believe customers have traditionally relied on us, rather than our competitors, for aftermarket products due to our highly engineered and customized products. However, the aftermarket for standard products is competitive, as the existence of common standards allows for easier replacement of the installed products. Proximity of service centers, timeliness of delivery and quality are important considerations for aftermarket products and services. Therefore, we continue to expand our global QRC network to improve our ability to capture this important aftermarket business. Oil and Gas The oil and gas industry represented approximately 39% and 41% of our bookings in 2008 and 2007, respectively. Investment in upstream (exploration and production) petroleum projects, which was driven by aggressive demand growth projections in 2008, contributed to the increase in bookings. Many of these projects were in Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Latin America and reflect opportunities with national, international and other major oil companies. Based on the current and future expectations of oil and gas price levels as compared with historical levels, oil and gas companies are currently reevaluating capital investment plans, and several major project delays have been announced in recent weeks. In the downstream segment (refining and transportation) of the industry, we experienced increased investment in 2008 due to a projected greater global demand for refined products, stimulated by the rapid economic growth in developing countries and general demand growth in the rest of the world. These demand growth projections have been reduced in recent months due to the current and projected impact of global economic conditions. This moderation of growth projections is influencing the timing of major refinery projects in several regions around the globe. Project investments are forecasted to continue for large developing market areas, such as China and India, as these markets continue to build indigenous capability to meet local demand. Additionally, existing refiners located in more mature markets continue to see pressure related to new clean fuel regulations and aging infrastructure, which result in activities such as overhauls and upgrades to address these concerns. We believe these situations will continue to provide project opportunities for our products, solutions and services, which are well suited for these applications. The outlook for the oil and gas industry is heavily dependent on the demand growth for crude and refined products from both mature markets and developing geographies. We believe oil and gas companies will continue a moderate level of upstream and downstream investment through the current economic market conditions. A prolonged decline in demand could cause oil and gas companies to reduce their overall level of activity or capital spending, which could decrease demand for our products and services. However, we believe the long-term fundamentals for this industry remain solid based on current supply, projected depletion rates of existing fields and forecasted long-term demand growth. Chemical The chemical industry represented approximately 17% of our bookings in both 2008 and 2007. The chemical industry continued its growth investment behavior through much of 2008. With the advent of the troubles in the financial markets, consumption of end products from the chemical industry began to decline in the fourth quarter of 2008. This began to impact capital spending plans at many of the major chemical companies. Recently announced 29 Table of Contents downsizing plans by several of the major global chemical companies are also bringing measured reductions in short-term capital investment plans. The North America Chemical Processing Industry has forecasted a focus on maintenance and upgrades of facilities to ensure the competitiveness of these operations during the current recessionary period. We believe our QRC structure and aftermarket capabilities are well positioned to serve these demands. In certain developing regions, such as China and the Middle East, capital investment is still forecasted consistent with the indigenous growth strategies to build production capabilities to meet current and future local demands. The outlook for the chemical industry is dependent on the global economy. The growth behavior in this industry is well-aligned with that of the gross domestic product behavior by region. As noted above, many of the products produced by this industry depend on consumer demand to drive growth. The significant decrease in the price of oil feedstock has the opportunity to improve the profitability of continuing operations should consumer and commodity prices hold at an acceptable level. We believe the chemical industry will continue to invest in maintenance and upgrades for optimization of existing assets and that certain developing regions of the globe will continue investing in capital infrastructure to support both current and future local needs. We also believe that our specialty product offerings and our aftermarket service capabilities position us to gain market share through the current economic downturn. Power The power industry represented approximately 15% and 12% of our bookings in 2008 and 2007, respectively. This industry continued to see capital investment growth due to the increased power demands in developing countries, such as China and India, and capacity increases in mature markets, including the United States ( U.S. ). The projects in 2008 spanned all versions of power generation, including coal-fired, gas-fired, hydro and nuclear. There was a concerted industry effort to review methodologies to provide clean power generation, which increased investments in carbon capture and storage, as well as alternative energy sources. We have leveraged our research and development investments and our strong customer relationships to ensure that we are properly engaged in all matters relative to power generation. We are seeing increased activity in alternative energy sources, such as geothermal and coal gasification, where we are working with key customers in the development of products to serve this portion of the power industry. Planned investments in nuclear power generators continued to grow in 2008 with a significant increase in proposed projects. According to data from the World Nuclear Association as of the end of 2008, there were 43 reactors under construction with 372 reactors planned or currently proposed. In 2008, China announced plans to develop an incremental 60 gigawatts of nuclear power generation by 2020, and the China National Nuclear Corporation announced they have received funding commitments of approximately $51 billion to support this ambition. New project plans have also been announced in India, Latin America and the Middle East. Our product offerings have maintained N-stamp certification (required for nuclear applications) through the slowdown in the past in nuclear power plant construction, which has allowed us to continue to support the aftermarket business for existing facilities. We believe this positions us well for the planned growth in investment in nuclear power generation globally. We believe the outlook for the power industry remains favorable in the current global economic recession; however, the duration and depth of this recession could delay the demand for additional power, which could delay major capital projects into the future. We believe the long-term fundamentals for this industry remain solid based on projected global population growth, advancements of industrialization and growth of urbanization in developing markets around the globe. Water In both 2008 and 2007, the water market represented approximately 6% of our bookings. Worldwide demand for fresh water and water treatment continues to create requirements for new facilities or for upgrades of existing systems, many of which require products that we offer, especially pumps. We believe that the persistent demand for fresh water during all economic cycles supports continuing investments even in the current economic downturn. While forecasts do indicate some potential funding challenges for municipal and government projects due to 30 Table of Contents reduced tax revenues, which are projected to potentially influence the scope of work planned, we do not currently foresee the cancellation of critical projects, as they are necessary for the availability of fresh water. The water industry is facing a future supply/demand challenge relative to forecasted global population growth coupled with the advancement of industrialization and urbanization. Due to the limitations of usable fresh water around the globe, there continues to be an increased investment in desalination. This investment is forecasted to significantly increase over the next couple of decades. We believe we are a global leader in the desalination market, which is already an important source of fresh water in the Mediterranean region and the Middle East. We expect that this trend in desalination will expand from these traditional areas to other coastal areas around the globe, which we believe presents a significant market opportunity for pumps, valves and actuation products. General Industries General industries comprises a variety of different businesses, including mining and ore processing, pharmaceuticals, pulp and paper, food and beverage and other smaller applications, none of which individually represented more than 5% of total bookings in 2008 and 2007. General industries also include sales to distributors, whose end customers operate in the industries we primarily serve. General industries represented, in the aggregate, approximately 23% and 24% of our bookings in 2008 and 2007, respectively. In 2008, we saw favorable growth in these businesses during the first three quarters of the year. With the advent of the disruptions in the global financial markets, several of these industries have experienced reduced consumption requirements for their respective end products. Pulp and paper along with mining and ore processing are two areas that have experienced measured adverse impacts from the current market conditions. Other industries in this segment are experiencing softening market conditions to a lesser extent. We believe the outlook for this group of industries is dependent upon the length and severity of the current global economic recession. We also believe that our specialty product offerings and our aftermarket service capabilities will provide sound business opportunities in these industries through the slower periods of the global economy. The reporting of trends by product type, customer type and business type is based upon analytical review of individual operational results and knowledge of their respective businesses, as we do not formally track revenues by any of these categories. These trends are analyzed as a secondary reporting mechanism that is not derived directly from our general ledger system. Our Strategies Our overarching objective is to grow our position as a product and integrated solutions provider in the flow control industry. This objective includes continuing to sell products by building on existing sales relationships and marketing the power of our portfolio of products and services. It also includes delivering specific end user solutions that help customers attain their business goals by ensuring maximum reliability at a decreased cost of ownership. We seek to drive sustainable, profitable growth by using strategies that are well communicated throughout our company. These strategies include: organic growth, globalization, process excellence, portfolio management, strategic acquisitions, organizational capability and technology/innovation. The key elements of these strategies are outlined below. Organic Growth Organic growth is an important initiative focused on growing revenues from the existing portfolio of products and services, as well as through the development of new customer-driven products and services. An overarching goal is to focus on opportunities that can maximize the organic growth from existing customers and to evaluate potential new customer-partnering initiatives that maximize the capture of the product total life cycle. We are one of the few pump, valve and seal companies that can offer customers a differentiated option of products and services, as well as offer additional options that include any combination of products and solution support packages across a broad portfolio. The combined pump and seal end user teams have historically been successful in delivering new solution programs and increasing organic aftermarket growth. 31 Table of Contents We seek to capture additional market share by creating mutually beneficial opportunities for us and our customers through sourcing and maintenance alliance programs pursuant to which we provide all or an agreed portion of customers parts and servicing needs. These customer alliances enable us to develop long-term professional relationships with our customers and serve as an effective platform for introducing new products and services to our customers and generating additional sales. We also seek to continue to review our substantial installed pump, seal and valve base as a means to expand the aftermarket services business, as customers are increasingly using third-party aftermarket service providers to reduce their fixed costs and improve profitability. To date, the aftermarket services business has provided us with a steady source of revenues and cash flows at higher margins than original equipment sales. This allows us to be in frequent contact with customers, building on the knowledge of customer needs and providing cross-selling opportunities. We are building on our established presence through an extensive global QRC network to provide the immediate parts, service and technical support required to effectively manage and win the aftermarket business created from our installed base. Globalization The globalization business initiative has several facets that include: expanding our global presence to capture business in the developing geographic market areas; utilizing low-cost sourcing opportunities to remain competitive in the global economy; and attracting and retaining the global intellectual capital required to support our global growth plans in new geographical areas. We believe there are attractive opportunities in international markets, particularly in Latin America, the Middle East and Asia-Pacific and intend to continue to utilize our global presence and strategically invest to further penetrate these markets. In the aftermarket services business, we seek to strategically add QRC sites in order to provide rapid response, fast delivery and onsite field repair on a global scale for our customers. In 2008, we added more than 10 QRCs expanding our ability to effectively deliver aftermarket support globally. We believe that future success will be supported by investments made to establish indigenous operations to effectively serve the local market while taking advantage of low cost manufacturing, competent engineering and strategic sourcing where practical. We believe that this positions us well to support our global customers from project conception through commissioning and over the life of their operations. We are focused on shifting, as appropriate, certain manufacturing and engineering functions to, and increasing the supply of materials and components from, lower cost areas such as India, China, Mexico, Latin America and Eastern Europe. In 2008, these low cost regions supplied our three divisions direct materials ranging from 13% to 28% of divisional spending. We are also focused on utilizing supply chain management to reduce procurement costs, including expanding purchases utilizing e-Commerce and further consolidating the procurement of goods at a better value. In addition, we have expanded our China presence with additional sales and supply chain professionals and growth plans. These growth plans include acquisition or development of new capabilities that will enhance the penetration of products in China for oil and gas and power projects, as well as provide a base for the export of products. Process Excellence The process excellence initiative encapsulates ongoing programs that work to drive increased customer fulfillment and yield internal productivity. This initiative includes: driving improved customer fulfillment through metrics such as on-time delivery, cost reduction, quality, cycle time reduction and warranty cost reduction as a percentage of sales; continuing to develop a culture of continuous improvement that delivers maximum productivity and cost efficiencies; and implementing global functional competencies to drive standardized processes. 32 Table of Contents We seek to increase our operational efficiency through our CIP initiative, which utilizes tools such as six sigma methodology, lean manufacturing and capacity management to improve quality and processes, reduce product cycle times and lower costs. Recognizing that employees are our most valuable resource in achieving operational excellence goals, we have instituted broad CIP training. To date, more than 1,400 employees are CIP-trained or certified as Green Belts, Black Belts or Master Black Belts, and are deployed on CIP projects throughout our company in operations and the front office of the business. As a result of the CIP initiatives, we have developed and implemented processes to reduce our engineering and manufacturing process cycle time, improve on-time delivery and service response time, lower inventory levels and reduce costs. We have also experienced success in sharing and applying best practices achieved in one business segment and deploying those ideas to other segments of the business. We continue to rationalize existing Enterprise Resource Planning ( ERP ) systems onto six strategic ERP systems. Going forward, these six strategic ERP systems will be maintained as core systems with standard tool sets, and will be enhanced as needed to meet the growing needs of the business in areas such as eCommerce, back office optimization and export compliance. Further investment in non-strategic ERP systems will be limited to compliance matters and conversion to strategic ERP systems. We also seek to improve our working capital utilization, with a particular focus on improving the management of accounts receivable and inventory. See further discussion in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this MD&A. Portfolio Management We drive our new product and service development through our product management organization, working in concert with engineering, operations and sales. The goal is to increase our revenues from new products and services developed during the last five years. The new product development process has made significant progress in demonstrating a pipeline of new and modified products and services. The continued management of our portfolio of products and services is critical to our success. We will continue to rationalize our portfolio of products and services to ensure alignment with market requirements. We will continue to make research and development ( R&D ) investments to expand the scope of our product offerings and our deployment of advanced technologies. Strategic Acquisitions We continually evaluate acquisitions, joint ventures and other strategic investment opportunities to broaden our product portfolio, service capabilities, geographic presence or operational capabilities to meet the growing needs of our customers. We evaluate all investment opportunities through a decision filtering process to try to ensure a good strategic, financial and cultural fit. In 2008, our acquisition activities focused on the addition of complimentary products and services to key components of our existing portfolio. These activities included the purchase of full ownership of Niigata Worthington Company, Ltd. ( Niigata ) in Japan, which previously was a 50 / 50 joint venture between our pump division and Niigata. We also completed a joint venture arrangement with The Linde Group for the development of its Ionic Compression technology, which will provide a global business in the area of clean fuel refueling technologies. Neither of the foregoing transactions were considered to have involved a significant amount of assets or to be an agreement upon which we are substantially dependent. Organizational Capability We focus on several elements in our strategic efforts to continuously enhance our organizational capability, including: institutionalizing our succession planning along with our leadership competencies and performance management capabilities, with a focus on key positions and critical talent pools; utilizing these capabilities to drive employee engagement through our training programs and facilitate our cross-divisional and functional development assignments; 33 Table of Contents developing talent acquisition programs such as our engineering recruitment program to address critical talent needs to support our emerging markets and global growth; capturing the intellectual capital in the current workforce, disseminating it throughout our company and sharing it with customers as a competitive advantage; creating a total compensation program that provides our associates with equitable opportunities that are competitive and linked to business and individual performance; and building a diversified organization with a strong ethical and compliance culture based on transparency and trust. We continue to focus on training through the distribution of electronic learning packages in multiple languages for our Code of Business Conduct, workplace harassment, facility safety, anti-bribery, export compliance and other regulatory and compliance programs. In addition, in 2006 we launched a rotating equipment specialist development program aimed at capturing internal intellectual capital and improving the capabilities of the internal workforce in an effort to provide better service to our customers. This is a comprehensive program that will continue through 2009 with the goal of educating more than 2,000 of our front line employees across the globe. We also formalized our skilled machinist apprenticeship training program in 2008 to provide trained machinist to support our growth. Technology/Innovation The infusion of advanced technologies into new products and services has become a core goal as we continue to grow and evolve our product portfolio. The objective is to improve the percentage of revenue derived from new products as a function of overall sales, utilizing technological innovation to improve overall product lifecycles and total cost of ownership for our customers. A cross-divisional technology council is in place to explore new technologies and their potential applications in our industry. The team also has the objective of ensuring that the technologies developed are available for wide use across our company to maximize the return on investments. We are actively involved in exploring and commercializing new technologies in five major areas: Materials Science; Fluid Dynamics; Mechanical Design; Mechatronics; and Electronics and Software. As an example, one major focus of our Electronics and Software team is integrating self-diagnostic capabilities into our products that are designed to enable pro-active, condition-based maintenance strategies. This includes a series of innovations that together are able to collect in-service data, intelligently analyze the data in real-time to detect emerging patterns of behavior that may indicate a potential problem, and then communicate pro-active advice to the end user on what actions can be taken to keep the unit in service longer and how to avoid unplanned downtime. In many of our research areas, we are teaming with universities and experts in the appropriate scientific fields to accelerate the required learning and to shorten the development time in leveraging the value of applied technologies in our products and services. Our intent is to be a market leader in the application of advanced technology to improve product performance and return on investment for our customers. OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS As discussed in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 ( Annual Report ), FPD acquired the remaining 50% interest in Niigata, a Japanese manufacturer of pumps and other rotating equipment, effective March 1, 2008, for $2.4 million in cash. The incremental interest acquired was accounted for as a step acquisition, and Niigata results of operations have been consolidated since the date of acquisition. Prior to this transaction, our 50% interest in Niigata was recorded using the equity method of accounting. No pro forma information has been provided due to immateriality. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Outlook for 2009 section included in this MD&A. 34 Table of Contents Bookings and Backlog 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 5,105.7 $ 4,318.7 $ 3,617.0 Backlog (at period end) 2,825.1 2,276.6 1,630.0 We define a booking as the receipt of a customer order that contractually engages us to perform activities on behalf of our customer with regard to manufacture, service or support. Bookings in 2008 increased by $787.0 million, or 18.2%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $181 million (currency effects on bookings are calculated using the change in the average exchange rates for the applicable periods). The increase is attributable to strength in the oil and gas and general industries, especially in FPD, primarily in Europe, the Middle East and Africa ( EMA ), as well as continued strength in the chemical industry, especially in FCD, and the power industry in FPD and FCD and $68.5 million in bookings provided by Niigata. Historically, the fourth quarter has been a strong bookings quarter for us. However, bookings in the fourth quarter of 2008 were lower than bookings in each of the first, second and third quarters of 2008, reflecting our customers responses to concerns regarding recent disruptions in the credit and capital markets, global economic conditions and recent declines in oil and gas prices. Total bookings in 2007 increased by $701.7 million, or 19.4%, as compared with 2006. The increase included currency benefits of approximately $208 million. Increased bookings were primarily attributable to strength in the oil and gas and chemical markets for all of our divisions. Additionally, the power industry continued to be strong for FPD and FCD, and the water and mining industries contributed to the growth in FPD. Backlog represents the accumulation of uncompleted customer orders. Backlog of $2.8 billion at December 31, 2008 increased by $548.5 million, or 24.1%, as compared with 2007. Currency effects provided a decrease of approximately $185 million (currency effects on backlog are calculated using the change in period end exchange rates). The net increase reflects growth in orders for large engineered products, which have longer lead times, and $95.9 million attributable to the acquisition of Niigata. During the fourth quarter of 2008, we had cancellations of $32.2 million, approximately $25 million of which was related to a single booking recorded by FPD in the third quarter of 2008. By the end of 2009, we expect to ship over 87% of our December 31, 2008 backlog. Backlog of $2.3 billion at December 31, 2007 increased by $646.6 million, or 39.7%, as compared with 2006. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $140 million. The increase resulted primarily from increased bookings as discussed above. Sales 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Sales $ 4,473.5 $ 3,762.7 $ 3,061.1 Sales in 2008 increased by $710.8 million, or 18.9%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $113 million. The increase was attributable to strength in the oil and gas and power markets in FPD, primarily in EMA and Asia Pacific, and growth in all markets in FCD, primarily in EMA and Asia Pacific, as well as $87.0 million in sales provided by Niigata. In 2008, original equipment and aftermarket sales increased approximately 22% and 13%, respectively, as compared with 2007. Sales in 2007 increased by $701.6 million, or 22.9%, as compared with 2006. The increase included currency benefits of approximately $178 million. The increase was primarily attributable to continued strength in the oil and gas markets, which positively impacted both original equipment and aftermarket sales for FPD. Additionally, FCD experienced strong project sales across all valve markets and FSD experienced increased aftermarket and project sales in EMA and North America, respectively. In 2007, original equipment and aftermarket sales increased 27% and 18%, respectively, as compared with 2006. Sales to international customers, including export sales from the U.S., were approximately 69% of sales in 2008 compared with 66% of sales in 2007 and 67% of sales in 2006. Sales to EMA were approximately 39%, 38% 35 Table of Contents and 42% in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Sales into the Asia Pacific region were approximately 18%, 16%, and 15% in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Gross profit $ 1,580.3 $ 1,247.7 $ 1,007.3 Gross profit margin 35.3 % 33.2 % 32.9 % Gross profit in 2008 increased by $332.6 million, or 26.7%, as compared with 2007. Gross profit margin in 2008 of 35.3% increased from 33.2% in 2007. The increase is primarily attributable to FPD, whose gross profit margin increased due primarily to improved original equipment pricing implemented in 2007, increased throughput and increased sales, which favorably impact our absorption of fixed manufacturing costs, and reduced warranty costs as a percentage of sales, as well as the impact of CIP initiatives. Additionally, gross profit margin was favorably impacted by specialty pumps, which had a higher margin. Partially offsetting these improvements was the significant growth in original equipment sales. While both original equipment and aftermarket sales increased, original equipment sales growth exceeded that of aftermarket sales growth during 2008. As a result, original equipment sales increased to approximately 65% of total sales as compared with approximately 63% in 2007. Original equipment generally carries a lower margin than aftermarket. Gross profit in 2007 increased by $240.4 million, or 23.9%, as compared with 2006. Gross profit margin in 2007 of 33.2% increased from 32.9% in 2006. Gross profit margin in 2007 was positively impacted by higher sales, which favorably impacted our absorption of fixed manufacturing costs, as well as various CIP and supply chain initiatives. Our CIP initiative drove increased throughput on existing capacity, reduced cycle time, lean manufacturing and reduced warranty costs as a percentage of sales. Our supply chain initiatives focus on materials costs savings through low cost supply sources, long-term supply agreements and product outsourcing. While both original equipment and aftermarket sales increased, the rate of growth of original equipment sales exceeded that of aftermarket sales. As a result, original equipment sales increased to 63% of total sales in 2007, as compared with approximately 62% of total sales in 2006. The aftermarket business generally provides more favorable gross profit margins than original equipment. Selling, General and Administrative Expense ( SG&A ) 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) SG&A $ 984.4 $ 856.5 $ 782.5 SG&A as a percentage of sales 22.0 % 22.8 % 25.6 % SG&A is impacted by growth in our underlying business, various initiatives to improve organizational capability, compliance and systems and infrastructure improvements. SG&A in 2008 increased by $127.9 million, or 14.9%, as compared with 2007. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $21 million. The increase in SG&A is primarily attributable to a $61.5 million increase in selling and marketing-related expenses in support of increased bookings and sales and overall business growth. The increase is also attributable to a $47.0 million increase in other employees costs due to annual and long-term incentive compensation plans, including equity compensation, arising from improved performance and a higher stock price as of the date of grant and annual merit increases, $9.8 million of SG&A incurred by Niigata and a $11.1 million increase in bad debt expense, primarily in FCD, partially offset by a $10.3 million decrease in legal fees and expenses due to legal matters incurred in 2007 that did not recur. SG&A as a percentage of sales in 2008 improved 80 basis points as compared with the same period in 2007, primarily as a result of leverage from increased sales. SG&A in 2007 increased by $74.0 million, or 9.5%, as compared with 2006. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $29 million. The increase in SG&A was primarily attributable to an increase in employee-related costs of $62.8 million due to continued investment in sales and engineering personnel and other in-house capabilities to drive long-term growth, as well as annual merit increases, equity compensation arising from improved performance and a higher stock price and annual and long-term incentive compensation plans, as well as a 36 Table of Contents $7.3 million increase in third party commissions, in support of increased bookings and sales. This was partially offset by a $5.9 million pre-tax gain recorded by FPD on the sale of our non-core assets related to the rail business of our wholly-owned Australian subsidiary, Thompsons, Kelly and Lewis, Pty. Ltd ( TKL ). A decrease of $12.1 million in audit fees was partially offset by an increase of $5.2 million in professional fees related to R&D. Legal fees and accrued resolution costs to governmental authorities related to our foreign subsidiaries involvement with the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program of approximately $11 million were offset by revisions to prior estimates based on favorable developments, as well as recoveries of certain other legal matters. For additional discussion of legal matters, see Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. SG&A as a percentage of sales in 2007 improved 280 basis points as compared with the same period in 2006. The improvement was primarily attributable to leverage from higher sales and the gain on the sale of our TKL rail assets, as well as ongoing efforts to contain costs and the stock modification and realignment charges recorded in 2006 that did not recur. Net Earnings from Affiliates 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Net earnings from affiliates $ 17.0 $ 18.7 $ 14.8 Net earnings from affiliates represents our joint venture interests in Asia and the Middle East. Net earnings from affiliates in 2008 decreased by $1.7 million as compared with 2007. The decrease in earnings is primarily attributable to the impact of the consolidation of Niigata in the first quarter of 2008 when we purchased the remaining 50% interest. Net earnings from affiliates in 2007 increased by $3.9 million as compared with 2006. The improvement in earnings was primarily attributable to an FCD joint venture in India and an FPD joint venture in Japan. Operating Income 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Operating income $ 612.9 $ 409.9 $ 239.6 Operating income as a percentage of sales 13.7 % 10.9 % 7.8 % Operating income in 2008 increased by $203.0 million, or 49.5%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $20 million. The increase is primarily a result of the $332.6 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by the $127.9 million increase in SG&A, discussed above. Operating income in 2007 increased by $170.3 million, or 71.1%, as compared with 2006. The increase included currency benefits of approximately $32 million. The increase was primarily a result of the $240.4 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by the $74.0 million increase in SG&A, discussed above. Interest Expense and Interest Income 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Interest expense $ (51.3 ) $ (60.1 ) $ (65.7 ) Interest income 8.4 4.3 7.6 Interest expense in 2008 decreased by $8.8 million as compared with 2007, primarily as a result of lower average outstanding debt and decreased interest rates. Interest expense decreased by $5.6 million in 2007 as compared with 2006, primarily as a result of lower average outstanding debt. At December 31, 2008 approximately 70% of our debt was at fixed rates, including the effects of $385.0 million of notional interest rate swaps. Interest income in 2008 increased by $4.1 million as compared with 2007 due primarily to a higher average cash balance. Interest income in 2007 decreased by $3.3 million as compared with 2006 due primarily to a lower average cash balance. 37 Table of Contents Other Income, net 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Other income, net $ 20.2 $ 5.9 $ 5.7 Other income, net in 2008 increased by $14.3 million as compared with 2007. This increase is primarily due to an $9.2 million increase in net gains on forward exchange contracts and net gains on transactions denominated in currencies other than our functional currencies, as well as the $2.8 million gain on the bargain purchase of the remaining 50% interest in Niigata, as discussed in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, as well as other individually immaterial items. Other income, net in 2007 was comparable to 2006. Tax Expense and Tax Rate 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Provision for income taxes $ 147.7 $ 104.3 $ 73.2 Effective tax rate 25.0 % 29.0 % 39.1 % The 2008 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to the net impact of foreign operations, which includes the impacts of lower foreign tax rates, changes in our reserves established for uncertain tax positions pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) Financial Interpretation ( FIN ) No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109, benefits arising from our permanent reinvestment in foreign subsidiaries, changes in valuation allowance estimates and a favorable tax ruling in Luxembourg. The net impact of discrete items included in the discussion above was approximately $22 million. The 2007 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to the net impact of foreign operations and changes in valuation allowance estimates, as well as changes in tax law and net favorable results from various tax audits, partially offset by additional reserves established for uncertain tax positions pursuant to our adoption of FIN No. 48. See additional discussion of uncertain tax positions in Note 17 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. The 2006 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to the net impact of foreign operations and certain U.S. non-deductible expenses. We have operations in European and Asian countries that provide various tax incentives. In 2003, we were granted a preferential tax rate of approximately 10% in Switzerland for certain sales and marketing activities. This incentive did not provide a benefit after 2006. During 2004, we received a 5-year, 10% tax rate in Singapore for income in excess of a prescribed base amount generated from certain regional headquarter activities, subject to certain employment and investment requirements. In 2008, the 10% tax rate in Singapore was extended through 2011. In India, we were granted 100% tax exemptions for profits derived from export sales and certain manufacturing operations in prescribed areas for a period of 10 years. The exemption for profits derived from export sales will expire in 2011, and the manufacturing operations exemption expired in 2007. On May 17, 2006, the Tax Increase Prevention and Reconciliation Act of 2005 was signed into law, creating an exclusion from U.S. taxable income for certain types of foreign related party payments of dividends, interest, rents, and royalties which, prior to 2006, have been subject to U.S. taxation. This exclusion is effective for the years 2006 through 2008, and applies to certain of our related party payments. Our effective tax rate is based upon current earnings and estimates of future taxable earnings for each domestic and international location. Changes in any of these and other factors, including our ability to utilize foreign tax credits and net operating losses or results from tax audits, could impact the tax rate in future periods. As of December 31, 2008 we have foreign tax credits of $2.1 million, expiring in 2015 through 2018 against which we recorded $2.1 million in valuation allowances. Additionally, we have recorded other U.S. net deferred tax assets of $114.1 million, which relate to net operating losses, tax credits and other deductible temporary differences that are available to reduce taxable income in future periods, most of which do not have a definite expiration. Should we not be able to utilize all or a portion of these credits and losses, our effective tax rate would be negatively impacted. 38 Table of Contents Net Earnings and Earnings Per Share 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions, except per share amounts) Income from continuing operations $ 442.4 $ 255.8 $ 114.0 Net earnings(1) 442.4 255.8 115.0 Net earnings per share from continuing operations diluted 7.74 4.46 2.00 Net earnings per share diluted 7.74 4.46 2.02 Average diluted shares 57.2 57.3 56.9 (1) Net earnings in 2006 includes a gain of $1.0 million from discontinued operations, representing the reduction in the loss on the sale of certain non-core service operations, collectively called the General Services Group ( GSG ) as a result of the resolution of the contingent sales price. Income from continuing operations in 2008 increased by $186.6 million to $442.4 million, or $7.74 per diluted share, as compared with 2007. The increase is primarily attributable to the $203.0 million increase in operating income, partially offset by the $43.4 million increase in tax expense, as discussed above. Income from continuing operations in 2007 increased by $141.8 million to $255.8 million, or $4.46 per diluted share, as compared with 2006. The increase was primarily attributable to the $170.3 million increase in operating income, partially offset by the $31.1 million increase in tax expense, as discussed above. Other Comprehensive (Expense) Income 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Other comprehensive (expense) income $ (189.9 ) $ 69.0 $ 63.5 Other comprehensive (expense) income in 2008 decreased by $258.9 million to expense of $189.9 million as compared with 2007. This was primarily due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar exchange rate versus the Euro and the British pound at December 31, 2008 as compared with December 31, 2007, as well as a decrease in pension and other postretirement income, which primarily reflects actuarial net losses resulting from returns on plan assets that were lower than anticipated. Other comprehensive (expense) income in 2007 increased by $5.5 million to income of $69.0 million as compared with 2006. The increase was due primarily to the weakening of the U.S. dollar exchange rate versus the Euro during 2007. An increase in pension and other postretirement income, due primarily to an increased discount rate, was mostly offset by a decline in results from interest rate hedging activity. Business Segments We conduct our business through three business segments that represent our major product areas. We evaluate segment performance and allocate resources based on each segment operating income. See Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion of our segments. The key operating results for our three business segments, FPD, FCD and FSD, are discussed below. Flowserve Pump Division Segment Results Through FPD, we design, manufacture, distribute and service engineered and industrial pumps and pump systems and submersible motors (collectively referred to as original equipment ). FPD also manufactures replacement parts and related equipment, and provides a full array of support services (collectively referred to as aftermarket ). FPD has 30 manufacturing facilities worldwide, eight of which are located in North America, 12 in Europe, four in Latin America and six in Asia. FPD also has 79 service centers, including those co-located in a manufacturing facility, in 28 countries. We operate primarily in the oil and gas, chemical and power generation industries. 39 Table of Contents As discussed in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, FPD acquired the remaining 50% interest in Niigata, a Japanese manufacturer of pumps and other rotating equipment, effective March 1, 2008, for $2.4 million in cash. The incremental interest acquired was accounted for as a step acquisition and Niigata results of operations have been consolidated since the date of acquisition. Prior to this transaction, our 50% interest in Niigata was recorded using the equity method of accounting. Flowserve Pump Division 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 3,040.3 $ 2,551.4 $ 2,110.9 Sales 2,514.8 2,095.4 1,617.7 Gross profit 786.0 596.6 457.4 Gross profit margin 31.3 % 28.5 % 28.3 % Segment operating income 391.0 274.2 172.7 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 15.5 % 13.1 % 10.7 % Backlog (at period end) 2,253.1 1,775.3 1,263.3 Bookings in 2008 increased by $488.9 million, or 19.2%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $115 million. The increase is attributable to EMA, North America and Asia Pacific, which increased $251.1 million (including currency benefits of approximately $106 million), $109.3 million and $109.2 million (including currency benefits of approximately $14 million), respectively. Bookings for original equipment and aftermarket increased approximately 20% and 16%, respectively. Original equipment bookings were driven by the oil and gas, power, water and general industries. Niigata provided an increase of $68.5 million to total bookings and represented approximately 14% of the total bookings increase. The bookings increase also includes a project of approximately $85 million to supply a variety of pumps to build the Abu Dhabi Crude Oil Pipeline. These pumps will largely be supplied from our European operations and are scheduled to ship in 2010. Of the $3.0 billion in total bookings in 2008, approximately 49% were from oil and gas, 16% power, 9% water, 8% chemical and 18% general industries. Bookings in 2007 increased by $440.5 million, or 20.9%, as compared with 2006. The increase included currency benefits of approximately $133 million. The increase was attributable to EMA, North America and Latin America, which increased $262.2 million (including currency benefits of approximately $111 million), $106.7 million and $59.6 million (including currency benefits of approximately $5 million), respectively. The highest rates of growth occurred in EMA and Latin America. Both original equipment and aftermarket bookings continued to be strong, increasing 25% and 14%, respectively, as compared with 2006. Increased bookings were led by continued strength in oil and gas, chemical, water and general industry markets. Of the $2.6 billion of total bookings in 2007, approximately 51% were from oil and gas, 15% power, 10% water, 8% chemical and 16% general industries. Sales in 2008 increased by $419.4 million, or 20.0%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $67 million. The increase is primarily attributable to EMA, Asia Pacific and Latin America, which increased $212.9 million (including currency benefits of approximately $51 million), $91.9 million (including currency benefits of approximately $15 million) and $28.6 million (currency had a negligible impact), respectively. Original equipment sales increased by approximately 22%, while aftermarket sales grew by approximately 17% compared to 2007. As noted above, the strong growth in our served markets over the past two years, predominantly oil and gas and power, have been the key drivers of the increases in sales in 2008. The increase in sales is also attributable to increased throughput resulting from capacity expansion, price increases initiated in 2007 and sales of $87.0 million provided by Niigata. Sales in 2007 increased by $477.7 million, or 29.5%, as compared with 2006. The increase included currency benefits of approximately $108 million. The increase was primarily attributable to EMA, North America and Latin America, which increased $300.7 million (including currency benefits of approximately $88 million), $129.5 million and $51.3 million (including currency benefits of approximately $5 million), respectively. The highest rate of growth occurred in Latin America. Both original equipment and aftermarket sales showed continued 40 Table of Contents strength, increasing 38% and 21%, respectively, as compared with the same period in 2006. The increases in EMA and North America were due to strength in the oil and gas industry. Gross profit in 2008 increased by $189.4 million, or 31.7%, as compared with 2007 and includes gross profit attributable to Niigata of $20.9 million. Gross profit margin in 2008 of 31.3% increased from 28.5% in 2007. This increase is primarily due to improved original equipment pricing implemented in 2007, increased throughput and increased sales, which favorably impact our absorption of fixed manufacturing costs, and reduced warranty costs as a percentage of sales, as well as the impact of CIP initiatives. Additionally, gross profit margin was favorably impacted by specialty pumps, which had a higher margin. Partially offsetting these improvements was the significant growth in original equipment sales. While both original equipment and aftermarket sales increased, original equipment growth exceeded that of aftermarket growth during 2008. As a result, original equipment sales increased to approximately 61% of total sales as compared with approximately 60% of total sales in 2007. Original equipment generally carries a lower margin than aftermarket. Gross profit in 2007 increased by $139.2 million, or 30.4%, as compared with 2006. Gross profit margin in 2007 of 28.5% increased from 28.3% in 2006. The increase was primarily attributable to increased sales, which favorably increases our absorption of fixed manufacturing costs, and our ability to implement modest price increases late in 2006, which allowed us to mitigate the impact of increased metals and other supply chain costs. This was partially offset by the significant growth in original equipment sales in 2007. While both original equipment and aftermarket sales increased, original equipment sales growth exceeded the growth in aftermarket for the period. As a result, original equipment sales increased to 60% of total sales as compared with 57% of total sales for the same period in 2006. The aftermarket business generally provides more favorable gross margins than original equipment sales. Operating income in 2008 increased by $116.8 million, or 42.6%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $11 million. The increase was due primarily to increased gross profit of $189.4 million, partially offset by a $69.5 million increase in SG&A (including negative currency effects of approximately $10 million) primarily related to a $24.9 increase in selling and marketing-related expense in support of increased bookings and sales and overall business growth. The increase is also attributable to a $18.9 million increase in other employees costs due to annual and long-term incentive compensation plans, including equity compensation, arising from improved performance and a higher stock price as of the date of grant and annual merit increases and $9.8 million of SG&A incurred by Niigata. Operating margin improved 240 basis points as compared with 2007 due primarily to the increase in gross profit margin of 280 basis points. Operating income in 2007 increased by $101.5 million, or 58.8%, as compared with 2006. The increase included currency benefits of approximately $18 million. The increase was due primarily to increased gross profit of $139.2 million, partially offset by a $40.5 million increase in SG&A. The increase in SG&A was primarily attributable to $22.5 million in higher selling costs, driven by an increase in sales and engineering personnel to support the global growth of our business and increased commissions resulting from increased sales levels, additional total R&D costs of $4.9 million, improvements to our ERP systems and additional compensation expense related to annual and long-term incentive plans. This was partially offset by a $5.9 million pre-tax gain on the sale of our TKL rail assets, which is included in SG&A. SG&A as a percentage of sales in 2007 improved 220 basis points as compared with 2006. The improvement in SG&A was attributable to leverage from higher sales, as well as ongoing efforts to contain costs, the gain on the sale of the TKL rail assets and severance charges recorded in 2006 that did not recur. Backlog of $2.3 billion at December 31, 2008 increased by $477.8 million, or 26.9%, as compared with 2007. Currency effects provided a decrease of approximately $149 million. Backlog growth is a result of an extended period of bookings growth, primarily in original equipment, combined with longer supplier and customer lead times, growth in size of projects and $95.9 million related to the acquisition of Niigata. During the fourth quarter of 2008, FPD had cancellations of $32.0 million, approximately $25 million of which was related to a single booking recorded in the third quarter of 2008. Backlog of $1.8 billion in 2007 increased by $512.0 million, or 40.5%, as compared with 2006. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $114 million. 41 Table of Contents Flow Control Division Segment Results Our second largest business segment is FCD, which designs, manufactures and distributes a broad portfolio of engineered and industrial valves, control valves, actuators, controls and related services. FCD leverages its experience and application know-how by offering a complete menu of engineered services to complement its expansive product portfolio. FCD has a total of 48 manufacturing facilities and QRCs in 23 countries around the world, with only five of its 19 manufacturing operations located in the U.S. Based on independent industry sources, we believe that we are the third largest industrial valve supplier on a global basis. Flow Control Division 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 1,486.4 $ 1,245.7 $ 1,060.9 Sales 1,381.7 1,163.2 994.8 Gross profit 497.7 405.8 338.3 Gross profit margin 36.0 % 34.9 % 34.0 % Segment operating income 218.4 163.7 115.9 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 15.8 % 14.1 % 11.6 % Backlog (at period end) 482.9 414.8 314.3 Bookings in 2008 increased by $240.7 million, or 19.3%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $51 million. The growth in bookings is primarily attributable to strength in EMA and Asia Pacific, which increased approximately $98 million and $89 million, respectively. These regions continue to be a focus for growth opportunities. North America and Latin America combined increased approximately $54 million. Key growth areas include chemicals and nuclear power generation. Of the $1.5 billion of bookings in 2008, approximately 34% were from chemical, 31% from general industries, 18% from oil and gas and 17% from power. Bookings in 2007 increased by $184.8 million, or 17.4%, as compared with 2006. The increase included currency benefits of approximately $56 million. The growth in bookings was primarily attributable to the sustained strength of our key end-markets. Increased project activity in the global oil and gas market, specifically in the Middle East and China, and growth in the pulp and paper market, both in Latin American and Asia, drove improved control valve bookings. Power valve bookings benefited from elevated maintenance repair operations ( MRO ) business for both the nuclear and fossil fuel power generation markets. Bookings improvement in the process valve market resulted from strength in the Chinese coal gasification and purification industries. Growth in China contributed to bookings improvement across all aspects of our valve portfolio. Of the $1.2 billion of bookings in 2007, approximately 33% were from chemical, 35% from general industries, 20% from oil and gas and 12% from power. Sales in 2008 increased by $218.5 million, or 18.8%, as compared with 2007. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $34 million. Asia Pacific, which increased approximately $64 million, continue to show substantial sales growth in the chemical market, especially in China. Sales across our markets in EMA demonstrated solid growth of approximately $79 million. North American sales also produced solid growth of approximately $42 million. Oil and gas market sales reflect steady increases in all regions, especially in EMA. Latin America sales increased approximately $34 million, which was due primarily to growth in the pulp and paper market, which is not expected to continue in the near term. Sales in 2007 increased by $168.4 million, or 16.9%, as compared with 2006. This increase included currency benefits of approximately $52 million. The increase was principally the result of strength in both project and MRO business across all significant areas of our valve portfolio. Continued growth in Asia, particularly in the coal gasification, petrochemical and acetic acid markets, drove improvement in process valve sales. Strong project sales in the oil and gas industry, specifically in North America, the Middle East and China, also contributed to the improvement. Sales of control valves increased due to the satisfaction of large orders in the Australian mining and Asian pulp and paper markets. Increased capacity enabled fulfillment of significant Russian district heating orders placed in the later half of 2006, contributing to the growth in power valve sales. 42 Table of Contents Gross profit in 2008 increased by $91.9 million, or 22.6%, as compared with 2007. Gross profit margin in 2008 of 36.0% increased from 34.9% in 2007. The increase reflects higher sales levels, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed manufacturing costs. Price increases, CIP, materials saving initiatives, investment in new products and increased absorption continue to drive margin improvement and offset the inflationary impact of our raw materials. The impact of metal price increases and transportation fuel surcharges have been minimized through supply chain initiatives. We continue to invest in projects and initiatives designed to improve gross profit margin. Gross profit in 2007 increased by $67.5 million, or 20.0%, as compared with 2006. Gross profit margin in 2007 of 34.9% increased from 34.0% in 2006. The increase reflects the aforementioned higher sales levels, which favorably impacts our leverage of fixed manufacturing costs, increased efficiency as a result of our successful relocation of several product lines in 2006, and strong focus on the successful implementation of various CIP, lean manufacturing and supply chain management initiatives. Gross profit margin was also positively impacted by our ability to implement modest price increases in the first half of 2007, which enabled us to mitigate the impact of increased metals and other supply chain costs. Operating income in 2008 increased by $54.7 million, or 33.4%, as compared with 2007. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $6 million. The increase is primarily attributable to the $91.9 million improvement in gross profit, offset in part by higher SG&A, which increased $38.4 million (including negative currency effects of approximately $7 million). Increased SG&A is primarily due to $17.3 million in higher selling and marketing costs and $4.9 million in increased R&D costs, as well as a $7.3 million bad debt expense related to two customers. Partially offsetting these cost increases is the reversal of a net $2.3 million accrual due to a contract settlement and a $1.2 million increase in net earnings from affiliates generated by our joint venture in India, which is driven by growth in the oil and gas markets in the Middle East. SG&A as a percentage of sales improved 60 basis points, primarily attributable to leverage from increased sales. Operating income in 2007 increased by $47.8 million, or 41.2% as compared with 2006. This increase included currency benefits of approximately $9 million. The increase was primarily attributable to the aforementioned $67.5 million improvement in gross profit, offset in part by higher SG&A costs, which increased $21.7 million (including negative currency effects of approximately $10 million) as compared with the same period in 2006. The increase is principally attributable to the $14.8 million of increased selling costs, primarily related to increased salary and higher external commission expense resulting from increased sales and bookings levels, as well as additional compensation expense related to our annual and long-term incentive plans. Also contributing to the increase was $4.8 million of increased total R&D costs, as well as increased legal fees and expenses related to compliance matters. Partially offsetting these increases was $6.6 million of realignment costs recognized in 2006 that did not recur. SG&A as a percentage of sales in 2007 improved 140 basis points as compared with 2006. The improvement is attributable to leverage from higher sales, as well as ongoing efforts to contain costs and realignment charges recorded in 2006 that did not recur. Backlog of $482.9 million at December 31, 2008 increased by $68.1 million, or 16.4%, as compared with 2007. Currency effects provided a decrease of approximately $21 million. The increase in backlog is primarily attributable to bookings growth in the power and chemical markets and large project business with longer lead times. Backlog of $414.8 million at December 31, 2007 increased by $100.5 million, or 32.0%, as compared with 2006. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $21 million. The increase in backlog was primarily attributable to increased bookings, as discussed above. Flow Solutions Division Segment Results Through FSD, we engineer, manufacture and sell mechanical seals, auxiliary systems and parts, and provide related services, principally to process industries and general industrial markets, with similar products sold internally in support of FPD. FSD has added to its global operations and has ten manufacturing operations, four of which are located in the U.S. FSD operates 74 QRCs worldwide (including six that are co-located in a manufacturing facility), including 24 sites in North America, 19 in EMA, and the remainder in Latin America and Asia. Our ability to rapidly deliver mechanical sealing technology through global engineering tools, locally sited QRCs and on-site engineers represents a significant competitive advantage. This business model has enabled FSD to 43 Table of Contents establish a large number of alliances with multi-national customers. Based on independent industry sources, we believe that we are the second largest mechanical seal supplier in the world. Flow Solutions Division 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 668.8 $ 592.5 $ 505.0 Sales 653.7 564.5 496.6 Gross profit 299.1 252.6 219.0 Gross profit margin 45.8 % 44.7 % 44.1 % Segment operating income 127.3 111.5 98.5 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 19.5 % 19.8 % 19.8 % Backlog (at period end) 118.2 109.4 74.4 Bookings in 2008 increased by $76.3 million, or 12.9%, as compared with 2007. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $15 million. A $65.4 million increase in customer bookings is due primarily to increased original equipment bookings in EMA, North America and Latin America, as well as increased aftermarket bookings in Latin America, North America and Asia Pacific. A $10.9 million increase in interdivision bookings (which are eliminated and are not included in consolidated bookings as disclosed above) also contributed to the increase. Of the $595.8 million of customer bookings in 2008, approximately 45% were from oil and gas, 24% from chemical and 31% from general industries. Bookings in 2007 increased by $87.5 million, or 17.3%, as compared with 2006. This increase included currency benefits of approximately $19 million. A $77.2 million increase in customer bookings was due primarily to increases of $45.3 million and $31.9 million in project and aftermarket bookings, respectively. A $10.3 million increase in interdivision bookings (which are eliminated and are not included in consolidated bookings as disclosed above) also contributed to the increase. All regions have exhibited growth in project type customer bookings, with the strongest rates of growth occurring in the oil and gas and mining markets of North America, Latin America and Asia; in the chemical market of Asia; and in the general industry markets of all regions. Increases in aftermarket customer bookings have occurred primarily in EMA and Asia. Of the $530.3 million of customer bookings in 2007, approximately 45% were from oil and gas, 23% from chemical and 32% from general industries. Sales in 2008 increased by $89.2 million, or 15.8%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $12 million. A $74.0 million increase in customer sales is primarily attributable to increased original equipment sales in EMA, North America and Latin America, as well as to increased aftermarket sales in North America, Latin America and Asia Pacific. A $15.2 million increase in interdivision sales (which are eliminated and are not included in consolidated sales as disclosed above) also contributed to the increase. Sales in 2007 increased by $67.9 million, or 13.7%, as compared with 2006. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $18 million. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in aftermarket customer sales in EMA. Increased customer project sales in North America of $13.8 million, increased project customer sales in Latin America and increased overall customer sales in Asia, as well as a $12.3 million increase in interdivision sales (which are eliminated and are not included in consolidated sales as disclosed above) all contributed to the increase. Gross profit in 2008 increased by $46.5 million, or 18.4%, as compared with 2007. Gross profit margin in 2008 of 45.8% increased from 44.7% in 2007. The improvements reflect the increase in sales, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed manufacturing costs, as well as the impact of cost savings initiatives throughout the year. These improvements were partially offset by a sales mix shift to original equipment business in North America and EMA. Increases in materials costs have largely been offset through supply chain management efforts and price increases in mid-2007 and early 2008. Gross profit in 2007 increased by $33.6 million, or 15.3%, as compared with 2006. Gross profit margin in 2007 of 44.7% increased from 44.1% in 2006. The improvements were due to a slight product shift towards the higher margin aftermarket business in EMA, which combined with a price increase earlier in 2007 and improved 44 Table of Contents absorption of fixed manufacturing costs resulting from higher sales, has offset downward margin pressures related to materials costs and a shift in North American sales towards lower margin project business. Operating income in 2008 increased by $15.8 million, or 14.2%, as compared with 2007. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $3 million. The improvement in 2008 reflects the $46.5 million increase in gross profit discussed above, partially offset by a $30.4 million increase in SG&A (including negative currency effects of approximately $4 million) due primarily to a $15.5 million increase related to sales and engineering and related expenses and approximately $1 million of realignment costs, as well as to increased infrastructure costs to support the global growth of our business. SG&A as a percentage of sales in 2008 increased 100 basis points as compared with 2007, resulting from investment in our global selling footprint and engineering support in anticipation of future sales. Operating income in 2007 increased by $13.0 million, or 13.2%, as compared with 2006. The increase includes currency benefits of $5 million. The improvement in 2007 reflects the $33.6 million increase in gross profit discussed above, partially offset by a $20.4 million increase in SG&A, which was attributable to an $11.5 million increase related to sales and engineering personnel and related expenses to support the global growth of our business; additional compensation related to our annual and long-term incentive plans; and an increase in legal fees and expenses related to compliance matters. SG&A as a percentage of sales in 2007 increased 60 basis points as compared with 2006. The increase was primarily attributable to compliance matters and increased depreciation of information technology upgrades, which is partially offset by increased sales. Backlog of $118.2 million at December 31, 2008 increased by $8.8 million, or 8.0%, as compared with 2007. Currency effects provided a decrease of approximately $5 million. Backlog at December 31, 2008 includes $18.6 million of interdivision backlog (which is eliminated and not included in consolidated backlog as disclosed above). The increase in backlog is primarily a result of the increased original equipment bookings discussed above, which tend to have longer lead times. Capacity expansions in Latin America, Asia Pacific and EMA in 2007 and 2008 have supported significant increases in shipments, helping to limit the increase in backlog. Backlog of $109.4 million at December 31, 2007 increased by $35.0 million, or 47.0%, as compared with 2006. Currency provided an increase of approximately $6 million. Backlog at December 31, 2007 includes $18.1 million of interdivision backlog (which is eliminated and not included in consolidated backlog as disclosed above). LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Cash Flow Analysis 2008 2007 2006 (Amounts in millions) Net cash flows provided by operating activities $ 406.0 $ 417.4 $ 163.2 Net cash flows used by investing activities (117.2 ) (77.1 ) (77.7 ) Net cash flows used by financing activities (182.7 ) (49.8 ) (114.5 ) Cash generated by operations and borrowings available under our existing revolving line of credit are our primary sources of short-term liquidity. Our sources of operating cash generally include the sale of our products and services and the conversion of our working capital, particularly accounts receivable and inventories. Our total cash balance at December 31, 2008 was $471.8 million, compared with $370.6 million in 2007 and $67.0 million in 2006. The cash flows provided by operating activities in 2008 as compared with 2007 primarily reflect a $186.6 million increase in net income and a $178.6 million decrease in cash flows from working capital, primarily due to our investment in inventory of $195.5 million, especially project-related inventory required to support future shipments of products in backlog, higher accounts receivable of $195.1 million, resulting primarily from increased sales, and a $63.9 million reduction in factored receivables. These increases were partially offset by higher accrued liabilities, reflecting increases in advanced cash received from our customers, as well as an increase in accounts payable. Further, operating cash flows in 2008 reflect an increase of $34.7 million in contributions to U.S. pension plans as compared with 2007. The cash flows provided by operating activities in 2007 as compared with 2006 primarily reflected a $140.7 million increase in net income and a $105.3 million increase in cash flows from working capital, particularly 45 Table of Contents due to increased accrued liabilities, reflecting increases in advanced cash received from our customers, which was partially offset by our investment in inventory, especially project-related work in process inventory required to support future shipments of products in backlog. Further, operating cash flows in 2007 reflected a decrease of $20.2 million in contributions to U.S. pension plans as compared with 2006. Our goal for days sales receivables outstanding ( DSO ) is 60 days. For the fourth quarter of 2008, we achieved a DSO of 62 days as compared with 54 days for the same period in 2007. The increase in DSO is attributable to the termination of our major factoring agreements, as discussed below in Accounts Receivable Factoring and in Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Factoring provided a decrease in DSO of six days as of December 31, 2007. For reference purposes based on 2008 sales, a DSO improvement of one day could provide approximately $13 million in cash. Increases in inventory used $195.5 million of cash flow for 2008 compared with $101.8 million and $98.4 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. Inventory turns were 3.6 times at December 31, 2008, compared with 4.4 times at both December 31, 2007 and 2006, reflecting the large increase in inventory, partially offset by the increase in sales. For reference purposes based on 2008 data, an improvement of one turn could yield approximately $180 million in cash. Cash outflows for investing activities were $117.2 million, $77.1 million and $77.7 million in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively, due primarily to capital expenditures. Capital expenditures during 2008 were $126.9 million, an increase of $38.0 million as compared with 2007. In 2008 and 2007, our capital expenditures were focused on increased spending to support increased throughput, ERP application upgrades, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities. Cash outflows in 2008 were partially offset by $7.3 million of proceeds from disposals of assets. Cash outflows for financing activities were $182.7 million in 2008 compared with $49.8 million in 2007 and $114.5 million in 2006. The increase in outflows in 2008 results primarily from the repurchase of common shares for $165.0 million. The decrease in outflows in 2007 resulted primarily from reduced payments on long-term debt, partially offset by the repurchase of common shares and the payment of cash dividends. On February 26, 2008, our Board of Directors authorized an increase in the payment of quarterly dividends on our common stock from $0.15 per share to $0.25 per share payable quarterly beginning on April 9, 2008. On February 23, 2009, our Board of Directors authorized an increase in the payment of quarterly dividends on our common stock from $0.25 per share to $0.27 per share payable quarterly beginning on April 8, 2009. Generally, our dividend date-of-record is in the last month of the quarter, and the dividend is paid the following month. Any subsequent dividends will be reviewed by our Board of Directors on a quarterly basis and declared at its discretion dependent on its assessment of our financial situation and business outlook at the applicable time. On February 26, 2008, our Board of Directors approved a program to repurchase up to $300.0 million of our outstanding common stock, which commenced in the second quarter of 2008. The share repurchase program does not have an expiration date, and we reserve the right to limit or terminate the repurchase program at any time without notice. Since the adoption of this program we have repurchased 1.7 million shares of our common stock for $165.0 million. Our cash needs for the next 12 months are expected to be slightly lower as compared with 2008, resulting from fewer capital expenditures and repurchases of common shares, partially offset by certain realignment costs (as discussed below in Outlook for 2009 ), increases in cash dividends and pension contributions and a smaller volume of advanced payments received from customers. We believe cash flows from operating activities, combined with availability under our revolving line of credit and our existing cash balances, will be sufficient to enable us to meet our cash flow needs for the next 12 months. However, cash flows from operations could be adversely affected by the current credit crisis and risk of a global recession, as well as economic, political and other risks associated with sales of our products, operational factors, competition, regulatory actions, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and fluctuations in interest rates, among other factors. We believe that cash flows from operating activities and our expectation of continuing availability to draw upon our revolving credit agreements are also sufficient to meet our cash flow needs for the periods beyond the next 12 months. 46 Table of Contents Payments for Acquisitions We regularly evaluate acquisition opportunities of various sizes. The cost and terms of any financing to be raised in conjunction with any acquisition, including our ability to raise economical capital, is a critical consideration in any such evaluation. As discussed in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we acquired the remaining 50% interest in Niigata, effective March 1, 2008, for $2.4 million in cash. During 2007, we completed one small acquisition for $2.3 million. During 2006, we completed four small asset acquisitions for an aggregate purchase price of $8.0 million. Assets acquired primarily include inventory, fixed assets and intangible assets. Financing Debt, including capital lease obligations, consisted of: December 31, 2008 2007 (Amounts in thousands) Term Loan, interest rate of 2.99% in 2008 and 6.40% in 2007 $ 549,697 $ 555,379 Capital lease obligations and other borrowings 23,651 2,597 Debt and capital lease obligations 573,348 557,976 Less amounts due within one year 27,731 7,181 Total debt due after one year $ 545,617 $ 550,795 Credit Facilities Our credit facilities, as amended, are comprised of a $600.0 million term loan maturing on August 10, 2012 and a $400.0 million revolving line of credit, which can be utilized to provide up to $300.0 million in letters of credit, expiring on August 10, 2012. We hereinafter refer to these credit facilities collectively as our Credit Facilities. At both December 31, 2008 and 2007, we had no amounts outstanding under the revolving line of credit. We had outstanding letters of credit of $104.2 million and $115.1 million at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, which reduced our borrowing capacity to $295.8 million and $284.9 million, respectively. Borrowings under our Credit Facilities bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (1) the base rate (which is based on greater of the prime rate most recently announced by the administrative agent under our Credit Facilities or the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50%) or (2) London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) plus an applicable margin determined by reference to the ratio of our total debt to consolidated Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ( EBITDA ), which as of December 31, 2008 was 0.875% and 1.50% for borrowings under our revolving line of credit and term loan, respectively. In connection with our Credit Facilities, we have entered into $385.0 million of notional amount interest rate swaps at December 31, 2008 to hedge exposure of floating interest rates. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on our Credit Facilities. European Letter of Credit Facility On September 14, 2007, we entered into an unsecured European Letter of Credit Facility ( European LOC Facility ), which is renewable annually, to issue letters of credit in an aggregate face amount not to exceed 150.0 million at any time. The initial commitment of 80.0 million was increased to 110.0 million, effective September 12, 2008. The aggregate commitment of the European LOC Facility may be increased up to 150.0 million as may be agreed among the parties, and may be decreased by us at our option without any premium, fee or penalty. The European LOC Facility is used for contingent obligations solely in respect of surety and performance bonds, bank guarantees and similar obligations. We had outstanding letters of credit drawn on the European LOC Facility of 104.0 million ($145.2 million) and 35.0 million ($51.1 million) as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. We pay certain fees for the letters of credit written against the European LOC Facility 47 Table of Contents based upon the ratio of our total debt to consolidated EBITDA. As of December 31, 2008, the annual fees equaled 0.875% plus a fronting fee of 0.1%. Debt Prepayments and Repayments We made scheduled repayments under our Credit Facilities of $5.7 million, $2.8 million, and $0 in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. We made no mandatory repayments in 2008 or 2007. Mandatory repayments in 2006 consisted of $14.4 million, using the net cash proceeds from the sale of GSG, and $0.9 million, using excess cash flows as defined by the Credit Facilities. We made no optional prepayments in 2008 or 2007. In 2006, we made optional prepayments of $5.0 million under our Credit Facilities, and we terminated our European Investment Bank Credit Facility and repaid the outstanding principle balance of $85.0 million. We may prepay loans under our Credit Facilities in whole or in part, without premium or penalty, at any time. Accounts Receivable Factoring Through our European subsidiaries, we engaged in non-recourse factoring of certain accounts receivable. The various agreements had different terms, including options for renewal and mutual termination clauses. Our Credit Facilities, which are fully described in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, limited factoring volume to $75.0 million at any given point in time as defined by our Credit Facilities. During the fourth quarter of 2007, we gave notice of our intent to terminate our major factoring facilities during 2008. All factoring agreements were terminated by the third quarter of 2008. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on our accounts receivable factoring. Debt Covenants and Other Matters Our Credit Facilities contain, among other things, covenants restricting our and our subsidiaries ability to dispose of assets, merge, pay dividends, repurchase or redeem capital stock and indebtedness, incur indebtedness and guarantees, create liens, enter into agreements with negative pledge clauses, make certain investments or acquisitions, enter into sale and leaseback transactions, enter into transactions with affiliates, make capital expenditures, or engage in any business activity other than our existing business. Our Credit Facilities also contain covenants requiring us to deliver to lenders our audited annual and unaudited quarterly financial statements and leverage and interest coverage financial covenant certificates of compliance. The maximum permitted leverage ratio is 3.25 times total debt to consolidated EBITDA. The minimum interest coverage is 3.25 times consolidated EBITDA to total interest expense. Compliance with these financial covenants under our Credit Facilities is tested quarterly. Our Credit Facilities include events of default customary for these types of credit facilities, including nonpayment of principal or interest, violation of covenants, incorrectness of representations and warranties, cross defaults and cross acceleration, bankruptcy, material judgments, Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended ( ERISA ) events, actual or asserted invalidity of the guarantees or the security documents and certain changes of control of our company. The occurrence of any event of default could result in the acceleration of our and the guarantors obligations under the Credit Facilities. We complied with all covenants under our Credit Facilities through December 31, 2008. Our European LOC Facility contains covenants restricting the ability of certain foreign subsidiaries to issue debt, incur liens, sell assets, merge, consolidate, make certain investments, pay dividends, enter into agreements with negative pledge clauses or engage in any business activity other than our existing business. The European LOC Facility also incorporates by reference the covenants contained in our Credit Facilities. Our European LOC Facility includes events of default usual for these types of letter of credit facilities, including nonpayment of any fee or obligation, violation of covenants, incorrectness of representations and warranties, cross defaults and cross acceleration, bankruptcy, material judgments, ERISA events, actual or asserted invalidity of the guarantees and certain changes of control of our company. The occurrence of any event of default could result in the termination of the commitments and an acceleration of our obligations under the European LOC Facility. We complied with all covenants under our European LOC Facility through December 31, 2008. 48 Table of Contents Liquidity Analysis Recent disruptions in global financial markets and banking systems are making credit and capital markets more difficult for companies to access, and are generally driving up the costs of newly raised debt. We continue to assess the implications of these factors on our current business and the state of the global economy. While we believe that these financial market disruptions have not directly had a disproportionate impact on our financial position, results of operations or liquidity, continuing volatility in the credit and capital markets could potentially impair our and our customers ability to access these markets and increase associated costs, as well as our customers ability to pay in full and/or on a timely basis. There can be no assurance that we will not be materially adversely affected by the financial market disruptions and the global economic recession as economic events and circumstances continue to evolve. Only 1% of our term loan is due to mature in each of 2009 and 2010. As noted above, our term loan and our revolving line of credit both mature in August 2012. After the effects of $385.0 million of notional interest rate swaps, approximately 70% of our term debt was at fixed rates at December 31, 2008. As of December 31, 2008, we had a borrowing capacity of $295.8 million on our $400.0 million revolving line of credit, and in September 2008 we renewed our unsecured European LOC Facility and increased it from an initial commitment of 80.0 million to a commitment of 110.0 million. We had outstanding letters of credit drawn on the European LOC Facility of 104.0 million as of December 31, 2008. Our revolving line of credit and our European LOC Facility are committed and are held by a diversified group of financial institutions. Further, we increased our cash balance by $101.2 million to $471.8 million as of December 31, 2008 as compared with December 31, 2007, after significant cash uses in 2008, including $165.0 million of share repurchases, $126.9 million in capital expenditures, $51.5 million in dividend payments, $50.8 million in contributions to our U.S. pension plans and the funding of increased working capital requirements. We monitor the depository institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents on a regular basis, and we believe that we have placed our deposits with creditworthy financial institutions. We utilize a variety of insurance carriers for a wide range of insurance coverage and continuously monitor their creditworthiness. Based on current credit ratings by industry rating experts, we currently believe that our carriers have the ability to pay on claims. We have experienced significant declines in the values of our U.S. pension plan assets resulting primarily from recent declines in global equity markets, and we currently anticipate that our contribution to our U.S. pension plan in 2009 will be between $55 million and $75 million. The decline in our U.S. pension plan asset values during 2008 of approximately $86 million, or 30%, will be recognized into earnings over the remaining service period. We have also experienced declines of approximately $15 million, or 11%, in our non-U.S. pension plan asset values. We continue to maintain an asset allocation consistent with our strategy to maximize total return, while reducing portfolio risks through asset class diversification. 49 Table of Contents CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS The following table presents a summary of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2008: Payments Due By Period Beyond 5 Within 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years Years Total (Amounts in millions) Long-term debt $ 5.7 $ 143.5 $ 400.6 $ $ 549.8 Fixed interest payments(1) 8.3 2.7 11.0 Variable interest payments(2) 16.2 32.0 5.4 53.6 Capital lease obligations 0.3 1.1 1.4 Operating leases 45.3 66.4 39.0 33.8 184.5 Purchase obligations:(3) Inventory 649.8 48.6 698.4 Non-inventory 47.5 2.9 1.8 52.2 Pension and postretirement benefits(4) 45.2 93.7 98.3 265.0 502.2 Total $ 818.3 $ 390.9 $ 545.1 $ 298.8 $ 2,053.1 (1) Fixed interest payments represent net incremental payments under interest rate swap agreements. (2) Variable interest payments under our Credit Facilities were estimated using a base rate of three-month LIBOR as of December 31, 2008. (3) Purchase obligations are presented at the face value of the purchase order, excluding the effects of early termination provisions. Actual payments could be less than amounts presented herein. (4) Retirement and postretirement benefits represent estimated benefit payments for our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit plans and our postretirement medical plan, as more fully described below and in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. As of December 31, 2008, the gross liability for uncertain tax positions under FIN No. 48 is approximately $130.8 million. We do not expect a material payment related to these obligations to be made within the next twelve months. We are unable to provide a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of future payments relating to the non-current FIN No. 48 obligations. The following table presents a summary of our commercial commitments at December 31, 2008: Commitment Expiration By Period Beyond 5 Within 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years Years Total (Amounts in millions) Letters of credit $ 339.8 $ 140.4 $ 39.1 $ 6.0 $ 525.3 Surety bonds 27.7 7.0 1.0 35.7 Total $ 367.5 $ 147.4 $ 40.1 $ 6.0 $ 561.0 We expect to satisfy these commitments through performance under our contracts. PENSION AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS OBLIGATIONS Our pension plans and postretirement benefit plans are accounted for using actuarial valuations required by SFAS No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions, and SFAS No. 106, Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions. We consider accounting for retirement plans critical because management is required to make significant subjective judgments about a number of actuarial assumptions, including discount rates, salary growth, long-term rates of return on plan assets, retirement rates, turnover, health care cost trend rates and mortality rates. Depending on the assumptions and estimates used, the pension and postretirement benefit 50 Table of Contents expense could vary within a range of outcomes and have a material effect on reported earnings. In addition, the assumptions can materially affect benefit obligations and future cash funding. Plan Descriptions We and certain of our subsidiaries have defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution plans for regular full-time and part-time employees. Approximately 68% of total defined benefit pension plan assets and 57% of defined benefit pension obligations are related to the U.S. plan as of December 31, 2008. The assets for the U.S. plan are held in a single trust with a common asset allocation. Unless specified otherwise, the references in this section are to total plans (i.e., the U.S. plan together with international plans). Benefits under our defined benefit pension plans are based primarily on years of credited service and on participants compensation. Assets under our defined benefit pension plans consist primarily of equity and fixed-income securities. At December 31, 2008, the estimated fair market value of plan assets for our defined benefit pension plans decreased to $289.0 million from $382.3 million at December 31, 2007. Assets were allocated as follows: U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Asset category 2008 2007 2008 2007 Equity securities 66 % 65 % 47 % 50 % Fixed income 30 % 25 % 51 % 47 % Other 4 % 10 % 2 % 3 % The projected benefit obligation ( Benefit Obligation ) for our defined benefit pension plans was $532.4 million and $555.0 million as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. The estimated prior service benefit for the defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net pension expense in 2009 is $1.3 million. The estimated actuarial net loss for the defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net pension expense in 2009 is $8.9 million. We amortize estimated prior service costs and estimated net loss over the remaining expected service period. None of our common stock is directly held by these plans. We sponsor defined benefit postretirement health care plans covering certain current retirees and a limited number of future retirees in the U.S. These plans provide for medical and dental benefits and are administered through insurance companies. We fund the plans as benefits are paid, such that the plans hold no assets in any period presented. Accordingly, we have no investment strategy or targeted allocations for plan assets. The benefits under the plans are not available to new employees or most existing employees. The postretirement Benefit Obligation for our defined benefit postretirement health care plan was $43.1 million and $62.3 million as of December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Accrual Accounting and Significant Assumptions Consistent with the requirements of SFAS No. 87, we account for pension benefits using the accrual method, recognizing pension expense before the payment of benefits to retirees. The accrual method of accounting for pension benefits necessarily requires actuarial assumptions concerning future events that will determine the amount and timing of the benefit payments. Our key assumptions used in calculating our cost of pension benefits are the discount rate, the rate of compensation increase, and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. We, in consultation with our actuaries, evaluate the key actuarial assumptions and other assumptions used in calculating the cost of pension and postretirement benefits, such as discount rate, expected return on plan assets for funded plans, mortality rates, retirement rates and assumed rate of compensation increases, and determine such assumptions as of December 31 of each year to calculate liability information as of that date and pension and postretirement expense for the following year. Depending on the assumptions used, the pension and postretirement expense could vary within a range of outcomes and have a material effect on reported earnings. In addition, the assumptions can materially affect Benefit 51 Table of Contents Obligations and future cash funding. Actual results in any given year may differ from those estimated because of economic and other factors. See discussion of our assumptions related to pension and postretirement benefits in the Our Critical Accounting Estimates section of this MD&A. In 2008, net pension expense for our defined benefit pension plans included in income from continuing operations was $29.5 million compared with $32.1 million in 2007 and $33.7 million in 2006. The postretirement benefit expense (gain) for the postretirement health care plan was $1.1 million in 2008 compared with $(0.1) million in 2007 and $0.7 million in 2006. The following are assumptions related to our defined benefit pension plans as of December 31, 2008: U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Weighted average assumptions used to determine Benefit Obligations: Discount rate 6.75 % 5.47 % Rate of increase in compensation levels 4.80 3.07 Weighted average assumptions used to determine 2008 net pension expense: Long-term rate of return on assets 8.00 % 4.35 % Discount rate 6.25 5.61 Rate of increase in compensation levels 4.50 3.32 The following provides a sensitivity analysis of alternative assumptions on the U.S. qualified and aggregate non-U.S. pension plans and U.S. postretirement plans. Effect of Discount Rate Changes and Constancy of Other Assumptions: 0.5% 0.5% Increase Decrease (Amounts in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plan: Effect on net pension expense $ (0.9 ) $ 0.9 Effect on Benefit Obligation (11.1 ) 11.5 Non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans: Effect on net pension expense (0.8 ) 1.4 Effect on Benefit Obligation (12.9 ) 14.5 U.S. Postretirement medical plans: Effect on postretirement medical expense 0.1 (0.2 ) Effect on Benefit Obligation (1.3 ) 1.3 Effect of Changes in the Expected Return on Assets and Constancy of Other Assumptions: 0.5% 0.5% Increase Decrease (Amounts in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plan: Effect on net pension expense $ (1.3 ) $ 1.3 Effect on Benefit Obligation N/A N/A Non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans: Effect on net pension expense (1.1 ) 1.1 Effect on Benefit Obligation N/A N/A U.S. Postretirement medical plans: Effect on postretirement medical expense N/A N/A Effect on Benefit Obligation N/A N/A 52 Table of Contents As discussed below, accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. ( GAAP ) provide that differences between expected and actual returns are recognized over the average future service of employees. At December 31, 2008, as compared to December 31, 2007, we increased our discount rate for the U.S. plan from 6.25% to 6.75% based on an analysis of publicly-traded investment grade U.S. corporate bonds, which had a higher yield due to current market conditions. We decreased our average rate for non-U.S. plans from 5.61% to 5.47% based primarily on lower yields of investment grade corporate bonds in the United Kingdom. We increased our average assumed rate of compensation increase from 4.5% to 4.8% for the U.S. plan. We increased the expected rate of return on U.S. plan assets from 7.75% to 8.00%, primarily based on our target allocations and expected long-term asset returns. We decreased our average rate of return on non-U.S. plan assets from 5.91% at December 31, 2007 to 4.35% at December 31, 2008. As the expected rate of return on plan assets is long-term in nature, short-term market changes do not significantly impact the rates. We expect that the net pension expense for our defined benefit pension plans included in earnings before income taxes will be $3.5 million higher in 2009 than the $29.5 million in 2008, reflecting, among other things, the amortization of the increased actuarial net loss. We expect the 2009 benefit for the postretirement health care plan to be $1.8 million, primarily reflecting amortization of the increased actuarial net gain. We have used discount rates of 6.75% and 6.50% at December 31, 2008, in calculating our estimated 2009 cost of pension benefits and cost of other postretirement benefits for U.S. plans, respectively. The assumed ranges for the annual rates of increase in health care costs were 7.8% for 2008, 8.8% for 2007 and 9.0% for 2006, with a gradual decrease to 5.0% for 2012 and future years. If actual costs are higher than those assumed, this will likely put modest upward pressure on our expense for retiree health care. Plan Funding Our funding policy for defined benefit plans is to contribute at least the amounts required under applicable laws and local customs. We contributed $71.0 million, $30.1 million and $45.7 million to our defined benefit plans in 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. In 2009, we expect to contribute between $55 million and $75 million to our qualified U.S. pension plan, and we expect to contribute approximately $13 million to our non-U.S. pension plans. For further discussions on pension and postretirement benefits, see Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The process of preparing financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the use of estimates and assumptions to determine reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of related contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and assumptions are based upon information available at the time of the estimates or assumptions, including our historical experience, where relevant. The most significant estimates made by management include: timing and amount of revenue recognition; deferred taxes, tax valuation allowances and tax reserves; reserves for contingent losses; retirement and postretirement benefits; and valuation of goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets. The significant estimates are reviewed quarterly by management, and management presents its views to the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Because of the uncertainty of factors surrounding the estimates, assumptions and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements, actual results may differ from the estimates, and the difference may be material. Our critical accounting policies are those policies that are both most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments on the part of management in their application, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe that the following represent our critical accounting policies. For a summary of all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Management and our external auditors have discussed our critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. 53 Table of Contents Revenue Recognition Revenues for product sales are recognized when the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the customers, which is based on the contractual delivery terms agreed to with the customer and fulfillment of all but inconsequential or perfunctory actions. In addition, our policy requires persuasive evidence of an arrangement, a fixed or determinable sales price and reasonable assurance of collectability. For contracts containing multiple elements, each having a determinable fair value, we recognize revenue in an amount equal to the element pro rata share of the contract fair value in accordance with the contractual delivery terms for each element. Freight charges billed to customers are included in sales and the related shipping costs are included in cost of sales in our consolidated statements of income. Revenues for long-term contracts, which include contracts that exceed certain internal thresholds regarding the size and duration of the project and provide for the receipt of progress billings from the customer, are recorded on the percentage of completion method with progress measured on a cost-to-cost basis. Percentage of completion revenue represents less than 10% of our consolidated sales in 2008. Revenue on service and repair contracts is recognized after services have been agreed to by the customer and rendered. Revenues generated under fixed fee service and repair contracts are recognized on a ratable basis over the term of the contract. These contracts can range in duration, but generally extend for up to five years. Fixed fee service contracts represent less than 1% of our consolidated sales in 2008. In certain instances, we provide guaranteed completion dates under the terms of our contracts. Failure to meet contractual delivery dates can result in late delivery penalties or non-recoverable costs. In instances where the payment of such costs are deemed to be probable, we perform a project profitability analysis accounting for such costs as a reduction of realizable revenues, which could potentially cause estimated total project costs to exceed projected total revenues realized from the project. In such instances, we would record reserves to cover such excesses in the period they are determined, which would adversely affect our results of operations and financial position. In circumstances where the total projected reduced revenues still exceed total projected costs, the incurrence of unrealized incentive fees or non-recoverable costs generally reduces profitability of the project at the time of subsequent revenue recognition. Our reported results would change if different estimates were used for contract costs or if different estimates were used for contractual contingencies. Deferred Taxes, Tax Valuation Allowances and Tax Reserves We recognize valuation allowances to reduce the carrying value of deferred tax assets to amounts that we expect are more likely than not to be realized. Our valuation allowances primarily relate to the deferred tax assets established for certain tax credit carryforwards and net operating loss carryforwards for U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries, and we evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing the related valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of these allowances, if necessary. We assess such factors as our forecast of future taxable income and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets in determining the sufficiency of our valuation allowances. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income in the applicable tax jurisdictions could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and could result in an increase in our effective tax rate on future earnings. Implementation of different tax structures in certain jurisdictions could, if successful, result in future reductions of certain valuation allowances. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which often result in proposed assessments. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions. We establish reserves for open tax years for uncertain tax positions that may be subject to challenge by various tax authorities. The consolidated tax provision and related accruals include the impact of such reasonably estimable losses and related interest and penalties as deemed appropriate. On January 1, 2007, we adopted FIN No. 48, which addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. Under FIN No. 48, we may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities. The determination is based on the technical merits of the 54 Table of Contents position and presumes that each uncertain tax position will be examined by the relevant taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. FIN No. 48 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods and requires increased disclosures. We believe we have adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these matters, and our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities. To the extent that the expected tax outcome of these matters changes, such changes in estimate will impact the income tax provision in the period in which such determination is made. Reserves for Contingent Loss Liabilities are recorded for various contingencies arising in the normal course of business when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and such loss is estimable. Assessments of reserves are based on information obtained from our independent and in-house experts, including recent legal decisions and loss experience in similar situations. The recorded legal reserves are susceptible to changes due to new developments regarding the facts and circumstances of each matter, changes in political environments, legal venue and other factors. Recorded environmental reserves could change based on further analysis of our properties, technological innovation and regulatory environment changes. Estimates of liabilities for unsettled asbestos-related claims are based on known claims and on our experience during the preceding two years for claims filed, settled and dismissed, and are included in retirement obligations and other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. A substantial majority of our asbestos-related claims are covered by insurance or indemnities. Estimated receivables from insurance carriers for unsettled claims and receivables for settlements and legal fees paid by us for asbestos-related claims are estimated using our historical experience with insurance recovery rates and estimates of future recoveries, which include estimates of coverage and financial viability of our insurance carriers. Estimated receivables are included in other assets, net in our consolidated balance sheets. Changes in claims filed, settled and dismissed and differences between actual and estimated settlement costs and insurance or indemnity recoveries could impact future expense. Pension and Postretirement Benefits We provide pension and postretirement benefits to certain of our employees, former employees, and their beneficiaries. The assets, liabilities and expenses we recognize and disclosures we make about plan actuarial and financial information are dependent on the assumptions used in calculating such amounts. The primary assumptions include factors such as discount rates, health care cost trend rates, inflation, expected rates of return on plan assets, retirement rates, mortality rates, rates of compensation increases and other factors. The assumption rates utilized to compute expense and benefit obligations are shown in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. These assumptions are assessed annually as of December 31 and adjustments are made as needed. In our review we evaluate prevailing market conditions and local laws and requirements in countries where plans are maintained, including appropriate rates of return, interest rates and medical inflation rates. We also compare our significant assumptions with our peers. The methodology to set our assumptions are: Discount rates are estimated using high quality debt securities based on corporate or government bond yields with a duration matching the expected benefit payments. For the U.S. and the United Kingdom, the discount rates are obtained from an analysis of publicly-traded investment-grade corporate bonds to establish a weighted average discount rate for each plan. For plans in the EURO zone we use the most applicable IBOXX Euro corporate AA bond indices. For other countries or regions without a corporate AA bond market, government bond rates are used. Our discount rate assumptions are impacted by changes in general economic and market conditions that affect interest rates on long-term high-quality debt securities, as well as the duration of our plans liabilities. 55 Table of Contents Health care cost trend rates are developed based upon historical retiree cost trend data, long-term health care outlook and industry benchmarks. The inflation assumptions are based upon both our specific trends and nationally expected trends. The expected rates of return on plan assets are derived from reviews of asset allocation strategies, expected long-term performance of asset classes, risks and other factors adjusted for our specific investment strategy. These rates are impacted by changes in general market conditions, but because they are long-term in nature, short-term market changes do not significantly impact the rates. Changes to our target asset allocation also impact these rates. Retirement rates are based upon actual and projected plan experience. Mortality rates are based on published actuarial tables relevant to the countries in which we have plans. The expected rates of compensation increase reflect estimates of the change in future compensation levels due to general price levels, seniority, age and other factors. We evaluate the funded status of each retirement plan using current assumptions and determine the appropriate funding level considering applicable regulatory requirements, tax deductibility, reporting considerations, cash flow requirements and other factors, and discuss our funding assumptions with the Finance Committee of our Board of Directors. Valuation of Goodwill, Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets The initial recording of goodwill and intangibles requires subjective judgments concerning estimates of the fair value of the acquired assets. We test the value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment as of December 31 each year or whenever events or circumstances indicate such assets may be impaired. The test for goodwill impairment involves significant judgment in estimating projections of fair value generated through future performance of each of the reporting units, which correlate to our operating segments. The test of indefinite-lived intangibles involves significant judgment in estimating projections of future sales levels. Impairment losses for goodwill are recognized whenever the implied fair value of goodwill is less than the carrying value. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units based on an income approach, whereby we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make various judgmental assumptions about sales, operating margins, growth rates and discount rates, which are based on our budgets, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows and marketplace data. Assumptions are also made for varying perpetual growth rates for periods beyond the long-term business plan period. We did not record an impairment of goodwill in 2008, 2007 or 2006. We also consider our market capitalization in our evaluation of the fair value of our goodwill. Although our market capitalization declined during 2008 in conjunction with the overall equity market decline, it did not decline to a level that indicated a potential impairment of our goodwill as of December 31, 2008. Impairment losses for intangible assets are recognized whenever the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value. Fair values are calculated for trademarks using a relief from royalty method, which estimates the fair value of the trademarks by determining the present value of the royalty payments that are avoided as a result of owning the trademark. This method includes judgmental assumptions about sales growth and discount rates that are consistent with the assumptions used to determine the fair value of our reporting units discussed above. We did not record an impairment of our trademarks in 2008, 2007 or 2006. The net realizable value of other long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, is reviewed periodically, when indicators of potential impairments are present, based upon an assessment of the estimated future cash flows related to those assets, utilizing a methodology similar to that for goodwill. Additional considerations related to our long-lived assets include expected maintenance and improvements, changes in expected uses and ongoing operating performance and utilization. 56 Table of Contents Due to uncertain market conditions and potential changes in strategy and product portfolio, it is possible that forecasts used to support asset carrying values may change in the future, which could result in non-cash charges that would adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations. ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS We have presented the information about accounting pronouncements not yet implemented in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. OUTLOOK FOR 2009 Our future results of operations and other forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report, including this MD&A, involve a number of risks and uncertainties in particular, the statements regarding our goals and strategies, new product introductions, plans to cultivate new businesses, future economic conditions, revenue, pricing, gross profit margin and costs, capital spending, depreciation and amortization, research and development expenses, potential impairment of investments, tax rate and pending tax and legal proceedings. Our future results of operations may also be affected by the amount, type and valuation of share-based awards granted, as well as the amount of awards forfeited due to employee turnover. In addition to the various important factors discussed above, a number of other factors could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations. See the risks described in Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this Annual Report. Our bookings increased 18.2% in 2008 as compared with 2007, which should translate into increased revenue in 2009, excluding currency fluctuations. However, as a booking represents a contract that can be modified or canceled, there is no guarantee that the increase in bookings will result in a comparable increase in revenues or otherwise be indicative of future results. Through the first 45 days of 2009, we had cancellations of $4.6 million related to orders booked in 2008. Historically, the fourth quarter has been a strong bookings quarter for us. However, bookings in the fourth quarter of 2008 were lower than bookings in each of the first, second and third quarters of 2008, reflecting our customers responses to concerns regarding recent disruptions in the credit and capital markets, global economic conditions and recent declines in oil and gas prices. Also, in response to global economic conditions, some customers have requested delayed shipments, which could delay the timing of our recognition of revenue anticipated to come from our backlog, or delayed project proposals, which could negatively impact our level of bookings in 2009. Although we have not seen a material deterioration in our markets and we believe that our primary markets continue to provide opportunities, we remain cautious in our outlook for 2009 given the activity levels in the fourth quarter of 2008 and the current uncertainty of global economic conditions. For additional discussion on our markets and our opportunities therein, see the Business Overview Our Markets section of this MD&A. We expect our operating income in 2009 to benefit from operational improvement programs, continuation of our end user strategy, selective contract bidding and previously implemented price increases. A number of significant expense and certain other items could negatively impact our operating income in 2009, which include: realignment costs; selected investments in technology infrastructure to consolidate our ERP systems; and higher wage and benefit costs due to inflation and share-based compensation. Although we implemented price increases in 2008 and 2007, we believe that pricing could become a more influential competitive factor in 2009 as compared with recent years. Additionally, the large proportion of original equipment business booked in 2008 by FPD may reduce gross profit margin as those products are shipped in 2009 and beyond. As part of our continuing operational optimization strategy, we are currently evaluating our opportunities to reduce and optimize certain non-strategic manufacturing facilities and our overall cost structure, and we could incur up to $40 million in realignment costs in 2009 as a result of these activities. All of our borrowings under our Credit Facilities carry a floating rate of interest. As of December 31, 2008, we had $385.0 million of derivative contracts to convert a portion of floating interest rates to fixed interest rates to reduce our exposure to interest rate volatility. As a result of reducing the volatility, we may not fully benefit from a decrease in interest rates. We expect our interest expense in 2009 will be slightly more favorable when compared with 2008, given the lower overall interest rate environment. However, because a portion of our debt carries a floating rate of interest, the debt is subject to volatility in rates, which could negatively impact interest expense. Our 57 Table of Contents results of operations may also be impacted by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements. See Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk. We expect to generate sufficient cash from operations to fund our business, capital expenditures, dividend payments, share repurchases, debt payments and pension plan contributions in 2009. We seek to improve our working capital utilization, with a particular focus on improving the management of accounts receivable and inventory, and requiring progress payments from customers on long lead time projects. However, the amount of cash generated or consumed by working capital is dependent on our level of revenues, backlog, customer acceptance and other factors. Additionally, tightening in our end markets may limit our ability to require progress payments from customers on new orders. In 2009, our capital expenditures will be focused on strategic initiatives to pursue new markets, geographic expansion, ERP application upgrades, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities and are expected to be approximately $100 million, before consideration of any acquisition activity. We have $5.7 million in scheduled repayments in 2009 under our Credit Facilities. We expect to comply with the covenants under our Credit Facilities in 2009. See the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this MD&A for further discussion of our debt covenants. The performance of global financial markets in 2008 has reduced the value of investments held in trust to support pension plans. Additionally, U.S. regulations are continually increasing the minimum level of funding for U.S pension plans. The combined impact of these changes will require us to increase our contributions to our pension plans in 2009. We currently anticipate that our minimum contribution to our qualified U.S. pension plan will be between $55 million and $75 million in 2009 in order to reach fully funded status, as defined by the Pension Protection Act, for 2009. We currently anticipate that our contributions to our non-U.S. pension plans will be approximately $13 million in 2009. As we have discussed in this and other public filings, we are currently subject to lawsuits, internal investigations and regulatory investigations in the U.S. and in foreign countries, which could negatively impact our results of operations and cash flows. We believe we are currently addressing these matters appropriately, and we are diligently striving to achieve the most favorable results. See Item 3. Legal Proceedings in this Annual Report for further discussion. We expect that our corporate representatives will, from time to time, meet privately with investors, investment analysts, the media and others, and may reiterate the forward-looking statements contained in this Outlook for 2009 section and elsewhere in this Annual Report, including any such statements that are incorporated by reference in this Annual Report. At the same time, we will keep this Annual Report and our most current business outlook publicly available on the Investor Relations section of our website (www.flowserve.com). Statements in the Business Outlook and other forward-looking statements in this Annual Report are subject to revision during the course of the year in our quarterly earnings releases and SEC filings and at other times. 
