CIK: 30625
Company Name: FLOWSERVE CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-03-01


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion and analysis is provided to increase the understanding of, and should be read in conjunction with, the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. Please see Risk Factors and Forward-Looking Statements sections for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements. Unless otherwise noted, all amounts discussed herein are consolidated. EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW We are an established leader in the fluid motion and control business, with a strong portfolio of pumping systems, valves, sealing solutions, automation and services in support of the oil and gas, chemical, power generation, water treatment and general industrial markets. These products are integral to the movement, control and protection of fluids in customers critical processes, whether it is a refinery, a power generation facility or a transportation pipeline. Our business model is heavily influenced by the capital spending of these industries for the placement of new products into service and for maintenance on existing facilities. The worldwide installed base of our products is another important source of revenue, where products are expected to ensure the maximum operating time of many key industrial processes. The aftermarket business includes parts, service solutions, product life cycle solutions and other value added services, and is generally a higher margin business and a key component to our profitable growth. We have experienced favorable conditions in 2006 in several of our core markets, specifically oil and gas. The rise of the price of crude oil and natural gas, in particular, has spurred capital investment in the oil and gas market, resulting in many new projects and expansion opportunities. Favorable market conditions have resulted in corresponding growth, much of which is in non-traditional areas of the world where new oil and gas reserves have been discovered. We believe the outlook for our business remains favorable; however, we believe that oil and gas prices will fluctuate in the future and such volatility could have a negative impact on our business in some or all of the geographical areas in which we conduct business. We and our customers are seeing rapid growth in the Middle East and Asia, with China providing a significant source of project growth. We continue to execute on our strategy to increase our presence in all of these regions to capture aftermarket business through the current installed base, as well as new projects and process plant expansions. The opportunity to increase the installed base of new products and drive recurring aftermarket business in future years is a critical by-product of these favorable market 29 Table of Contents conditions. Although we have experienced strong demand for our products and services in recent periods, we face challenges affecting many companies in our industry and/or with significant international operations. We currently employ approximately 14,000 employees in more than 55 countries who are focused on six key strategies that reach across the business. See Our Strategies section of this Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) for a discussion of our six key strategies. We continue to build on our geographic breadth with the implementation of additional Quick Response Centers ( QRCs ) with the goal to be positioned as near to the customers as possible for service and support in order to capture this important aftermarket business. Along with ensuring that we have the local capability to sell, install and service our equipment in remote regions, it becomes equally imperative to continuously improve our global operations. Our global supply chain capability is being expanded to meet global customer demands and ensure the quality and timely delivery of our products. Significant efforts are underway to reduce the supply base and drive processes across the divisions to find areas of synergy and cost reduction. In addition, we are improving our supply chain management capability to ensure it can meet global customer demands. We continue to focus on improving on-time delivery and quality, while reducing warranty costs across our global operations through a focused Continuous Improvement Process ( CIP ) initiative. The goal of the CIP initiative is to maximize service fulfillment to customers such as on-time delivery, reduced cycle time and quality at the highest internal productivity. This program is a key factor in our margin expansion plans. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS Legal and Regulatory Matters On February 7, 2006, we received a subpoena from the SEC seeking documents and information relating primarily to products that two of our foreign subsidiaries delivered to Iraq from 1996 through 2003 under the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program. We believe that the SEC investigation is focused primarily on whether any inappropriate payments were made to Iraqi officials in violation of the federal securities laws. The investigation includes periods prior to, as well as subsequent to, our acquisition of the foreign operations involved in the investigation. We may be subject to certain liabilities if violations are found regardless of whether they relate to periods before or subsequent to our acquisition. In addition, the two foreign subsidiaries have been contacted by governmental authorities in their respective countries concerning their involvement in the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program. We are unable to predict how the foreign governmental authorities will pursue either of these matters in the future. We believe that the SEC and the foreign governmental authorities are also investigating other companies in connection with the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program. We engaged outside counsel in February 2006 to conduct an investigation of our foreign subsidiaries participation in the United Nations Oil-for-Food program. The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors has been regularly monitoring this situation since the receipt of the SEC subpoena and assumed direct oversight of the investigation in January 2007. We currently expect the investigation will be completed during the second quarter of 2007. Our investigation has included, among other things, a detailed review of contracts with the Iraqi government under the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program during 1996 through 2003, a forensic review of the accounting records associated with these contracts, and interviews of persons with knowledge of the events in question. Our investigation has found evidence to date that, during the years 2001 through 2003, certain non-U.S. personnel at the two foreign subsidiaries authorized payments in connection with certain of our product sales under the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program totaling approximately 0.6 million, which were subsequently deposited by a third party into Iraqi-controlled bank accounts. These payments were not authorized under the United Nations Oil-for-Food Program and were not properly documented in the subsidiaries accounting records but were expensed as paid. During the course of the investigation, certain other potential issues involving non-U.S. personnel were identified at one of the foreign subsidiaries, which are currently under review. We have taken certain disciplinary actions against persons who engaged in wrongful conduct, violated our ethics policies or failed to cooperate fully in the investigation, including terminating the employment of certain 30 Table of Contents non-U.S. senior management personnel at one of the foreign subsidiaries. Certain other non-U.S. senior management personnel at that facility involved in the above conduct had been previously separated from our company for other reasons. We will continue to fully cooperate in both the SEC and the foreign investigations. The investigations are in progress but, at this point, are incomplete. Accordingly, if the SEC and/or the foreign authorities take enforcement action with regard to these investigations, we may be required to pay fines, disgorge profits, consent to injunctions against future conduct or suffer other penalties which could potentially materially impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. In March 2006, we initiated a process to determine our compliance posture with respect to U.S. export control laws and regulations. Upon initial investigation, it appeared that some product transactions and technology transfers were not necessarily in full compliance with U.S. export control laws and regulations. As a result, in conjunction with outside counsel, we are currently involved in a systematic process to conduct further review, validation, and voluntary disclosure of certain apparent export violations discovered as part of this review process. We currently believe this process will not be substantially complete until the first quarter of 2008, given the complexity of the export laws and the current scope of the investigation. Any violations of U.S. export control laws and regulations that are identified and disclosed to the U.S. government may result in civil or criminal penalties, including fines and/or other penalties. Because our review into this issue is ongoing, we are currently unable to determine the full extent of any confirmed violations or determine the nature or total amount of potential penalties to which we might be subject to in the future. Given that the resolution of this matter is uncertain at this time, we are not able to reasonably estimate the maximum amount of liability that could result from final resolution of this matter. We cannot currently predict whether the ultimate resolution of this matter will have a material adverse effect on our business, including our ability to do business outside the U.S., or on our financial condition. Other matters On September 29, 2006, our Board of Directors authorized a program to repurchase up to two million shares of our outstanding common stock. Shares may be repurchased to offset potentially dilutive effects of stock options issued under our equity-based compensation programs. We commenced the program in October 2006 and repurchased 1.3 million shares for $68.4 million during the fourth quarter of 2006. Subsequent repurchases as of February 26, 2007 have totaled 0.5 million shares for $25.0 million. We expect to conclude the program by the end of the second quarter of 2007. BUSINESS OVERVIEW Our Company We believe that we are a world-leading manufacturer and aftermarket service provider of comprehensive flow control systems. We develop and manufacture precision-engineered flow control equipment such as pumps, valves and seals, for critical service applications that require high reliability. We use our manufacturing platform to offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. Operations are conducted through three business segments that are referenced throughout this document: Flowserve Pump Division ( FPD ): engineered pumps, industrial pumps and related services; Flow Control Division ( FCD ): industrial valves, manual valves, control valves, nuclear valves, valve actuators and controls and related services; and Flow Solutions Division ( FSD ): precision mechanical seals and related products and services. Our product portfolio is built on more than 50 well-respected brand names such as Worthington, IDP, Valtek, Limitorque, and Durametallic. This portfolio is believed to be one of the most comprehensive in the industry. The products and services are sold either directly or through designated channels to more than 10,000 companies, including some of the world leading engineering and construction firms, original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ), distributors and end users. 31 Table of Contents Our Markets Our products and services are used in several distinct industries: oil and gas, chemical, power generation and water treatment, as well as a number of other industries that are collectively refer to as general industries. Demand for most of our products depends on the level of new capital investment and planned maintenance expenditures by our customers. The level of capital expenditures depends, in turn, on the general economic conditions, which are related to the phase of the cycle in their industries and the expectations of future market behavior. The levels of maintenance spend are driven by the reliability of the equipment, planned downtimes for maintenance and the required capacity utilization of the process. The oil and gas industry represented approximately 43% and 35% of our bookings in 2006 and 2005, respectively. High petroleum prices generally drove additional investment in upstream (exploration and production) petroleum projects and significantly contributed to the increase in bookings. Many of these projects were in Asia, Africa, the Middle East and South America and reflect opportunities with national, international, and other major oil companies. Based on the current and future expectations of oil and gas price levels as compared to historical levels, oil and gas companies are encouraged to evaluate new resources, new technologies and explore different options such as oil sands, deepwater, heavy oil and the Arctic region. In the downstream segment of the industry (refining and transportation), high crude oil prices have historically reduced the demand for our products and services from crude oil refineries and natural gas processors as they sought to take advantage of favorable refining margins by operating at high levels of capacity utilization and deferring maintenance. The current global demand for larger amounts of oil and oil derivatives has been stimulated by the rapid economic growth in developing countries and general growth in the rest of the world. The available refining capacity is not currently adequate to meet the market demand for refined products. The refineries are additionally pressured by new clean fuel regulations, which result in activities such as revamps and upgrades to address these environmental concerns. These situations have been positive for our products as oil and gas companies try to address the supply to the market with increased capacity and the right quality of products to meet tightening regulations. Output of the worldwide chemical industry during 2006 expanded slightly as compared with 2005. This was mirrored in increased capacity utilization rates in key chemical producing countries such as the United States ( U.S. ) and Germany, which recovered modestly throughout 2006. The good growth in profitability among major chemical companies and a legacy of underinvestment from 2000 to 2003 encouraged increased global capital expenditure by the chemical industry during 2006. The growth in the U.S. chemical industry, however, was slower than in 2005. In contrast, Asia-Pacific, (particularly China) continues to be a major focus of investment for the chemical industry. Although the global chemical industry is in a more mature phase of its cycle, output growth predictions provided by independent third parties for 2007 are modestly higher than for 2006. We are also seeing increased opportunities in alternative energy sources such as ethanol. We believe this and the forecasted growth in capital expenditures should help sustain continuing healthy demand for our products from this industry. The chemical industry represented approximately 15% and 18% of our bookings in 2006 and 2005, respectively. Early in 2006, high natural gas prices diminished the profitability of many power generators that in recent years made significant investments in power plants fueled by natural gas. The profitability of these power generators improved throughout 2006, as natural gas prices trended lower. The power generators have been able to recover a portion of their higher costs through rate increases, but their liquidity is still challenged due to overinvestment in these power facilities in recent years and volatility in natural gas prices. This volatility has led to a renewed interest in coal and nuclear generation plants. A number of nuclear power generators are planning significant maintenance activities. We have seen an increase in orders in this industry, and it has been a positive contributor to 2006 bookings, sales and earnings. In addition, there are several coal-fired power plants planned for the U.S. and China, and we are actively pursuing the flow control opportunities for these projects. The revenue opportunity for products at a coal-fired plant typically can be three times that of a natural gas power plant. We are also seeing increased activity in alternative energy sources such as geothermal. The power industry represented approximately 13% and 14% of our bookings in 2006 and 2005, respectively. 32 Table of Contents Worldwide demand for fresh water and water treatment continues to create demand for new facilities or for upgrades of existing systems, many of which require products that we offer, especially pumps. We believe we are a global leader in the desalination market, which is an important source of fresh water in the Mediterranean area and the Middle East. We expect that this trend in desalination will expand from the traditional areas, as previously mentioned, to other coastal areas around the globe. This is a significant market for pump and valve actuation products. In 2006 and 2005, the water market represented approximately 6% and 7%, respectively, of our bookings. General industries comprises a variety of different businesses, including mining and ore processing, pulp and paper, food and beverage, and other smaller applications, none of which individually represents more than 5% of total bookings in 2006 and 2005. General industries represented approximately 23% and 26% of our bookings in 2006 and 2005, respectively. We saw some improvement in these businesses in 2006, most notably mining and ore processing and expect stable growth in 2007. Our customers include engineering contractors, OEMs, end users and distributors. Sales to engineering contractors and OEMs are typically for large project orders, as are certain sales to distributors. Project orders generally have lead times in excess of three months. Project orders are typically procured for customers either directly from us or indirectly from contractors for new construction projects or facility enhancement projects. The quick turnaround business, which we also refer to as the book and ship business, is defined as orders that are received from the customer (booked) and shipped within three months of receipt. These orders are typically for more standard products, parts or services. Each of our three business segments generates certain levels of this type of business. We use our manufacturing platform to offer a broad array of aftermarket equipment services such as installation, advanced diagnostics, repair and retrofitting. Timelines of delivery, quality and the proximity of service centers are important considerations for aftermarket products and services. In geographic regions where we are positioned to provide quick response, we believe customers have traditionally relied on us, rather than our competitors, for aftermarket products due to our highly engineered and customized products. However, the aftermarket for standard products is very competitive, and price competition has generally been increasing. Price competition tends to be less significant for OEMs than aftermarket services and OEM prices have generally been increasing due to decreased levels of supply availability. In the sale of aftermarket products and services, we benefit from a large installed base of pumps, seals and valves, which require maintenance, repair and replacement parts. The reporting of trends by product type, customer type and business type is based upon analytical review of individual operational results and knowledge of their respective businesses, as we do not formally track revenues by any of these categories. These trends are analyzed as a secondary reporting mechanism that is not derived directly from our general ledger system. Our Strategies Our overarching objective is to grow our position as a product and integrated solutions provider in the flow control industry. This objective includes continuing to sell products by building on existing sales relationships and marketing the power of our portfolio of products and services. It also includes delivering specific end- user solutions that help customers attain their business goals by ensuring maximum reliability at a decreased cost of ownership. Sustainable, profitable growth is being driven using six strategies that are well communicated throughout our company. These strategies include: organic growth, globalization, process excellence, portfolio management, organizational capability and technology/innovation. The key elements of these strategies are outlined below. Organic Growth Organic growth is an important initiative focused on growing revenues from the existing portfolio of products and services, as well as through the development of new customer-driven products and services. An overarching goal is to focus on opportunities that can maximize the organic growth from existing customers and to evaluate potential new customer-partnering initiatives that maximize the capture of the product total life cycle. We are one of the few pump, valve and seal companies that can offer customers a differentiated option of products and services as well as offer an additional option that includes any combination of products and solution support packages across 33 Table of Contents a very broad portfolio. The combined pump and seal end-user teams have historically been particularly successful in delivering new solution programs and increasing organic aftermarket growth. We seek to capture additional market share by creating mutually beneficial opportunities for us and our customers through sourcing and maintenance alliance programs pursuant to which we provide all or an agreed portion of customers parts and servicing needs. These customer alliances enable us to develop long-term professional relationships with our customers and serve as an effective platform for introducing new products and services to our customers and generating additional sales. We also seek to continue to review the substantial installed pump, seal and valve base as a means to expand the aftermarket services business, as customers are increasingly using third-party aftermarket service providers to reduce their fixed costs and improve profitability. To date, the aftermarket services business has provided us with a steady source of revenues and cash flows at higher margins than original equipment sales. This allows us to be in frequent contact with customers, building on the knowledge of customer needs and providing cross-selling opportunities. We are building on our established presence through an extensive QRC global network to provide the immediate parts, service and technical support required to effectively manage and win the aftermarket business from the installed base. New product and service development is driven through our product management organization, working in concert with engineering, operations and sales. The goal is to increase our revenues from new products and services developed during the last five years. The new product development process has made significant progress in demonstrating a pipeline of new and modified products and services. We expect our research and development costs to increase in 2007 to support the goal of increased revenues from new products and services. Globalization The globalization business initiative has several facets that include: expanding our global presence to capture business outside the traditional geographic market areas (China, Russia, South America, Middle East and Africa); utilizing low-cost sourcing opportunities to remain competitive in the global economy; and attracting and retaining the global intellectual capital required to support our global growth plans in the new geographical areas. We believe there are attractive OEM opportunities in international markets, particularly in South America, the Middle East and Asia-Pacific and intend to continue to utilize our global presence to further penetrate these markets. In 2006 we signed an agreement for a joint venture in Saudi Arabia with Al Rushaid Group to develop a full service repair facility and training school in support of the region. A manufacturing facility lease was signed for a joint pump, seal and valve facility in Suzhou, China and construction was initiated on a new pump facility in Coimbatore, India. The former pump facility in Bangalore will be used by our valve division to expand its local footprint. The work force at our engineering center in Chennai, India was expanded, as well as at our facilities in China. In the aftermarket services business, we seek to strategically add sites as the customers and the customer base grows in order to provide rapid response, fast delivery and onsite field repair. A number of new QRC have been added in 2006. We are focused on shifting, as appropriate, certain manufacturing and engineering functions to, and increasing the supply of materials and components from, lower cost areas such as India, China, Mexico, South America and Eastern Europe. In 2006 these areas accounted for approximately 20% of our direct material spending, compared to approximately 5% in 2001. We are focused on utilizing supply chain management to reduce procurement costs, including expanding purchases through reverse auctions and further consolidating the procurement of goods at a better value. In addition, we have expanded our China presence with additional sales and supply chain professionals, new management and growth plans. These growth plans include acquisition or development of new capabilities that will 34 Table of Contents enhance the penetration of products in China for oil and gas and power projects, as well as provide a base for the export of products. Process Excellence The process excellence initiative encapsulates ongoing programs that drive increased customer fulfillment at the lowest cost, or internal productivity. This initiative includes: driving improved customer fulfillment across our company through metrics such as on-time delivery, cost reduction, quality, cycle time reduction and warranty cost reduction; continuing to develop a culture of continuous improvement that delivers maximum productivity and cost efficiencies across our company; and implementing consistent processes across our company to ensure future success as an integrated company. We seek to increase our operational efficiency through our CIP initiative, which utilizes tools such as Six Sigma methodology, lean manufacturing and constraint management to improve quality and processes, reduce product cycle times and lower costs. Recognizing that employees are our most valuable resource in achieving operational excellence goals, we have instituted broad CIP training. To date, more than 1,000 employees are CIP-trained or certified as Green Belts or Black Belts and are deployed on CIP projects throughout our company in operations and the front office of the business. As a result of the CIP initiatives, we have developed and implemented processes to reduce our engineering and manufacturing process cycle time, improve on-time delivery and service response time, lower inventory levels and otherwise reduce costs. We have also experienced success in sharing and applying best practices achieved in one of our business segments and deploying those ideas to other segments of the business. We are actively working to standardize processes and simplify our information technology platform. To date, standard processes have been designed and agreed to by our Manufacturing, Supply Chain, Sales and Service and Finance departments, creating a standard blueprint for our company. Implementation of these processes using a common enterprise resource planning ( ERP ) software platform has been completed in two sites, with four sites currently in the last stages of preparation for implementation. Several additional sites are in the planning stages. We seek to continue to improve our working capital utilization, with a particular focus on improving the management of accounts receivable and inventory. See further discussion in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this MD&A. Portfolio Management The continued management of our portfolio of products and services is critical to our success. While we will continue to pursue selective acquisitions, we have been focused on smaller niche additions to the portfolio and rationalizing the current portfolio of products and services to ensure alignment with customers. We intend to continue to evaluate acquisition, joint ventures and other investment opportunities as we seek to broaden our product portfolio and operational capabilities and to expedite expansion into the faster growing Asian, African and South American markets. During the past year, we took advantage of smaller niche opportunities that helped round out our presence or filled small gaps in the portfolio. These smaller acquisitions included current and non-current assets and intellectual property. Product management teams also continue to work to streamline the portfolio by rationalizing products that competed internally, had been superseded by new products or were not able to reach internal rates of return. Organizational Capability We believe there are several elements to building an enhanced organizational capability, including: developing a deeper internal talent pool through training and cross-divisional and functional assignments to allow our company the flexibility to grow and expand the organization; 35 Table of Contents capturing the intellectual capital in the current workforce, as well as that of the customers, and being able to share it within our company and with customers as a competitive advantage; developing talent acquisition programs to address critical talent needs to support our global growth, and building an organization with strengthened compliance to mandatory and recommended processes and procedures and implementing the information systems that ensure compliance. We continue to focus on training through the distribution of electronic learning packages in multiple languages for our Code of Business Conduct, workplace harassment, facility safety, export compliance and other regulatory and compliance programs throughout our company. In addition, in 2006 we launched a new rotating equipment specialist program aimed at capturing internal intellectual capital and improving the capabilities of the internal workforce in an effort to provide better service to our customers. This is a very comprehensive program that will continue through 2007 and 2008 with the goal of educating more than 2,000 of our front line employees across the globe. Technology/Innovation The infusion of new product technologies has become a core requirement as we evaluate the development of new products and services. The objective is to improve the percentage of new products as a function of revenue during the next five years with the investment in technology being a critical part of success. In 2006, a number of opportunities were pursued in technology for smart equipment, energy efficiency of products, use of radio frequency identification, advanced technology for monitoring wear, sub-sea and geothermal technologies, as well as developing new products to meet the demands of customers. This investment in technology will continue to increase in 2007. A cross-divisional technology team is in place to ensure that the technologies developed are available for wide use across all divisions to maximize the return on investments. The primary application of advanced technology is in adding self-diagnostic capabilities into our products. This includes the intelligence required to provide customers with advanced warning of required maintenance, allowing their operations to reach optimal productivity. OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Effective December 31, 2006, we changed our method of accounting for U.S. inventories from the last-in, first-out method to the first-in, first-out ( FIFO ) method. In accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 154, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections, we have retrospectively adjusted prior interim and annual periods to reflect the results and balances that would have been reported had we applied the FIFO method of accounting for inventories for all periods presented in this MD&A and in the consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2006 ( Annual Report ). The impact of the change in accounting principle increased net earnings for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 by $6.0 million, $5.2 million and $2.9 million, respectively, or $0.10, $0.09 and $0.06 per diluted share, respectively, and increased both total assets and total shareholders equity at December 31, 2005 by $21.6 million. See additional detail in Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. As a result of selling certain non-core service operations, collectively called the General Services Group ( GSG ), which was previously included in FCD, in December 2005, and our Government Marine Business Unit ( GMBU ), an FPD business, in November 2004, we treated these dispositions as discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2005 and 2004. The gain of $1.0 million from discontinued operations in 2006 represents the reduction in the loss on the sale of GSG as a result of the resolution of the contingent sales price. The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, increased $32.7 million in 2005, compared to a loss of $1.7 million in 2004. The increase is due primarily to the impairment of certain assets owned by GSG, which is more fully discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. 36 Table of Contents Bookings and Backlog 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Bookings continuing operations $ 3,617.0 $ 2,931.9 $ 2,524.8 Bookings discontinued operations 90.4 132.6 Total bookings 3,617.0 3,022.3 2,657.4 Backlog (at period end) 1,630.0 994.1 836.4 We define a booking as the receipt of a customer order that contractually engages us to perform activities on behalf of our customer with regard to manufacture, service or support. Bookings for continuing operations in 2006 increased $685.1 million, or 23.4%, as compared with the same period in 2005. Total bookings in 2006 increased by $594.7 million, or 19.7%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $24 million. Total bookings in 2005 include $90.4 million of bookings for GSG, a discontinued operation that was sold effective December 31, 2005. Increased bookings are primarily attributable to strength in the oil and gas industry, which has positively impacted each of our divisions, particularly in North America and the Middle East. The power, chemical and water treatment industries have also contributed to the improvement. Bookings for continuing operations in 2005 increased by $407.1 million, or 16.1%, as compared with 2004. Total bookings in 2005 increased by $364.9 million, or 13.7%, as compared with 2004. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $10 million. Total bookings in 2005 and 2004 include $90.4 million and $116.1 million, respectively, of bookings for GSG. Total bookings in 2004 also includes $16.6 million of bookings for GMBU, a discontinued operation that was sold effective November 2004. Bookings for Thompsons, Kelly and Lewis, Pty. Ltd ( TKL ), which was acquired in March 2004, increased $28.8 million in 2005 as compared with 2004. Increased bookings are also attributable to improved bookings in Europe, the Middle East and Africa ( EMA ) for FPD and improved bookings in Asia Pacific for FPD and FCD. Establishment of customer alliances has resulted in increased bookings in FSD as described below. Bookings have also been positively impacted by continued strength in the oil and gas industry and recovery of major valve markets. Backlog represents the accumulation of uncompleted customer orders. Amounts presented above include backlog related to discontinued operations of $0, $0 and $11.2 million for 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Backlog of $1.6 billion at December 31, 2006 increased by $635.9 million, or 64.0%, as compared with 2005. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $101 million. The increase resulted primarily from increased bookings as discussed above. The increase in total bookings reflects an increase in orders for engineered products, which naturally have longer lead times, as well as expanded lead times at the request of certain customers. By the end of 2007, we expect to ship over 85% of this backlog. Backlog of $994.1 million at December 31, 2005 increased by $157.7 million, or 18.9%, as compared with 2004. Currency effects provided a decrease of approximately $67 million. The increase in backlog is primarily attributable to the strong bookings performance in 2005, as well as an increase in large oil and gas project orders in EMA for FPD. Sales 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Sales $ 3,061.1 $ 2,695.3 $ 2,522.5 Sales in 2006 increased by $365.8 million, or 13.6%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $39 million. The increase in sales is primarily attributable to continued strength in the oil and gas industry, particularly in North America and the Middle East, which has significantly impacted FPD and FCD. FCD has also been positively impacted by strength in the process valve industry, particularly in Asia. Additional capacity has enabled FSD to increase its aftermarket sales. Sales in 2005 increased by $172.8 million, or 6.9%, as compared with 2004. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $8 million. The increase in sales is attributable to all three of our segments and primarily 37 Table of Contents due to continued growth in the oil and gas industry, which has positively impacted FPD and FSD, and the continued recovery and strengthening of major valve markets. Sales to international customers, including export sales from the U.S., were approximately 67% of sales in 2006 compared with 65% of sales in 2005 and 68% of sales in 2004. Sales to EMA were approximately 42%, 39% and 43% in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Sales into the Asia Pacific region were approximately 15%, 14% and 14% in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. We believe that our sales to international customers will continue to increase as a percentage of total sales, as we believe our highest revenue growth opportunities are in Asia, the Middle East and South America. Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Gross profit $ 1,007.3 $ 870.6 $ 763.2 Gross profit margin 32.9 % 32.3 % 30.3 % Gross profit margin in 2006 of 32.9% increased from 32.3% in 2005. Gross profit margin in 2006 was positively impacted by various CIP and supply chain initiatives. Our CIP initiative is driving increased throughput on existing capacity, reduced cycle time, lean manufacturing and reduced warranty costs. Our supply chain initiatives focus on materials costs savings through low cost supply sources, long-term supply agreements and product outsourcing. Gross profit margin in 2006 was also positively impacted by pricing increases in FCD and FSD, as well as increased sales in all of our divisions, which positively impacts our absorption of fixed costs. These were partially offset by an increase in original equipment sales, primarily by FPD, which generally carries a lower margin. Gross profit margin in 2005 of 32.3% increased from 30.3% in 2004. Gross profit margin in 2005 was positively impacted by operational improvements attributable to our CIP initiative, which resulted in cost savings, a higher mix of aftermarket business, which generally has a higher margin, and increased sales, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed costs. Additionally, the charge to cost of sales to increase the reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory was significantly lower in 2005 than the charge recorded in 2004, which had a favorable impact on gross profit margin. Selling, General and Administrative Expense ( SG&A ) 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) SG&A expense $ 782.5 $ 684.3 $ 605.1 SG&A expense as a percentage of sales 25.6 % 25.4 % 24.0 % SG&A is impacted by growth in our underlying business, various initiatives to improve organizational capability, compliance and systems and infrastructure improvements. In each of the three years presented, at least 55% of SG&A consisted of employee-related costs, which includes payroll, benefits and incentive payments. SG&A in 2006 increased by $98.2 million, or 14.4%, as compared with 2005. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $6 million. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in employee-related costs of $54.0 million as follows: increased marketing and engineering personnel to support increased sales; development of in-house capabilities for tax, Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, internal audit, and financial planning and analysis; increased equity incentive arising from higher share price ($6.5 million primarily related to restricted stock) and the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment ($6.9 million related to stock options); costs associated with our expansion in Asia; and severance charges related to an outsourcing initiative ($1.3 million). The increase is also due to an increase in travel expenses of $12.1 million, due to increased global selling and marketing activity to support overall business growth and increased compliance initiatives, an $8.0 million increase in information technology expenses related to infrastructure and ERP application upgrades and a $11.4 million increase in legal fees and expenses, partially offset by a $12.6 million decrease in finance-related professional fees due to the development of in-house capabilities discussed above. Additionally, we incurred charges of $11.6 million 38 Table of Contents associated with the relocation of product lines to different facilities and the severance of redundant personnel in Europe, which accounts for 40 basis points of our SG&A as a percentage of sales. SG&A in 2005 increased by $79.2 million, or 13.1%, as compared with 2004. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $3 million. The increase in SG&A is due primarily to the following: employee-related costs of $38.5 million including sales commissions, incentive compensation and equity incentive programs arising from improved performance and the higher share price ($11.1 million); severance and transition expenses ($8.1 million); and modification of stock options expiration terms for former executives, current and retired employees and board of directors ($7.2 million). See further discussion of stock modifications in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. The increase in SG&A is also attributable to increases in professional fees resulting from the restatement of 2002, 2003 and the first quarter of 2004, which includes a $24.1 million increase in audit fees and a $13.8 million increase in other professional fees related to tax consulting, accounting and internal audit assistance. These increases in professional fees were partially offset by a $15.5 million decrease in legal fees and expenses and a $6.8 million decrease in costs incurred related to Sarbanes-Oxley compliance. Operating Income 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Operating income $ 239.6 $ 198.8 $ 166.1 Operating income as a percentage of sales 7.8 % 7.4 % 6.6 % Operating income in 2006 increased by $40.8 million, or 20.5%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $6 million. The increase is primarily a result of the $136.7 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by the $98.2 million increase in SG&A, discussed above. Operating income in 2005 increased by $32.7 million, or 19.7% as compared with 2004. Currency had a negligible impact on operating income for the period. The increase is primarily a result of the $107.4 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by the $79.0 million increase in SG&A, discussed above. Interest Expense and Loss on Repayment of Debt 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Interest expense $ (65.7 ) $ (74.1 ) $ (80.4 ) Interest income 7.6 3.4 1.9 Loss on early extinguishment of debt (0.7 ) (27.7 ) (2.7 ) Interest expense in 2006 decreased by $8.4 million as compared with 2005 primarily as a result of the refinancing of our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes in August 2005 with the proceeds of borrowings under our Credit Facilities. Interest expense decreased by $6.3 million in 2005 as compared with 2004, also as a result of our 2005 refinancing. See further discussion of our refinancing in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this MD&A and in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. At December 31, 2006 approximately 77% of our debt was at fixed rates, including the effects of $435.0 million of notional interest rate swaps. Interest income in 2006 increased by $4.2 million as compared with 2005 due primarily to higher interest rates, higher average cash balance and the receipt of interest on a long-overdue receivable that was collected in 2006. Interest income in 2005 increased by $1.5 million as compared with 2004 due to significantly higher average cash balances. During 2006, we incurred charges of $0.7 million on debt repayments and extinguishment primarily as a result of our repayments of amounts outstanding under our European Investment Bank ( EIB ) credit facility. During 2005, we incurred a charge of $27.7 million as a result of debt repayments and extinguishment related to our 2005 refinancing. Expenses incurred as a result of the refinancing are more fully described in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this MD&A. During 2004, we incurred a charge of $2.7 million on debt repayments and 39 Table of Contents extinguishment related to the accelerated write-off of deferred loan costs resulting from $160.0 million of optional debt prepayments and $167.9 million of mandatory debt prepayments triggered by the GMBU divestiture ($22.9 million), the issuance of the EIB credit facility ($85.0 million) and receivables securitization ($60.0 million). Other Income (Expense), net 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Other income (expense), net $ 6.4 $ (8.4 ) $ (14.1 ) Other income (expense), net in 2006 increased by $14.8 million to income of $6.4 million as compared with 2005, primarily due to a $14.2 million increase in unrealized gains on forward exchange contracts. Other income (expense), net in 2005 decreased by $5.7 million to expense of $8.4 million as compared with 2004, primarily due to a $2.6 million decrease in unrealized losses on derivative contracts, as well as foreign currency transaction losses. Tax Expense and Tax Rate 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Provision for income taxes $ 73.2 $ 40.6 $ 42.1 Effective tax rate 39.1 % 44.1 % 59.4 % The 2006 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to the net impact of foreign operations and certain U.S. non-deductible expenses. The 2005 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to Extraterritorial Income ( ETI ) exclusion benefits of $1.9 million, state income tax benefits of $2.7 million resulting primarily from net reductions in valuation allowances and $12.7 million of net tax impact from foreign operations. The 2004 effective tax rate differed from the federal statutory rate of 35% primarily due to ETI exclusion benefits of $4.9 million, $22.0 million of net tax impact from foreign operations resulting from approximately $85 million in foreign earnings repatriation to pay down U.S. debt. We have operations in European and Asian countries that provide various tax incentives. In 2003, we were granted a preferential tax rate of approximately 10% in Switzerland for certain sales and marketing activities. This incentive is not likely to provide a benefit after 2006. During 2004, we received a 5-year, 10% tax rate in Singapore for income in excess of a prescribed base amount generated from certain regional headquarter activities, subject to certain employment and investment requirements. In India, we were granted 100% tax exemptions for profits derived from export sales and certain manufacturing operations in prescribed areas for a period of 10 years. The Indian tax exemptions expire in 2011 and 2007, respectively. On October 22, 2004, the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (the 2004 Act ) was signed into law, creating a temporary incentive for U.S. multinationals to repatriate accumulated income earned outside the U.S. at an effective tax rate of 5.25%, versus the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35%. During 2004, we repatriated approximately $46 million (as part of the $85 million discussed above) pursuant to a dividend reinvestment plan as described by the 2004 Act. We have not recognized the lower tax rate on these dividends in our financial statements due to uncertainties surrounding the interpretation of the 2004 Act. To the extent this uncertainty is favorably resolved in a future reporting period, the benefit associated with these dividends will be recognized in that period. The 2004 Act also provides for a phase out of the existing ETI exclusion for foreign export sales, as it was viewed to be inconsistent with the international trade protocols set by the European Union. This phase out provides that the benefit for our otherwise qualifying export sales in 2005 and 2006 will be limited to approximately 80% and 60%, respectively. As a replacement for the loss of the ETI export incentive, the 2004 Act provides a deduction for income from qualified domestic production activities, which will be phased in from 2005 through 2010. This manufacturing deduction had no impact to our 2006 and 2005 tax rates, and the impact to our future tax rate has not yet been quantified. Under the guidance of Financial Accounting Standards Board Staff Position No. FAS 109-1, Application of FASB Statement No. 109 to the Tax Deduction on Qualified Production Activities Provided by the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, the tax deduction on qualified production activities will be treated as a 40 Table of Contents special deduction, as described in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes . As such, the special deduction will be reported in the period in which the deduction is claimed on our tax return. On May 17, 2006, the Tax Increase Prevention and Reconciliation Act of 2005 was signed into law, creating an exclusion from U.S. taxable income for certain types of foreign related party payments of dividends, interest, rents, and royalties which, prior to 2006, have been subject to U.S. taxation. This exclusion is effective for the years 2006 through 2008, and applies to certain of our related party payments. In July 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Financial Interpretation ( FIN ) No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an Interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109. FIN No. 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with SFAS No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. FIN No. 48 also prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return, as well as guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. We are still evaluating the impact of FIN No. 48 on our consolidated financial condition and our 2007 effective tax rate. Our effective tax rate is based upon current earnings and estimates of future taxable earnings for each domestic and international location. Changes in any of these and other factors, including our ability to utilize foreign tax credits and net operating losses or results from tax audits, could impact the tax rate in future periods. As of December 31, 2006 we have foreign tax credits of $21.4 million, expiring in 2010 through 2016 against which we recorded $0.5 million in valuation allowances. Additionally, we have recorded other U.S. net deferred tax assets of $86.5 million, which relate to net operating losses, tax credits and other deductible temporary differences which are available to reduce taxable income in future periods, most of which do not have a definite expiration. Should we not be able to utilize all or a portion of these credits and losses, our effective tax rate would be negatively impacted. Net Earnings and Earnings Per Share 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Income from continuing operations $ 114.0 $ 51.4 $ 28.8 Net earnings 115.0 17.1 27.1 Net earnings per share from continuing operations diluted 2.00 0.91 0.52 Net earnings per share diluted 2.02 0.30 0.49 Average diluted shares 56.9 56.7 55.7 Income from continuing operations in 2006 increased by $62.6 million to $114.0 million, or $2.00 per diluted share, as compared with 2005. The increase is primarily attributable to the $40.8 million increase in operating income and the $27.0 million decrease in loss on debt repayment and extinguishment, partially offset by the $32.6 million increase in tax expense, as discussed above. Income from continuing operations in 2005 increased by $22.6 million to $51.4 million, or $0.91 per diluted share. The increase is primarily attributable to the $32.7 million increase in operating income, the $6.3 million decrease in interest expense and the $5.7 million decrease in other income (expense), net, partially offset by the $25.0 million increase in loss on debt repayment and extinguishment, as discussed above. Net earnings in 2005 declined as compared with 2004 primarily as a result of impairment charges of $30.1 million related to GSG, which is included in discontinued operations and is more fully discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. Other Comprehensive Income (Expense) 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Other comprehensive income (expense) $ 63.5 $ (63.7 ) $ 15.1 41 Table of Contents Other comprehensive income (expense) in 2006 increased by $127.2 million to income of $63.5 million as compared with 2005. The increase is due to the weakening of the U.S. dollar exchange rate versus the Euro and the British pound during 2006. Pension and other postretirement gain of $23.9 million in 2006 increased from expense of $31.9 million in 2005, primarily as a result of an increased discount rate. Other comprehensive income in 2005 decreased by $78.8 million to expense of $63.7 million as compared with 2004. The decline is primarily a result of a decrease of $56.3 million in currency translation adjustments as compared with 2004. The decrease is due primarily to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar exchange rate versus the Euro and the British pound during 2005. Pension and other postretirement expense of $31.9 million in 2005 increased as compared with expense of $8.2 million in 2004, primarily as a result of a decreased discount rate. Business Segments We conduct our business through three business segments that represent our major product areas. We evaluate segment performance and allocate resources based on each segment operating income. See Note 17 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion of our segments. The key operating results for our three business segments, FPD, FCD and FSD are discussed below. Flowserve Pump Division Segment Results Through FPD, we design, manufacture and distribute highly engineered pumps, industrial pumps and pump systems (collectively referred to as original equipment ). FPD also manufactures replacement parts and related equipment, and provides a full array of support services (collectively referred to as aftermarket ). FPD has 27 manufacturing facilities worldwide, of which nine are located in North America, 11 in Europe, five in South America and two in Asia. FPD also has more than 30 service centers, which are either free standing or co-located in a manufacturing facility. Flowserve Pump Division 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Bookings continuing operations $ 2,110.9 $ 1,575.7 $ 1,322.5 Bookings discontinued operations 16.6 Total bookings 2,110.9 1,575.7 1,339.1 Sales 1,617.7 1,398.4 1,329.8 Gross profit 457.4 395.8 344.8 Gross profit margin 28.3 % 28.3 % 25.9 % Segment operating income 172.7 149.8 113.6 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 10.7 % 10.7 % 8.5 % Backlog (at period end) 1,263.3 703.5 575.8 Total bookings in 2006 increased by $535.2 million, or 34.0%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $15 million. The increase is primarily due to a $360.1 million increase in EMA, which is attributable to strength in the oil and gas, power and water industries and a $131.1 million increase in North America, which is primarily attributable to the oil and gas industry. The increase in bookings includes a 46% increase in original equipment bookings, attributable to all regions, and an 18% increase in aftermarket bookings, particularly in EMA. Of the $2.1 billion of total bookings in 2006, approximately 54% were from oil and gas, 16% power, 9% water, 6% chemical and 15% general industries. Bookings for continuing operations in 2005 increased by $253.2 million, or 19.2%, as compared with 2004. Total bookings in 2005 increased by $236.6 million, or 17.7%, as compared with 2004. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $3 million. Total bookings in 2004 includes $16.6 million of bookings for GMBU, a discontinued operation. The increase in bookings is primarily due to increases in all regions: EMA bookings increased $131.3 million; North and South America bookings increased by $45.9 million and $24.2 million, respectively, due primarily to large engineered projects; and Asia Pacific increased $36.3 million due primarily to TKL, which was acquired in March 2004. The increase is also attributable to continued growth in the oil and gas 42 Table of Contents industry. Of the $1.6 billion of total bookings in 2005, approximately 46% were from oil and gas, 17% power, 11% water, 7% chemical and 19% general industries. Sales in 2006 increased by $219.3 million, or 15.7%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $24 million. The increase is primarily attributable to EMA, which increased $141.1 million, and North America, which increased $59.7 million. Oil and gas sales to the Middle East region have contributed the most significant growth in EMA, while domestic oil and gas sales have contributed the most significant growth in North America. Original equipment increased to approximately 56% of sales in 2006, as compared with approximately 53% of sales in 2005. Sales in 2005 increased by $68.6 million, or 5.2%, as compared with 2004. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $4 million. Sales in North and South America increased by $24.2 million and $19.4 million, respectively. In North America, higher sales were primarily attributable to an improvement in general industrial products, as well as in parts and service. Asia Pacific increased $18.8 million due primarily to TKL. Gross profit margin in 2006 of 28.3% did not change as compared with 2005. In 2006, gross profit margin was positively impacted by higher sales, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed costs, as well as CIP and supply chain initiatives. However, these were offset by a 23% increase in sales of original equipment, which carries a lower margin. Aftermarket sales increased by 8%. Gross profit margin in 2005 of 28.3% increased from 25.9% in 2004 primarily as a result of the increase in sales, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed costs, a higher mix of historically more profitable general industrial and nuclear products and services and increased productivity. Operating income in 2006 increased by $22.9 million, or 15.3%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $4 million. The increase is primarily a result of the $61.6 million improvement in gross profit, partially offset by increased commission expenses and travel to support increased bookings and sales, expenses related to stock options and increased information technology project costs. Also, 2006 includes $5.0 million of severance costs associated with the termination of redundant personnel in Europe, which accounts for 30 basis points of our SG&A as a percentage of sales. Operating income in 2005 increased by $36.2 million, or 31.9%, as compared with 2004. The increase includes negative currency effects of approximately $1 million. The increase is primarily a result of the $51.0 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by increases in marketing expenses to support increased bookings and sales and increased information technology costs. Backlog of $1.3 billion in 2006 increased by $559.8 million, or 79.6%, as compared with 2005. Currency provided an increase of approximately $82 million. The increase in backlog is primarily attributable to the growth in bookings discussed above. Backlog of $703.5 million in 2005 increased by $127.7 million, or 22.2%. Currency provided a decrease of approximately $52 million. The increase in backlog is primarily attributable to the strong bookings performance in 2005 across all regions, as well as an increase in large oil and gas project orders in EMA. 43 Table of Contents Flow Control Division Segment Results Our second largest business segment is FCD, which designs, manufactures and distributes a broad portfolio of industrial valve products, including modulating and finite valves, actuators and controls. FCD leverages its experience and application know-how by offering a complete menu of engineered services to complement its expansive product portfolio. FCD has manufacturing and service facilities in 19 countries around the world, with only five of its 20 manufacturing operations located in the U.S. Flow Control Division 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Bookings continuing operations $ 1,060.9 $ 936.0 $ 851.7 Bookings discontinued operations 90.4 116.1 Total bookings 1,060.9 1,026.4 967.8 Sales 994.8 894.3 838.7 Gross profit 338.3 287.7 253.0 Gross profit margin 34.0 % 32.2 % 30.2 % Segment operating income 115.9 92.1 65.6 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 11.6 % 10.3 % 7.8 % Backlog (at period end) 314.3 240.6 216.5 Bookings for continuing operations in 2006 increased by $124.9 million, or 13.3%, as compared with 2005. Total bookings in 2006 increased by $34.5 million, or 3.4%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $6 million. Total bookings in 2005 includes $90.4 million of bookings for GSG, a discontinued operation. The increase is primarily attributable to continued strengthening of several of our key end-markets. Increased bookings in the process valve market resulted from growth in the China chemical and coal gasification industries, as well as across the board strength in the North American and Middle Eastern oil and gas markets. Growth in the Russian district heating market, increased project business in the U.S. and Western European steam recovery systems, improved project business in the European chemical market, and improvements in the Asian pulp and paper industries also contributed to the increase. Of the $1.1 billion of total bookings in 2006, approximately 40% were from general industry, 29% chemical, 19% oil and gas and 12% power. Bookings for continuing operations in 2005 increased by $84.3 million, or 9.9%, as compared with 2004. Total bookings in 2005 increased by $58.6 million, or 6.1%, as compared with 2004. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $3 million. Total bookings in 2005 and 2004 include $90.4 million and $116.1 million, respectively, of bookings for GSG. The increase in bookings is primarily attributable to increases in order volume, particularly in Asia Pacific coupled with what we believe to be sustainable price increases in all of our core end-markets including the oil and gas, power and chemical industries. Of the $1.0 billion of total bookings in 2005, approximately 42% were from general industry, 30% chemical, 14% oil and gas and 14% power. Sales in 2006 increased by $100.5 million, or 11.2%, as compared with 2005. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $10 million. The increase is primarily attributable to notable improvements in the process valve industry, specifically in the Middle Eastern petroleum and German chemical markets, as well as the North American oil and gas industry. Also contributing to the growth in the process valves business were strong sales in Asia chemical market, specifically acetic acid and coal gasification projects in China. Successful completion of several projects in the North American power industry also helped drive the improvement, as well as improvements in both the Asian oil and gas and European fine chemicals markets. In 2007, FCD expects to institute modest price increases based upon the increased metals cost and manufacturing lead times. The achieved benefit, if any, will be dependent on the ability of our customer base to absorb these price increases into their capital spending plans. Sales in 2005 increased by $55.6 million, or 6.6%, as compared with 2004. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $2 million. The recovery of major valve markets that began in 2004 strengthened as 2005 progressed and drove sales increases to our process and power valve customers. Sales in 2005 reflects an increase in sales volume, improvement in worldwide power markets and U.S. chemical markets. Sales in 2005 also reflect improvement in the Asian and Russian markets. 44 Table of Contents Gross profit margin in 2006 of 34.0% increased from 32.2% in 2005. The increase is due to the increase in sales, which favorably impacts our absorption of fixed costs. Strong focus on realizing margin improvements on aftermarket sales for our installed base, improved sharing of materials pricing risk with our customers, our successful implementation of various other CIP and supply chain initiatives and implementation of broad-based price increases in the latter-half of 2005 also contributed to the improvement. Gross profit margin in 2005 of 32.2% increased from 30.2% in 2004. The increase is due to our efforts to continuously monitor inventory levels, coupled with successful management of aged inventory, which resulted in a charge to cost of sales to increase the reserve for obsolete and slow moving inventory of $3.7 million in 2005, which was significantly lower as compared with the $14.1 million charge recorded in 2004. Further, the aforementioned volume and sales price increases and a more favorable mix of aftermarket sales, which typically have a higher margin, positively impacted gross profit margin. Operating income in 2006 increased by $23.8 million, or 25.8 as compared with 2005. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $1 million. The increase is primarily attributable to the $50.6 million improvement in gross profit, partially offset by higher SG&A, driven primarily by increased headcount, which contributed an additional $8.5 million of compensation costs, a $1.7 million increase in information technology project costs, a $2.3 million increase in travel costs, a $1.5 million increase in equity-based incentive compensation and higher external commission expense resulting from increased sales. In 2006, we recognized $1.2 million in bad debt expense related to the bankruptcy of a single customer. Also, 2006 includes $6.6 million of costs associated with the relocation of product lines to different facilities, which accounts for 70 basis points of our SG&A as a percentage of sales. Operating income in 2005 increased by $26.5 million, or 40.4%, as compared with 2004. This increase includes currency benefits of less than $1 million. The increase is driven primarily by the $34.7 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by higher sales commissions incurred to generate the sales increase, higher costs associated with Sarbanes-Oxley compliance, costs incurred in expanding our footprint in Asia. Backlog of $314.3 million at December 31, 2006 increased by $73.7 million, or 30.6%, as compared with 2005. Currency effects provided an increase of approximately $16 million. The increase in backlog is primarily attributable to increased bookings, as discussed above, which should yield increased sales in 2007. Backlog of $240.6 million at December 31, 2005 increased by $24.1 million, or 11.1% as compared with 2004. Currency effects provided a decrease of approximately $12 million. The increase in backlog is primarily attributable to the strong bookings performance in 2005. Flow Solutions Division Segment Results Through FSD, we engineer, manufacture and sell mechanical seals, auxiliary systems and parts, and provide related services, principally to process industries and general industrial markets, with similar products sold internally in support of FPD. FSD has added to its global operations and has nine manufacturing operations, four of which are located in the U.S. FSD operates 67 QRCs worldwide, including 24 sites in North America, 16 in Europe, and the remainder in South America and Asia. Our ability to rapidly deliver mechanical sealing technology through global engineering tools, locally sited QRCs and on-site engineers represents a significant competitive advantage. 45 Table of Contents This business model has enabled FSD to establish a large number of alliances with multi-national customers. Based on independent industry sources, we believe that we are the second largest mechanical seal supplier in the world. Flow Solutions Division 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Bookings $ 505.0 $ 463.4 $ 395.0 Sales 496.6 443.6 394.0 Gross profit 219.0 194.9 170.8 Gross profit margin 44.1 % 43.9 % 43.4 % Segment operating income 98.5 87.5 73.0 Segment operating income as a percentage of sales 19.8 % 19.7 % 18.5 % Backlog (at period end) 74.4 61.2 43.7 Bookings in 2006 increased by $41.6 million, or 9.0%, as compared with 2005. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $4 million. This increase is due to a $28.7 million increase in customer bookings, which is primarily attributable to EMA and South America, as well as a $12.9 million increase in interdivision bookings (which are eliminated and are not included in consolidated bookings as disclosed above). The increase is attributable to growth from projects including OEMs and end user markets with the majority of the increase coming from regions outside North America. Success in the end user market continues to be a strength based on the FSD business model, which places a premium on servicing customers locally through an increasing network of QRCs. During the period we added, rebuilt, upgraded or relocated 15 QRCs to further improve our ability to service our customers in their locale. The bookings improvement continues to reflect FSD ability to establish long-term customer alliance programs, including fixed fee contracts. This strategy of signing special fixed fee alliances in conjunction with the higher levels of local service that comes from the strategically located QRCs has led to market share gains in 2006 over 2005. Of the $505.0 million of bookings in 2006, approximately 48% were from oil and gas, 27% chemical and 25% general industries. Bookings in 2005 increased by $68.4 million, or 17.3%, as compared with 2004. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $4 million. This increase in bookings reflects increased business in projects, which includes OEMs, and the aftermarket. We experienced strong growth in compressor and pump seals in the project business and continued success with end users due to a focus on servicing customers locally through our increasing network of QRCs. In addition, the bookings improvement reflects FSD success in establishing longer-term customer alliance programs, including fixed fee alliances. Fixed fee alliances are contractual agreements with customers wherein the customer pays us a fixed amount each period (usually monthly) for the term of the agreement. In return for this fixed cost, the customer is entitled to new seals, repairs, upgraded equipment, replacements and maintenance services as defined within the scope of each agreement. We believe the fixed fee strategy coupled with higher levels of customer service, reliability, drive for repair business, equipment upgrades, replacements and maintenance services have led to increases in market share in 2005 and 2004. Of the $463.4 million of bookings in 2005, approximately 46% were from oil and gas, 29% chemical and 25% general industries. Sales in 2006 increased by $53.0 million, or 11.9%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of approximately $5 million. The increase is attributable to a $44.4 million increase in customer sales, primarily in North America and EMA, our two largest markets, as well as an $8.6 million increase in interdivision sales (which are eliminated and are not included in consolidated sales as disclosed above). The increase in customer sales is primarily attributable to aftermarket sales, where FSD has expanded capacity to enable it to meet customer demand for fast turnaround. Additionally, sales growth occurred in the project business and original equipment. Aftermarket and original equipment sales growth occurred in the oil and gas, chemical and mineral and ore processing industries. Sales in 2005 increased by $49.6 million, or 12.6%, as compared with 2004. This increase includes currency benefits of approximately $3 million. The increase is due to strength in the oil and gas industry led by oil prices and high demand; share growth in the mineral and ore processing industry due to strong demand; and increased sales in the gas compressor business due to growth in the natural gas industry. 46 Table of Contents Gross profit margin in 2006 of 44.1% increased slightly from 43.9% in 2005 primarily as a result of various supply chain initiatives and our ability to pass along price increases. Gross profit margin in 2005 of 43.9% increased from 43.4% in 2004 primarily as a result of the ability to pass along price increases and improved product mix in the aftermarket, which typically has a higher margin. Operating income in 2006 increased by $11.0 million, or 12.6%, as compared with 2005. The increase includes currency benefits of less than $1 million. The improvement in 2006 reflects the $24.1 million increase in gross profit, partially offset by an increase in SG&A, which is attributable to increases in our global engineering and sales functions to both support our sales growth and maintain the level of service and support response that gives us our competitive advantage. Operating income in 2005 increased by $14.5 million, or 19.9%, as compared with 2004. This increase includes currency benefits of less than $1 million. The improvement in 2005 reflects the $24.1 million increase in gross profit and greater control of SG&A. Backlog of $74.4 million at December 31, 2006 increased by $13.2 million, or 21.6%, as compared with 2005. Currency provided an increase of approximately $3 million. Backlog at December 31, 2006 includes $14.7 million of interdivision backlog (which is eliminated and not included in consolidated backlog as disclosed above). The increase in backlog is primarily attributable to the increased bookings discussed above. Capacity expansions in South America, Asia-Pacific and EMA in 2006 helped to significantly increase shipments, helping to limit the increase in backlog. Backlog of $61.2 million in 2005 increased by $17.5 million, or 40.1%, as compared with 2004. Currency provided a decrease of approximately $2 million. The increase in backlog is primarily attributable to the strong bookings performance in 2005. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Net cash flows provided by operating activities $ 163.2 $ 127.4 $ 267.5 Net cash flows used by investing activities (77.7 ) (39.3 ) (14.1 ) Net cash flows used by financing activities (114.5 ) (53.3 ) (250.6 ) Cash Flow Analysis Cash generated by operations and borrowings available under our existing revolving line of credit are our primary sources of short-term liquidity. Our sources of operating cash generally include the sale of our products and services and the reduction of our working capital, particularly accounts receivable and inventories. Our total cash balance at December 31, 2006 was $67.0 million, compared with $92.9 million in 2005 and $63.8 million in 2004. The cash flows provided by operating activities in 2006 as compared with 2005 primarily reflect a $98.0 million increase in net income, offset by a $32.6 million decrease in cash flows from working capital, particularly due to higher inventory of $98.4 million, especially project-related work in process inventory required to support future shipments of products in backlog. Further, operating cash flows in 2006 reflect a decrease of $8.5 million in funding of U.S. pension plans as compared with 2005, an increase to net deferred taxes ($4.5 million) and an increase in equity compensation ($11.3 million) due to the expensing of stock options under SFAS No. 123(R) also had positive impacts on cash flows from operating activities. The decrease in cash flows provided by operating activities in 2005 as compared with 2004 primarily reflect a $125.6 decrease in cash flows provided by working capital, particularly higher accounts receivable of $37.2 million from the impact of the termination of our accounts receivable securitization agreement of $48.7 million. Operating cash flows in 2005 reflect a lower than anticipated return on pension assets and increased funding of U.S. pension plans of approximately $29.4 million as compared with 2004. The negative cash flow impact of increases to net deferred taxes ($27.6 million) is offset by positive cash flow impacts related to the following non-recurring events: non-cash expense related to our debt refinancing ($27.7 million) and impairment of assets related to discontinued operations ($30.1 million). An increase in equity compensation also provided a positive cash flow impact of 47 Table of Contents $12.0 million. In addition, incremental factoring of certain non-U.S. receivables contributed $23.4 million in 2006, contributed $0.7 million in 2005 and used $3.4 million in 2004. Our goal for days sales receivables outstanding ( DSO ) is 60 days. For the fourth quarter of 2006, we achieved a DSO of 56 days as compared to 58 days for the same period in 2005. For reference purposes based on 2006 sales, an improvement of one day could provide approximately $10 million in cash. Increases in inventory used $98.4 million of cash flow for 2006 compared with uses of $20.6 million of cash flow for 2005 and contributions of $21.0 million in 2004. Inventory turns were 4.4 times at December 31, 2006, compared with 4.8 times and 4.7 times at December 31, 2005 and 2004 respectively, reflecting the substantial increase in sales, partially offset by the large increase in inventory. For reference purposes based on 2006 data, an improvement of one turn could yield approximately $102 million in cash. Cash outflows for investing activities were $77.7 million, $39.3 million and $14.1 million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, due primarily to capital expenditures. Capital expenditures during 2006 were $73.5 million, an increase of $24.3 million as compared with 2005, which reflects increased spending to support capacity expansion, enterprise resource planning application upgrades and information technology infrastructure. Cash outflows for financing activities were $114.5 million in 2006 compared with $53.3 million in 2005 and $250.6 million in 2004. The change in 2006 results primarily from debt paydown and repurchase of common shares, partially offset by proceeds from stock option activity. The change in 2005 is primarily a result of the debt paydown. Our cash needs for the next 12 months are expected to be substantially similar to 2006, except for decreases in payments of long-term debt and repurchases of common shares (see discussion below), partially offset by an increase in capital expenditures related to information technology infrastructure and capacity expansion, as well as prospective dividend payments. Our pension contributions are currently expected to be less in 2007 as compared with 2006, but will be re-evaluated later in 2007. We believe cash flows from operating activities, combined with availability under our revolving line of credit and our existing cash balances, will be sufficient to enable us to meet our cash flow needs for the next 12 months. However, cash flows from operations could be adversely affected by economic, political and other risks associated with sales of our products, operational factors, competition, regulatory actions, fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and fluctuations in interest rates, among other factors. We believe that cash flows from operating activities and our expectation of continuing availability to draw upon our revolving credit agreements are also sufficient to meet our cash flow needs for the periods exceeding the next 12 months. We had a substantial number of outstanding stock options granted in past years to employees and directors under our stock option plans that were previously unexercisable due to the non-current status of our filings with the SEC. On September 29, 2006 we became current with our filings with the SEC, and reopened our stock option exercise program. As of December 31, 2006, optionees have exercised 1.9 million of these outstanding options, which provided cash proceeds of $40.7 million during 2006. Approximately 0.8 million outstanding options remain exercisable as of December 31, 2006. On September 29, 2006, our Board of Directors authorized a program to repurchase up to two million shares of our outstanding common stock. Shares may be repurchased to offset potentially dilutive effects of stock options issued under our equity-based compensation programs. We commenced the program in October 2006 and repurchased 1.3 million shares for $68.4 million during the fourth quarter of 2006. Subsequent repurchases as of February 26, 2007 have totaled 0.5 million shares for $25.0 million. We expect to conclude the program by the end of the second quarter of 2007. Payments for Acquisitions We regularly evaluate acquisition opportunities of various sizes. The cost and terms of any financing to be raised in conjunction with any acquisition, including our ability to raise economical capital, is a critical consideration in any such evaluation. During 2006, we completed four small asset acquisitions for an aggregate purchase price of $8.0 million. Assets acquired primarily include inventory, fixed assets and intangible assets. 48 Table of Contents In March 2004, we acquired the remaining 75% interest in TKL for approximately $12 million. We paid for the acquisition with cash generated by operations. Prior to the acquisition, we held a 25% interest in TKL. As a result of this acquisition, we strengthened our product offering in the mining industry, broadened our manufacturing capacity in the Asia Pacific region and gained foundry capacity. Capital Expenditures 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Capital expenditures $ 73.5 $ 49.3 $ 45.2 Depreciation expense 60.5 59.8 62.5 Capital expenditures are funded primarily by operating cash flows and, to a lesser extent, by bank borrowings. In 2006, our capital expenditures were focused on capacity expansion, ERP application upgrades, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities. In 2005, our capital expenditures were focused on new product development, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities. Capital expenditures in 2004 include approximately $5 million for the purchase of a building we previously leased for the manufacture of valves. In previous years, capital expenditures were less than depreciation expense due to excess capacity and the upgrading of equipment through integration processes. In 2007, we expect that our capital expenditures will focus on capacity expansion, ERP application upgrades, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities and are expected to be between approximately $85 million and $90 million. Certain of our facilities may face capacity constraints in the foreseeable future, which may lead to higher capital expenditure levels. Financing Debt, including capital lease obligations, consisted of: December 31, 2006 2005 (Amounts in thousands) Term Loan, interest rate of 6.88% in 2006 and 6.36% in 2005 $ 558,220 $ 578,500 EIB loan, interest rate of 4.42% 85,000 Capital lease obligations and other 6,349 1,636 Debt and capital lease obligations 564,569 665,136 Less amounts due within one year 8,050 12,367 Total debt due after one year $ 556,519 $ 652,769 Credit Facilities On August 12, 2005, we entered into Credit Facilities comprised of a $600.0 million term loan maturing on August 10, 2012 and a $400.0 million revolving line of credit, which can be utilized to provide up to $300.0 million in letters of credit, expiring on August 12, 2010. We refer to these credit facilities collectively as our Credit Facilities. We used the proceeds of borrowings under our Credit Facilities to refinance our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes and indebtedness outstanding under our previous credit facilities. Further, we replaced the letter of credit agreement that guaranteed our EIB credit facility (described below) with a letter of credit issued as part of the Credit Facilities. Borrowings under our Credit Facilities bear interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (1) the base rate (which is based on greater of the prime rate most recently announced by the administrative agent under our Credit Facilities or the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50%) or (2) London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) plus an applicable margin determined by reference to the ratio of our total debt to consolidated Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ( EBITDA ), which as of December 31, 2006 was 1.5% for LIBOR borrowings. 49 Table of Contents EIB Credit Facility On April 14, 2004, we and one of our European subsidiaries, Flowserve B.V., entered into an agreement with EIB, pursuant to which EIB agreed to loan us up to 70.0 million, with the ability to draw funds in multiple currencies, to finance, in part, specified research and development projects undertaken by us in Europe. In August 2004, we borrowed $85.0 million at a floating interest rate based on 3-month U.S. LIBOR that reset quarterly. We repaid the outstanding principal balance and terminated this facility on December 15, 2006, using cash generated from operations. As a result of this repayment, we incurred expenses of $0.5 million related to the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs. Additional discussion of our Credit Facilities and other debt instruments no longer in effect as of December 31, 2006, is included in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. We have entered into interest rate and currency swap agreements to hedge our exposure to cash flows related to the credit facilities discussed above. These agreements are more fully described in Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk. Debt Prepayments and Repayments The following summarizes our repayment of obligations under our various credit facilities: 2006 2005 2004 (Amounts in millions) Scheduled repayment $ $ 1.5 $ 27.5 Mandatory repayment 15.3 167.9 Optional prepayment(1) 90.0 38.4 160.0 Loss on early extinguishment of debt 0.7 27.7 2.7 (1) Optional prepayment in 2005 excludes the proceeds from our Credit Facilities that were used to repay our outstanding obligations under our previous credit facilities and our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes. Loans under our Credit Facilities are subject to mandatory repayment with, in general: 100% of the net cash proceeds of asset sales; and Unless we attain and maintain investment grade credit ratings: 50% of the proceeds of any equity offerings; and 100% of the proceeds of any debt issuances (subject to certain exceptions). In 2006, we made mandatory repayments of $14.4 million, using the net cash proceeds from the sale of GSG, and $0.9 million, using excess cash flows as defined by the Credit Facilities. We may prepay loans under our Credit Facilities in whole or in part, without premium or penalty. We incurred $9.3 million in fees related to the Credit Facilities, of which $0.8 million were expensed in 2005. Prior to the refinancing, we had $11.8 million of unamortized deferred loan costs related to previous credit facilities and Senior Subordinated Notes, which were called immediately following our refinancing. Based upon the final syndicate of financial institutions for the Credit Facilities, we expensed $10.5 million of these unamortized deferred loan costs in 2005. In addition to the total loan costs of $11.3 million that were expensed, we recorded a charge of $16.4 million for premiums paid to call our 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes, for a total loss on extinguishment of $27.7 million recorded in 2005. The remaining $8.5 million of fees related to the Credit Facilities were capitalized and combined with the remaining $1.3 million of previously unamortized deferred loan costs for a total of $9.8 million in deferred loan costs included in other assets, net. These costs are being amortized over the term of the Credit Facilities using the effective interest method. 50 Table of Contents Accounts Receivable Factoring Through our European subsidiaries, we engage in non-recourse factoring of certain accounts receivable. The various agreements have different terms, including options for renewal and mutual termination clauses. Our Credit Facilities, which are fully described in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report, limit factoring volume to $75.0 million at any given point in time as defined by our Credit Facilities. Debt Covenants and Other Matters Our Credit Facilities contain leverage and interest coverage financial covenants. Under the leverage covenant, the maximum permitted leverage ratio stepped down in the fourth quarter of 2006, with a further step-down beginning in the fourth quarter of 2007. Under the interest coverage covenant, the minimum required interest coverage ratio stepped up in the fourth quarter of 2006, with a further step-up beginning in the fourth quarter of 2007. Compliance with these financial covenants under our Credit Facilities is tested quarterly. Our Credit Facilities include events of default usual for these types of credit facilities, including nonpayment of principal or interest, violation of covenants, incorrectness of representations and warranties, cross defaults and cross acceleration, bankruptcy, material judgments, ERISA events, actual or asserted invalidity of the guarantees or the security documents, and certain changes of control of our company. The occurrence of any event of default could result in the acceleration of our and the guarantors obligations under the Credit Facilities. We complied with the covenants through December 31, 2006. CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND COMMERCIAL COMMITMENTS The following table presents a summary of our contractual obligations at December 31, 2006: Payments Due by Period Within Beyond 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years 5 Years Total (Amounts in millions) Long-term debt $ 2.8 $ 11.4 $ 143.5 $ 400.6 $ 558.2 Fixed interest payments(1) (2.0 ) (2.0 ) Variable interest payments(2) 38.8 76.7 75.0 12.6 203.1 Capital lease obligations 0.2 0.6 0.8 Operating leases 29.0 38.6 23.4 18.4 109.5 Purchase obligations:(3) Inventory 351.5 4.1 355.6 Non-inventory 42.7 7.3 0.1 50.1 Retirement and postretirement benefits(4) 42.1 90.2 92.6 229.4 454.3 Total $ 505.1 $ 228.9 $ 334.6 $ 660.9 $ 1,729.6 (1) Fixed interest payments include payments (receipts) on synthetically fixed rate debt. (2) Variable interest payments under our Credit Facilities were estimated using a base rate of three-month LIBOR as of December 31, 2006. (3) Purchase obligations are presented at the face value of the purchase order, excluding the effects of early termination provisions. Actual payments could be less than amounts presented herein. (4) Retirement and postretirement benefits represent estimated benefit payments for our U.S. and non-U.S. defined benefit plans, as more fully described below and in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. 51 Table of Contents The following table presents a summary of our commercial commitments at December 31, 2006: Commitment Expiration by Period Within Beyond 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years 5 Years Total (Amounts in millions) Letters of credit $ 280.9 $ 67.3 $ 19.3 $ 4.0 $ 371.5 Surety bonds 44.7 2.9 1.0 48.6 Total $ 325.6 $ 70.2 $ 19.3 $ 5.0 $ 420.1 We expect to satisfy these commitments through performance under our contracts. PENSION AND POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS OBLIGATIONS Our pension plans and postretirement benefit plans are accounted for using actuarial valuations required by SFAS No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions, and SFAS No. 106, Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions. We consider accounting for retirement plans critical because management is required to make significant subjective judgments about a number of actuarial assumptions, including discount rates, salary growth, long-term return on plan assets, retirement, turnover, health care cost trend rates and mortality rates. Depending on the assumptions and estimates used, the pension and postretirement benefit expense could vary within a range of outcomes and have a material effect on reported earnings. In addition, the assumptions can materially affect accumulated benefit obligations and future cash funding. Adoption of SFAS No. 158 As discussed in Notes 1 and 12 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report, we adopted SFAS No. 158 effective December 31, 2006. The impact of the adoption is summarized below ( MPL refers to minimum pension liability): Pre-FAS 158 Pre-FAS 158 FAS 158 Without MPL MPL With MPL Adoption Adjustment Adjustment Adjustment Adjustments Post FAS 158 (Amounts in thousands) Net deferred tax asset $ 73,318 $ 8,685 $ 82,003 $ (2,740 ) $ 79,263 Retirement obligations and other liabilities 414,739 (32,571 ) 382,168 25,926 408,094 Total shareholders equity 1,019,886 23,886 1,043,772 (23,186 ) 1,020,586 The estimated prior service benefit for the defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into pension expense in 2007 is $1.4 million. The estimated net loss for the defined benefit pension plans that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into pension expense in 2007 is $7.5 million. Plan Description We and certain of our subsidiaries have defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution plans for regular full-time and part-time employees. The defined benefit pension plan in the U.S. is the Flowserve Corporation Pension Plan and the defined contribution plan is the Flowserve Corporation Retirement Savings Plan. Approximately 66% of total defined benefit pension plan assets and 54% of benefit obligations are related to the U.S. plan as of December 31, 2006. The assets for the U.S. plan are held in a single trust with a common asset allocation. Unless specified otherwise, the references in this section are to total plans (i.e., the U.S. plan together with international plans). Benefits under our defined benefit pension plans are based primarily on years of credited service and on participants compensation. Assets under our defined benefit pension plans consist primarily of equity and fixed- 52 Table of Contents income securities. At December 31, 2006, the fair market value of plan assets for our defined benefit plans increased to $365.1 million from $311.6 million at December 31, 2005. Assets were allocated as follows: U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Asset Category 2006 2005 2006 2005 Equity securities 65% 66% 50% 48% Fixed income 25% 30% 38% 41% Other 10% 4% 12% 11% The projected benefit obligation for our defined benefit pension plans was $544.5 million and $520.6 million as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. None of our common stock is directly held by these plans. We sponsor a defined benefit postretirement health care plan covering most current retirees and a limited number of future retirees in the U.S. This plan provides for medical and dental benefits and is administered through insurance companies. We fund the plan as benefits are paid, such that the plans hold no assets in any period presented. Accordingly, we have no investment strategy or targeted allocations for plan assets. The benefits under the plan are not available to new employees or most existing employees. The accumulated postretirement benefit obligation for our defined benefit postretirement health care plan was $71.4 million and $73.8 million as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Accrual Accounting and Significant Assumptions Consistent with the requirements of SFAS No. 87, we account for pension benefits using the accrual method, recognizing pension expense before the payment of benefits to retirees. The accrual method of accounting for pension benefits necessarily requires actuarial assumptions concerning future events that will determine the amount and timing of the benefit payments. Our key assumptions used in calculating our cost of pension benefits are the discount rate, the rate of compensation increase, and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. We, in consultation with our actuaries, evaluate the key actuarial assumptions and other assumptions used in calculating the cost of pension benefits, such as discount rate, expected return on plan assets for funded plans, life expectancy of participants and assumed rate of wage increases, and determine such assumptions as of December 31 of each year to calculate liability information as of that date and pension expense for the following year. Depending on the assumptions used, the pension expense could vary within a range of outcomes and have a material effect on reported earnings. In addition, the assumptions can materially affect accumulated benefit obligations and future cash funding. Actual results in any given year may differ from those estimated because of economic and other factors. The assumed discount rate used for determining future pension obligations is based on indices of AA-rated corporate bonds, except for two foreign locations which use government bonds. The assumed rate of compensation increase used for determining future pension obligations reflects an estimate of the change in actual future compensation levels due to general price levels, productivity, seniority and other factors. The expected long-term rate of return on assets was determined by assessing the rates of return for each targeted asset class, return premiums generated by active portfolio management and by comparison of rates utilized by other companies. In 2006, net pension expense for our defined benefit pension plans included in income from continuing operations was $31.4 million compared to $26.5 million in 2005 and $22.9 million in 2004. The postretirement benefit expense for the postretirement health care plan was $0.7 million in 2006 compared to $0.8 million in 2005 and $3.8 million in 2004. The decline in 2005 is primarily attributable to plan amendments capping our liabilities and to a decrease in the number of participants. 53 Table of Contents The following are assumptions related to our defined benefit pension plans for the year ended December 31, 2006: U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Weighted average assumptions used to determine benefit obligations: Discount rate 5.75 % 4.78 % Rate of increase in compensation levels 4.50 3.23 Weighted average assumptions used to determine net cost: Long-term rate of return on assets 7.50 % 5.46 % Discount rate 5.50 4.43 Rate of increase in compensation levels 4.50 3.19 The following provides a sensitivity analysis of alternative assumptions on the U.S. qualified and aggregate non-U.S. pension plans and U.S. postretirement plans. Effect of Discount Rate Changes and Constancy of Other Assumptions: 0.5% Increase 0.5% Decrease (Amounts in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plan: Effect on pension expense $ (1.0 ) $ 1.0 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (12.1 ) 12.6 Non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans: Effect on pension expense (2.1 ) 2.1 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (21.0 ) 24.0 U.S. Postretirement medical plans: Effect on postretirement medical expense (0.6 ) 0.3 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation (3.0 ) 3.1 Effect of Changes in the Expected Return on Assets and Constancy of Other Assumptions: 0.5% Increase 0.5% Decrease (Amounts in millions) U.S. defined benefit pension plan: Effect on pension expense $ (1.1 ) $ 1.1 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A Non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans: Effect on pension expense (0.6 ) 0.6 Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A U.S. Postretirement medical plans: Effect on postretirement medical expense N/A N/A Effect on Projected Benefit Obligation N/A N/A As discussed below, GAAP provides that differences between expected and actual returns are recognized over the average future service of employees. At December 31, 2006, we increased our assumed discount rate for the U.S. plan from 5.50% to 5.75% consistent with increased 10-year bond yields and our average rate for non-U.S. plans from 4.43% to 4.78%. We maintained our average assumed rate of compensation increase at 4.5% for the U.S. plan. The increase in the discount rate had the effect of decreasing the present value of benefit obligations and, accordingly, decreased pension expense for 2006. We decreased the expected rate of return on U.S. plan assets from 8.25% for 2005 to 7.5% for 2006, primarily to reflect reduced expected long-term equity returns. 54 Table of Contents We expect that the net pension expense for our defined benefit pension plans included in earnings before income taxes will be approximately $2.8 million lower in 2007 than the $31.4 million in 2006, reflecting, among other things, the increase in the assumed discount rate and an expected reduction in the rate of return on plan assets. We expect the 2007 expense for the postretirement health care plan to be $0.7 million. We have used the same assumed discount rates of 5.50% and 5.75% at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, in calculating our cost of pension benefits and our cost of other postretirement benefits for U.S. plans. The assumed ranges for the annual rates of increase in per capita costs were 9.0% for 2006, 8.0% for 2005 and 9.0% for 2004, with a gradual decrease to 5.0% for 2010 and future years. If actual costs are higher than those assumed, this will likely put modest upward pressure on our expense for retiree health care. Plan Funding Our funding policy for defined benefit plans is to contribute at least the amounts required under applicable laws and local customs. We contributed $45.7 million, $53.1 million and $23.4 million to our defined benefit plans in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. In 2007, we expect to contribute approximately $20 million to our qualified U.S. pension plan, and we expect to contribute approximately $12 million to our non-U.S. pension plans. On August 17, 2006, President Bush signed into law the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the PPA ). Among other things, the PPA established minimum funding standards for defined benefit plans for plan years beginning after 2007 and provided for accelerated vesting of employer contributions to defined contribution plans beginning in 2007. We are still evaluating the impact of the PPA on our future funding of our U.S. defined benefit pension plans. For further discussions on retirement benefits, see Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements, included in this Annual Report. OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES The process of preparing financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the use of estimates and assumptions to determine reported amounts of certain assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of related contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and assumptions are based upon information available at the time of the estimates or assumptions, including our historical experience, where relevant. The most significant estimates made by management include; timing and amount of revenue recognition; deferred taxes, tax valuation allowances and tax reserves; reserves for contingent losses; retirement and postretirement benefits; and valuation of goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets. The significant estimates are reviewed quarterly by management with oversight by our Disclosure Control Committee, an internal committee comprised of members of senior management, and the Disclosure Control Committee presents its views to the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Because of the uncertainty of factors surrounding the estimates, assumptions and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements, actual results may differ from the estimates, and the difference may be material. Our critical accounting policies are those policies that are both most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments on the part of management in their application, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We believe that the following represent our critical accounting policies. For a summary of all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Management and our external auditors have discussed our critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Revenue Recognition Revenues for product sales are recognized when the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the customers, which is based on the contractual delivery terms agreed to with the customer and fulfillment of all but inconsequential or perfunctory actions. In addition, our policy requires persuasive evidence of an arrangement, a fixed or determinable sales price and reasonable assurance of collectibility. For contracts containing multiple 55 Table of Contents elements, each having a determinable fair value, we recognize revenue in an amount equal to the elements pro rata share of the contract fair value in accordance with the contractual delivery terms for each element. If a customer arrangement requires formal acceptance, revenue is not recognized until formal acceptance has been received. Freight charges billed to customers are included in sales and the related shipping costs are included in cost of sales in our consolidated statements of income. Revenues for long-term contracts, which include contracts that exceed certain internal thresholds regarding the size and duration of the project and provide for the receipt of progress billings from the customer, are recorded on the percentage of completion method with progress measured on a cost-to-cost basis. Percentage of completion revenue represents approximately 7% of our consolidated sales in 2006. Revenue on service and repair contracts is recognized after services have been agreed to by the customer and rendered. Revenues generated under fixed fee service and repair contracts are recognized on a ratable basis over the term of the contract. These contracts can range in duration, but generally extend for up to five years. Fixed fee service contracts represent less than 1% of our consolidated sales in 2006. In certain instances, we provide guaranteed completion dates under the terms of our contracts. Failure to meet contractual delivery dates can result in unrealized incentive fees or non-recoverable costs. In instances where the payment of such costs are deemed to be probable, we perform a project profitability analysis accounting for such costs as a reduction of realizable revenues, which could potentially cause estimated total project costs to exceed projected total revenues realized from the project. In such instances, we would record reserves to cover such excesses in the period they are determined, which would adversely affect our results of operations and financial position. In circumstances where the total projected reduced revenues still exceed total projected costs, the incurrence of unrealized incentive fees or non-recoverable costs generally reduces profitability of the project at the time of subsequent revenue recognition. Our reported results would change if different estimates were used for contract costs or if different estimates were used for contractual contingencies. Deferred Taxes, Tax Valuation Allowances and Tax Reserves We recognize valuation allowances to reduce the carrying value of deferred tax assets to amounts that we expect are more likely than not to be realized. Our valuation allowances primarily relate to the deferred tax assets established for certain tax credit carryforwards and net operating loss carryforwards for U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries, and we evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing the related valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of these allowances, if necessary. We assess such factors as our forecast of future taxable income and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets in determining the sufficiency of our valuation allowances. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income in the applicable tax jurisdictions could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and could result in an increase in our effective tax rate on future earnings. Implementation of different tax structures in certain jurisdictions could, if successful, result in future reductions of certain valuation allowances. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which often result in proposed assessments. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions. We establish reserves for open tax years for certain positions that are subject to challenge by various tax authorities. The consolidated tax provision and related accruals include the impact of such reasonably estimable losses and related interest as deemed appropriate. We believe we have adequately provided for any reasonably foreseeable outcome related to these matters, and our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities. To the extent that the expected tax outcome of these matters changes, such changes in estimate will impact the income tax provision in the period in which such determination is made. Reserves for Contingent Loss Liabilities are recorded for various contingencies arising in the normal course of business when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and such loss is estimable. Assessments of reserves are based on information obtained from our independent and in-house experts, including recent legal decisions and loss experience in similar situations. The recorded legal reserves are susceptible to changes due to new developments regarding the facts and 56 Table of Contents circumstances of each matter, changes in political environments, legal venue and other factors. Recorded environmental reserves could change based on further analysis of our properties, technological innovation and regulatory environment changes. Retirement and Postretirement Benefits Determination of the value of our retirement and postretirement benefits liabilities is based on actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions that are assessed annually in the fourth quarter and which include: discount rates; expected return on plan assets for funded plans; life expectancy of participants; assumed rate of wage increases; and assumed rate of health care cost increases. We evaluate, in conjunction with our professional advisors, prevailing market conditions in countries where plans are maintained, including appropriate rates of return, interest rates and medical inflation rates. Specifically for our U.S. plan, we assess such market factors as changes in the cash balance interest crediting rate, borrowing rates for investment grade corporate and industrial companies, assumptions used by Fortune 500 companies, our actual wage increases in recent years, expected rates of return for each targeted asset class held by the plans and return premiums generated by active investment management. For the non-U.S. plans we perform similar analyses, but also factor in local laws and requirements. We also compare our significant assumptions with our peers and discuss our key assumptions, prior to their incorporation into actuarial calculations, with the Finance Committee of our Board of Directors. We evaluate the funded status of each retirement plan using current assumptions and determine the appropriate funding level considering applicable regulatory requirements, tax deductibility, reporting considerations, cash flow requirements and other factors. Valuation of Goodwill, Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets We record all assets and liabilities acquired in purchase acquisitions, including goodwill, indefinite-lived intangibles and other intangibles at fair value, as required by SFAS No. 141, Business Combinations. The initial recording of goodwill and intangibles requires subjective judgments concerning estimates of the fair value of the acquired assets. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized, but are subject to annual impairment tests. We test the value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment as of December 31 each year or whenever events or circumstances indicate such assets may be impaired. The test for goodwill impairment involves significant judgment in estimating projections of fair value generated through future performance of each of the reporting units, which correlate to our operating segments. The test of indefinite-lived intangibles involves significant judgment in estimating projections of future sales levels. Impairment losses for goodwill are recognized whenever the implied fair value of goodwill is less than the carrying value. Impairment losses for intangibles are recognized whenever the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value. In calculating the fair value of the reporting units using the present value of estimated future cash flows, we rely on a number of factors including operating results, business plans, economic projections, anticipated future cash flows and market data used in discounting those cash flows. Inherent uncertainties exist in determining and applying such factors. The discount rate used in the projection of fair value represents an internally estimated weighted average cost of capital of 9.37%. The net realizable value of other long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, is reviewed periodically, when indicators of potential impairments are present, based upon an assessment of the estimated future cash flows related to those assets, utilizing methodologies similar to that for goodwill and indefinite-lived assets. Additional considerations related to our long-lived assets include expected maintenance and improvements, changes in expected uses and ongoing operating performance and utilization. 57 Table of Contents Due to uncertain market conditions and potential changes in strategy and product portfolio, it is possible that forecasts used to support asset carrying values may change in the future, which could result in non-cash charges that would adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition. ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS We have presented the information about accounting pronouncements not yet implemented in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. OUTLOOK FOR 2007 Our future results of operations and other forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report, including this MD&A, involve a number of risks and uncertainties in particular, the statements regarding our goals and strategies, new product introductions, plans to cultivate new businesses, future economic conditions, revenue, pricing, gross margin and costs, capital spending, depreciation and amortization, research and development expenses, potential impairment of investments, the tax rate, and pending tax and legal proceedings. Our future results of operations may also be affected by the amount, type, and valuation of the share-based awards granted as well as the amount of awards forfeited due to employee turnover. In addition to the various important factors discussed above, a number of other factors could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations. See the risks described in Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A included in this Annual Report. We experienced continued strengthening in our markets in 2006 and we remain optimistic about our markets and our performance in 2007, considering that the economic opportunities in many of our geographic and core industrial markets continue to be strong. As a result of these factors, our revenues are expected to increase from 2006, excluding currency fluctuations. For additional discussion on our markets, see the Business Overview Our Markets section of this MD&A. Our bookings for continuing operations increased 23.4% in 2006 as compared with 2005. We believe this will translate into increased revenue in 2007. However, as a booking represents a contract that can be modified or canceled, there is no guarantee that the increase in bookings will result in the same increase in revenues. Additionally, as customer requested lead times have extended, the timing for conversion of a booking into revenue is extending accordingly. We expect our operating income to increase in 2007 as compared with 2006, although there are a numbers of factors that could have a significant impact on our operating income in 2007. We believe our 2007 operating income should continue to benefit from a number of operational improvement programs, including the procurement program and the CIP initiative, as well as other operational improvements in several of our facilities. In addition, continuation of our end user strategy, and selective contract bidding may also positively contribute to our operating income in 2007. However, a number of significant costs and certain other expenses will negatively impact our operating income in 2007. These include selected investments in technology infrastructure to consolidate our ERP systems; enhancements to our CIP initiative; professional fees incurred in the development of tax strategies and enhancement of our compliance programs; an increase in research and development spending; non-cash stock compensation expenses primarily related to the adoption of SFAS No. 123(R), and higher wage and benefit costs due to inflation. Additionally, the large proportion of original equipment business booked in 2006 by FPD may have some negative pressure on gross margin percentage as those are shipped in 2007 and beyond. While we expect our tax rate in 2007 to be less than in 2006, several things could negatively impact it, including the adoption of FIN No. 48 in 2007. Following the refinancing of our previous credit facilities and 12.25% Senior Subordinated Notes in August 2005, 100% of our debt carries a floating rate of interest. As of December 31, 2006 we had $435.0 million of derivative contracts to convert a portion of floating interest rates to fixed interest rates to reduce our exposure to interest rate volatility. As a result of our lower levels of debt in 2006, we expect our interest expense will be lower in 2007 as compared with 2006. However, because a portion of our debt carries a floating rate of interest, the debt is subject to volatility in rates, which could negatively impact interest expense. Our results of operations may also be impacted by unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate movements. See Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk. 58 Table of Contents We expect to generate sufficient cash from operations to fund our business, capital expenditures, pension plan contribution obligations and continue to reduce debt levels. We seek to continue to improve our working capital utilization, with a particular focus on improving the management of accounts receivable and inventory. However, the amount of cash generated from working capital is dependent on the level of revenues, backlog and other factors. Our plan for capital expenditures in 2007 is to focus on capacity expansion, enterprise resource planning application upgrades, information technology infrastructure and cost reduction opportunities and are expected to be between approximately $85 million and $90 million, before consideration of any acquisition activity. Currently, no significant acquisitions are imminent. While current pension regulations allow us latitude in the amount of contributions, we currently anticipate that our contributions to our qualified U.S. pension plan will be approximately $20 million in 2007. We currently anticipate that our contributions to our non-U.S. pension plans will be approximately $12 million in 2007. We have $2.8 million in scheduled repayments in 2007 under our Credit Facilities. We expect to comply with the covenants under our Credit Facilities in 2007. See the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this MD&A for further discussion of our debt covenants. As we have discussed in this and prior publicly filed reports, we are currently subject to lawsuits, internal investigations and regulatory investigations in the U.S. and in foreign countries, which could negatively impact our cash flows and results of operations. We believe we are currently dealing with these matters appropriately, and we are diligently striving to achieve the most favorable results. In 2006, the Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program that authorized the company to repurchase up to two million shares of common stock. As of December 31, 2006, 1.3 million shares had been repurchased under the program, and an additional 0.5 million shares had been purchased as of February 26, 2007. We expect to fund the program using existing cash and cash provided by operations, borrowings and stock option exercises. We expect that our corporate representatives will, from time to time, meet privately with investors, investment analysts, the media and others, and may reiterate the forward-looking statements contained in this Outlook for 2007 section and elsewhere in this Annual Report, including any such statements that are incorporated by reference in this Annual Report. At the same time, we will keep this Annual Report and our most current Business Outlook publicly available on our Investor Relations web site (www.intc.com). The public can continue to rely on the Business Outlook published on the web site as representing our current expectations on matters covered, unless we publish a notice stating otherwise. Statements in the Business Outlook and other forward-looking statements in this Annual Report are subject to revision during the course of the year in our quarterly earnings releases and SEC filings and at other times. 
