CIK: 313927
Company Name: CHURCH DWIGHT CO INC DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-03-13


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS ( MD&A ) Overview The Company develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of consumer and specialty products. It recognizes revenues and profits from selling its products under a variety of brands, including ARM & HAMMER and TROJAN, to consumers through supermarkets, drug stores and mass merchandisers; and to industrial customers and distributors. On May 28, 2004, the Company acquired the joint venture interest in Armkel owned by affiliates of Kelso & Company, and Armkel was merged into the Company. This is sometimes referred as the Armkel acquisition. The discussion of results of operations of Armkel are reflected in the results of operations since the acquisition on May 28, 2004. The Company operates in three primary segments, Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products. Our Consumer Domestic segment includes household products for deodorizing such as ARM & HAMMER baking soda and cat litter products, laundry and cleaning, such as XTRA and ARM & HAMMER laundry detergents, SCRUB FREE and BRILLO cleaning products; and personal care products, such as TROJAN condoms, NAIR depilatories and waxes, FIRST RESPONSE and ANSWER home pregnancy and ovulation test kits, ARRID antiperspirant and ARM & HAMMER, MENTADENT, CLOSE-UP, PEPSODENT and AIM toothpastes. Our Consumer International segment sells a variety of personal care products, some of which use the same brands as our domestic product lines, in international markets, including France, the United Kingdom, Canada, Mexico, Australia, Brazil and Spain. Our Specialty Products ( SPD ) segment is the largest U.S. producer of sodium bicarbonate, which it sells together with other specialty inorganic chemicals for a variety of industrial, institutional, medical and food applications. This segment also sells a range of animal nutrition and specialty cleaning products. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, our Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products segments represented approximately 70%, 17% and 13%, respectively, of net sales. For the three year period ended December 31, 2005, the Company earnings per share has grown at an average rate of 19.5%, its sales has increased from $1,047.1 million in 2002 to $1,736.5 million in 2005 and its income from operations has increased from $104.5 million in 2002 to $212.8 million in 2005. These increases principally reflect the Armkel and Unilever oral care business acquisitions. During 2005, the Company continued to experience extraordinary price increases for raw and packaging materials, diesel fuel and energy costs, partially as a result of strong demand from China and supply interruptions caused by hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The hurricanes devastating damage to oil and chemical production facilities in the Gulf region resulted in widespread shortages. While the Company was able to identify alternative supply sources at much higher costs, and maintain normal service levels, it was able to partially offset these higher costs through cost improvement programs and pricing actions taken over the last twelve months. The Company expects these increases to have some residual impact on its operations during the first half of 2006. The Company operates in highly competitive consumer product markets, in which cost efficiency, new product offerings and innovation are critical to success. The consumer products markets are particularly mature in North America and are characterized by high household penetration, particularly with respect to the Company most significant product categories such as laundry detergents and oral care. Furthermore, because of ongoing retail sector consolidation and the competitive environment facing retailers, the Company faces pricing pressure from these customers, particularly the high-volume retail store customers, who have increasingly sought to obtain pricing concessions or better trade terms. To protect its existing market share or to capture increased market share, the Company had to increase expenditures for promotions and advertising and to introduce and establish new products. Consequently, the need for ongoing cost cutting initiatives needs to be sustained as new product introductions or product line extensions remain the most viable path to generating organic top-line growth given the mature nature of most product categories in North American markets. Through its acquisitions, the Company has been able to lower its overall unit costs and increase the productivity of its various manufacturing facilities. This has resulted in higher levels of cash flow. 20 Table of Contents Recent Acquisitions On October 31, 2005, the Company closed on its previously announced acquisition of the SPINBRUSH toothbrush business from The Procter & Gamble Company ( P&G ). The Company paid $75.0 million in cash at closing. The Company will purchase the inventory following a transition period which is expected to be completed by mid 2006 and may make additional cash payments of up to $30.0 million based on the near-term performance of the business. The acquisition was funded out of the Company available cash. An independent appraisal of the assets acquired is in process. The financial statements included in this report reflect a preliminary allocation, which assigns a significant amount of the purchase price to intangible assets. During the transition period, while P&G continues to provide significant services, the Company is accounting for the net cash received from P&G as other revenue. The Company expects to complete the transition process by mid 2006. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company acquired a small skin care business in South America. The Company paid approximately $4.3 million, which was allocated to intangible assets. The results since the acquisition are included in the Consumer International segment. Critical accounting policies Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations addresses matters set forth in our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principals generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, our observance of trends in industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Our critical accounting policies include: Revenue Recognition and Promotional and sales returns reserves Most of the Company revenue represents sales of finished goods inventory and is recognized when delivered to or picked up by our customer. The reserves for consumer and trade promotion liabilities and sales returns are established based on our best estimate of the amounts necessary to settle future and existing claims on products sold as of the balance sheet date. Promotional reserves are provided for sales incentives made directly to consumers such as coupons and sales incentives made to vendors such as slotting, cooperative advertising, incentive discounts based on volume of sales and other arrangements. All such costs are netted against sales. Slotting costs are recorded when the related sale is recognized. Co-op advertising costs are recorded when the customer places the advertisement for the Company products. Discounts relating to price reduction arrangements are recorded when the related sale takes place. Costs associated with end-aisle or other in-store displays are recorded when product is sold relating to the promotion. The Company relies on historical experience and forecasted data to determine the required reserves. For example, the Company uses historical experience to project coupon redemption rates to determine reserve requirements. Based on the total face value of coupons redeemed over the past couple of years, if the actual rate of redemptions were to deviate by 0.1% from the rate accrued for in the financial statements, an approximately $0.9 million difference in the reserve required would result. With regard to other promotional reserves and sales returns, the Company uses experience-based estimates, customer and sales organization inputs, and historical trend analysis in arriving at the reserves required. If the Company estimates for vendor promotional activities and sales returns were to differ by 10% the impact to promotional spending and sales return accruals would be approximately $5 million. While management believes that its promotional and sales returns reserves are reasonable and that appropriate judgements have been made, estimated amounts could differ materially from actual future obligations. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, the Company reversed promotion liabilities of approximately $8.1 million based on changes to previous estimates, and in 2004 and 2003 the Company reversed promotion liabilities of approximately $10.2 million and $1.3 million, respectively. 21 Table of Contents Impairment of goodwill, trademarks and other intangible assets and property, plant and equipment Carrying values of goodwill, trademarks and other indefinite lived intangible assets are reviewed periodically for possible impairment in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets . The Company impairment review is based on a discounted cash flow approach that requires significant judgment with respect to volume, revenue and expense growth rates, and the selection of an appropriate discount rate. Management uses estimates based on expected trends in making these assumptions. With respect to goodwill, impairment occurs when the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the discounted present value of cash flows for that reporting unit. For trademarks and other intangible assets, an impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the net present value of estimated cash flows, which represents the estimated fair value of the asset. The Company uses its judgment in assessing whether assets may have become impaired between annual valuations. Indicators such as unexpected adverse economic factors, unanticipated technological change or competitive activities and acts by governments and courts may indicate that an asset has become impaired. Property, plant and equipment and other long-lived assets are reviewed periodically for possible impairment in accordance with SFAS No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets . The Company impairment review is based on an undiscounted cash flow analysis at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows exist. The analysis requires management judgment with respect to changes in technology, the continued success of product lines, and future volume, revenue and expense growth rates. The Company conducts annual reviews for idle and underutilized equipment, and reviews business plans for possible impairment implications. Impairment occurs when the carrying value of the asset exceeds the future undiscounted cash flows. When an impairment is indicated, the estimated future cash flows are then discounted to determine the estimated fair value of the asset and an impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the net present value of estimated future cash flows. In 2005, the Company recognized tradename impairment, plant impairment and restructuring and equipment obsolescence charges of approximately $18.7 million, of which $7.8 million, $7.7 million and $3.2 million were included in the operating results of the Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and SPD segments, respectively. In 2004, the Company recognized tradename, equipment obsolescence and plant impairment charges of $6.7 million, which were charged to the Consumer Domestic segment. In 2003, the Company recognized tradename, equipment obsolescence and plant impairment charges of approximately $2.7 million, which were charged to the Consumer Domestic segment. The estimates and assumptions used in connection with impairment analyses are consistent with the business plans and estimates that the Company uses to manage its business operations. The use of different assumptions would increase or decrease the estimated value of future cash flows and would have increased or decreased any impairment charge taken. Future outcomes may also differ. If the Company products fail to achieve estimated volume and pricing targets, market conditions unfavorably change or other significant estimates are not realized, then the Company revenue and cost forecasts may not be achieved, and the Company may be required to recognize additional impairment charges. Inventory valuation When appropriate, the Company writes down the carrying value of its inventory to the lower of cost or market (net realizable value), including any costs to sell or dispose. The Company identifies any slow moving, obsolete or excess inventory to determine whether a valuation allowance is needed. The determination of whether inventory items are slow moving, obsolete or in excess of needs requires estimates and assumptions about the future demand for the Company products, technological changes, and new product introductions. In addition, the Company allowance for obsolescence may be impacted by the reduction of the number of stock keeping units ( SKU ). The number of Domestic SKU has been reduced by approximately 46% over the last 2 years. To minimize this risk, the Company evaluates its inventory levels and expected usage on a periodic basis and records adjustments as required. Adjustments to the inventory net realizable value were $5.8 million at December 31, 2005, and $5.9 million at December 31, 2004. 22 Table of Contents Valuation of pension and postretirement benefit costs The Company pension and postretirement benefit costs are developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions provided by the Company to our actuaries, including the discount rate and expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. Material changes in the Company pension and postretirement benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions. The discount rate is subject to change each year, consistent with changes in applicable high-quality, long-term corporate bond indices. Based on the expected duration of the benefit payments for our pension plans and postretirement plans we refer to applicable indices such as Standard & Poors or the Moody AA Corporate Bond Index to select a rate at which we believe the pension benefits could be effectively settled. Based on the published rates as of December 31, 2005, as well as selected Corporate bonds matching our estimated cash flows of the plans, the Company used a discount rate of 5.75% for its three domestic plans. The discount rate used in 2005 is the same as the December 31, 2004 rate used for the domestic plans. The Company weighted average discount rate as of December 31, 2005, is 5.36% as compared to 5.58% used at December 31, 2004. All foreign subsidiaries lowered their discount rate at December 31, 2005. The expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets is selected by taking into account a historical trend, the expected duration of the projected benefit obligation for the plans, the asset mix of the plans, and known economic and market conditions at the time of valuation. Based on these factors, the Company weighted average expected long-term rate of return as of December 31, 2005 is 7.37%, a decline of 24 basis points from the 7.61% rate used at December 31, 2004. This decrease is due to the change in the expected long-term rate of the Company domestic plans from 8.25% to 7.75%. A 50 basis point change in the expected long-term rate of return would result in less than a $0.5 million change in pension expense for 2006. In accordance with SFAS No. 87, the Company recognized an additional minimum pension liability of $0.3 million in 2005, and recorded a charge, net of tax, to accumulated other comprehensive loss of $0.2 million which decreased stockholders equity. The charge to stockholders equity for the excess of additional pension liability represents a net loss not yet recognized as pension expense. The Company made cash contributions of approximately $5.3 million to certain of its pension plans in 2005. The Company estimates it will be required to make cash contributions to its pension plans of approximately $5.4 million in 2006. Tax contingencies The Company records liabilities in income taxes payable for potential assessments in various tax jurisdictions. The liabilities relate to tax return positions which, although supportable by the Company, may be challenged by the tax authorities. The Company adjusts these liabilities as a result of changes in tax legislation, interpretations of laws by courts, rulings by tax authorities, changes in estimates and the closing of the statute of limitations. The Company tax rate includes the impact of the liabilities and any changes to the liabilities. Settlement of any issue with the tax authorities would require the use of cash. Favorable resolution of an issue would be recognized as a reduction to the Company annual tax rate. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In December 2004, the FASB issued SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004), Share-Based Payment . SFAS No. 123R supersedes APB Opinion No. 25, which requires recognition of an expense when goods or services are provided. SFAS No. 123R requires the determination of the fair value of the share-based compensation at the grant date and the recognition of the related expense over the period in which the share-based compensation vests. SFAS No. 123R permits a modified prospective or retrospective transition method. Under the retrospective method, financial statements for prior periods are adjusted on a basis consistent with the pro forma disclosures required for those periods by the original SFAS No. 123. The Company adopted the provisions of SFAS 23 Table of Contents No. 123R effective January 1, 2006, and will begin recognizing an expense for unvested share-based instruments that has been issued or will be issued after that date. The Company has decided to apply the modified prospective method of adoption and anticipates the effect on diluted earnings per share to be approximately $0.08 in 2006. Under this method, compensation cost is recognized on or after the required effective date for the portion of outstanding awards, for which the requisite service has not yet been rendered, based on the grant date fair value of those awards calculated under Statement 123 for either recognition or pro forma disclosures. The American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (the AJCA ) was enacted on October 22, 2004. The AJCA repeals an export incentive, creates a new deduction for qualified domestic manufacturing activities and includes a special one-time deduction of 85% of certain foreign earnings repatriated to the U.S. The FASB issued FASB Staff Position No. FAS 109-1, Application of FASB Statement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, to the Tax Deduction on Qualified Production Activities Provided by the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (FSP FAS 109-1) on December 21, 2004. In accordance with FSP FAS 109-1, the Company treats the deduction for qualified domestic manufacturing activities, which became effective for the Company beginning January 1, 2005, as a reduction of the income tax provision in future years as realized. In December 2004, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position No. FAS 109-2, Accounting and Disclosure Guidance for the Foreign Earnings Repatriation Provision within the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004, allowing companies additional time to evaluate the effect of the AJCA on plans for reinvestment or repatriation of foreign earnings. The Company has decided not to repatriate any of its foreign earnings under the AJCA. FASB Interpretation No. 47 ( FIN No. 47 ), Accounting for Conditional Asset Retirement Obligations, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 143, was issued in March 2005 and is effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2005. FIN No. 47 provides clarification with respect to the timing of liability recognition for legal obligations associated with the retirement of tangible long-lived assets when the timing and/or method of settlement of the obligation is conditional on a future event. FIN No. 47 requires that the fair value of a liability for a conditional asset retirement obligation be recognized in the period in which it occurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value can be made. The adoption of FIN No. 47 did not have a material impact on the Company consolidated financial position or results of operations in 2005. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2005, 2004 AND 2003 The discussion of results of operations at the consolidated level presented below is followed by a more detailed discussion of results of operations by segment. The discussion of our segment operating results is presented on a historical basis for the years ending December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003. The segment discussion also addresses certain product line information. The Company reporting units are consistent with its reportable segments. Consolidated results 2005 compared to 2004 Net Sales Net Sales increased by $274.4 million or 18.8% to $1,736.5 million, compared to $1,462.1 million in 2004. The increase was largely due to the May 2004 Armkel acquisition, which contributed sales through May 27, 2005 of $208.1 million in 2005. Also contributing to the increase was the reversal of promotion reserves of $8.1 million, and favorable foreign exchange rates of $4.0 million. Effective price increases on certain domestic products and the third quarter introduction of ELEXA, a premium line of sexual health products for women, contributed to the higher sales. Late in 2005, the Company purchased the SPINBRUSH toothbrush business from P&G. As noted earlier, the Company is accounting for the net cash received during the transition period as other revenue, which amounted to an immaterial amount for the year. 24 Table of Contents Operating Costs The Company gross margin of 36.7% was virtually unchanged as compared to the 36.5% gross margin in 2004. The 2005 gross margin was affected by a $6.4 million charge associated with the closure of a sub-scale consumer products manufacturing operation abroad, and plant impairment and equipment obsolescence charges of $7.8 million. The gross margin was also impacted by higher commodity costs, particularly for oil-based raw and packaging materials used in household and specialty products businesses, partially offset by the effect of cost improvement programs and pricing actions which the Company has implemented over the past year and the previously mentioned reversal of promotion reserves. Gross margin was positively impacted by the full year effect of the Armkel acquisition, whose brands carry a higher gross margin than the Company existing product lines prior to the acquisition. The 2004 gross margin was affected by a $10.5 million inventory related purchase accounting charge associated with the Armkel acquisition and $4.8 million in plant obsolescence and impairment charges. Marketing expenses of $183.4 million increased $22.2 million or 13.8% from 2004, reflecting $28.0 million associated with the acquired Armkel brands during the first five months of 2005. Expenses for the introduction of ELEXA were more than offset by lower expenses for certain other Personal Care and Laundry and Cleaning products. Selling, general and administrative expenses ( SG&A ) of $240.8 million increased $40.4 million or 20.1% as compared to 2004. Costs associated with the former Armkel business for the five months ended May 27, 2005 were approximately $38.0 million. Included in the current year SG&A expenses are tradename impairment charges of $6.3 million and an $8.3 million charge related to litigation involving Andes Trading de Mexico S.A. (the Andes litigation ). (For a further explanation, please refer to item c in footnote 16, Commitments, contingencies and guarantees.) Other SG&A costs decreased in 2005 due to lower deferred and performance based compensation costs of approximately $3.0 million, and lower Sarbanes-Oxley Act related expenses of $2.2 million. Included in 2004 SG&A is $4 million of severance costs and the termination costs relating to a foreign subsidiary pension plan, and a $1.9 million tradename impairment charge. Other Income and Expenses The decrease in equity in earnings of affiliates of $10.3 million reflects the consolidation of the former Armkel business since the May 28, 2004 acquisition date. Included in the Company equity earnings from Armkel in 2004 is a $2.5 million tradename impairment charge. The combined results of the Company other equity investments, Armand Products Company ( Armand ) and The ArmaKleen Company ( ArmaKleen ), increased by $0.5 million. Interest expense of $44.1 million was $2.7 million higher than 2004. The increase can be attributed primarily to increased debt that was assumed by the Company as part of the Armkel acquisition, and the full year effect of new debt required to purchase the remaining interest in Armkel. Included in 2004 interest expense was $4.9 million associated with the Company settlement of an appraisal action brought by former Carter-Wallace shareholders and an indemnification arrangement involving Armkel and the Company, which acquired Carter-Wallace consumer products business in 2001. Net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $1.2 million is associated with the fourth quarter refinancing of the Company term loan. In 2004, the Company incurred charges of $22.9 million including an $8.0 million charge associated with the Company bank debt refinancing to effect the acquisition of Armkel and a $14.9 million charge related to the redemption of the Armkel 9 1 / 2 % Senior Subordinated Notes due 2009 assumed as part of the Armkel acquisition. Taxation The effective tax rate for 2005 was 29.8% as compared to 30.3% in 2004. The tax rate in 2005 was favorably impacted by the reversal of tax accruals of $7.4 million, of which $6.2 million related to the expiration 25 Table of Contents of the statute of limitations in connection with tax positions and $1.2 million was due to a lower effective state tax rate. Last year tax rate was favorably impacted by prior year research and development tax credits and other items totaling $4.6 million. 2004 compared to 2003 Net Sales Net sales increased by $405.2 million or 38.3% to $1,462.1 million, compared to $1,056.9 million in the previous year. The increase was primarily due to the Armkel acquisition and the oral care business acquisition which contributed sales of $380.4 million in 2004. Also contributing to the increase was the effect of favorable foreign exchange rates of $4.6 million, and $10.2 million resulting from the reversal of prior year promotion reserves due to a change in estimate. The 2003 sales also included $25.2 million generated by the oral care business, which was acquired from Unilever in fourth quarter and $1.3 million due to the reversal of prior year promotion adjustments. Operating Costs The Company gross margin increased to 36.5% from 30.1% in the prior year. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to the Armkel acquisition and full year effect of the oral care business acquisition. The acquired products carried a higher gross margin than the Company existing product lines prior to the acquisitions. Included in the 2004 gross margin was the impact of a $10.5 million inventory related purchase accounting charge associated with the Armkel acquisition and $4.8 million in plant obsolescense and impairment charges. Gross profit in 2003 included a $5.9 million inventory related purchase accounting charge related to the oral care business acquisition. Marketing expenses of $161.2 million increased $72.4 million or 81% from 2003. Approximately $62 million of the increase was associated with the acquired Armkel and oral care brands. Marketing expenses for existing brands increased $10 million primarily in support of Deodorizing and Cleaning products, Personal Care products and new product activity. This increase was partially offset by lower expense for BRILLO SCRUB N TOSS, which was introduced in 2003. Selling, general and administrative expenses of $200.5 million increased $83.1 million or 41% as compared to 2003. This increase was primarily due to approximately $62.0 million associated with the former Armkel business and additional costs in support of the oral care business acquisition. Other increases include $4.0 million of severance costs and the termination costs relating to a foreign subsidiary pension plan, a $1.9 million tradename impairment charge, higher performance related compensation costs of $6.4 million, higher Sarbanes-Oxley Act compliance expenses of $3.7 million, and higher research & development ( R&D ) expenses of $1.7 million (exclusive of costs to support the acquired Armkel and oral care brands). Other Income and Expenses The decrease in equity in earnings of affiliates of $13.5 million reflected the consolidation of the former Armkel business since the May 28, 2004 acquisition date. Included in the Company equity earnings from Armkel in 2004 was a $2.5 million tradename impairment charge. The 2003 result benefited from a litigation settlement, partially offset by an impairment of an asset held for sale, for a net contribution to the Company of approximately $5 million. The combined results of the Company other equity investments, Armand and ArmaKleen increased by $0.8 million. Interest expense increased $21.0 million to $41.4 million. The increase primarily was attributable to increased debt that was assumed by the Company as part of the Armkel acquisition, and new debt required to purchase the remaining interest in Armkel, a $4.9 million third quarter interest payment related to a legal settlement and the full year effect of the debt required to purchase the oral care business. 26 Table of Contents Net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $22.9 million included an $8.0 million charge incurred in the second quarter of 2004 associated with the Company bank debt refinancing to effect the acquisition of Armkel and a $14.9 million charge in the fourth quarter related to the redemption of the Armkel 9 1 / 2 % Senior Subordinated Notes due 2009 assumed as part of the Armkel acquisition. The charge in 2003 of $4.1 million was associated with the bank debt refinanced to acquire the oral care business. Investment income was approximately $1.9 million higher than in 2003 as a result of a higher amount of investable cash available and slightly higher interest rates. Other income and expense includes the effect of foreign exchange remeasurement gains related to intercompany loans between the Company subsidiaries. Taxation The effective tax rate for 2004 was 30.3% as compared to 30.8% in 2003. This year tax rate was favorably impacted by prior year R&D tax credits and other items of $4.6 million. The 2003 tax rate reflected a settlement of a state tax matter as well as the resolution of other tax contingencies. Segment results for 2005, 2004 and 2003 Segment results are presented based upon segments as described in Note 18 of the notes to the Company audited consolidated financial statements. The Company has three reportable segments based on differences in the nature of products and organizational and ownership structures. Specifically, the Company has identified the following segments: Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products. The Company also has a Corporate segment. Segment revenues are derived from the sale of the following products: Segment Products Consumer Domestic Household and personal care products Consumer International Primarily personal care products Specialty Products Specialty chemical products The Company continues to have a 50 percent ownership interest in the Armand and ArmaKleen partnerships as of December 31, 2005. Since the Company did not control these entities as of December 31, 2005, they were accounted for under the equity method in the consolidated financial statements, and the Company equity in earnings are included in Income Before Taxes and Minority Interest of the Corporate segment. On May 28, 2004, the Company purchased the remaining 50% of Armkel that it did not own, and Armkel was merged into the Company. Operating results for the former Armkel business have been fully consolidated in the Consumer Domestic and Consumer International segments for periods subsequent to May 28, 2004. The Company equity in earnings of Armkel domestic operations for the period up to May 28, 2004 are included in Income Before Taxes and Minority Interest of the Consumer Domestic segment, and equity in earnings of Armkel international operations for the period up to May 28, 2004 are included in Income Before Taxes and Minority Interest of the Consumer International segment. 27 Table of Contents The following table presents selected financial information relating to the Company segments for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2005. The segment discussion also presents product line fluctuations. (Dollars in thousands) Consumer Domestic Consumer Internat l SPD Corporate Total Net Sales 2005 $ 1,218,221 $ 297,241 $ 221,044 $ $ 1,736,506 2004 1,077,101 176,694 208,267 1,462,062 2003 832,064 36,974 187,836 1,056,874 Income Before Taxes & Minority Interest 2005 $ 142,669 $ 14,322 $ 14,343 $ 3,549 $ 174,883 2004 112,672 15,320 17,984 (18,533 ) 127,443 2003 89,748 11,647 16,195 (625 ) 116,965 Consumer Domestic 2005 compared to 2004 Consumer Domestic Net Sales increased $141.1 million or 13.1% to $1,218.2 million in 2005. Personal Care Products increased $107.9 million primarily due to sales associated with the domestic results of the former Armkel products of $102.3 million for the five months ended May 27, 2005, higher sales of condoms and diagnostic kits and sales associated with ELEXA, partially offset by lower oral care product sales. Household product sales increased $33.2 million or 4.9% due to higher sales of ARM & HAMMER and XTRA liquid laundry products, ARM & HAMMER SUPER SCOOP cat litter, partially offset by lower sales of powdered laundry detergent. Other increases included in the segment results is $6.8 million associated with the reduction of promotion reserves due to a change in estimate. In a effort to reduce the impact of higher raw and packaging costs, the Company implemented price increases for about 20% of its Consumer Domestic products, during the latter part of 2004 and 2005. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company announced price increases ranging from 4% to over 10% for products representing about 35% of its U.S. consumer products portfolio, effective February 1, 2006. The products affected include ARM & HAMMER and XTRA liquid laundry detergents, ARM & HAMMER SUPER SCOOP cat litter and ARM & HAMMER baking soda. Due to the timing of previously agreed promotional events, the full benefit of the price increase will not be realized until the second quarter of 2006. Consumer Domestic Income before Taxes and Minority Interest increased $30.0 million to $142.7 million. This is primarily due to the increased contribution from the former Armkel products for the entire year, the profit impact resulting from higher sales of liquid laundry detergent, TROJAN, FIRST RESPONSE and cat litter products, lower marketing expenses for certain personal care products lower performance based compensation costs, and lower interest expense (which includes the elimination of the segment allocation of the interest expense portion of the settlement of the appraisal action brought by former Carter-Wallace shareholders). In addition, 2004 results reflected impairment charges of $6.7 million and a $10.5 million inventory step-up charge. The increased profitability was partially offset by higher manufacturing and freight costs in 2005 resulting from higher oil and natural gas prices due in part to Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, which the Company estimates to be $6.0 million. These cost increases were partially offset by the effect of substantial cost improvements, as well as price increases for about 20% of the segment products which were implemented during 2005. The segment profitability was also negatively impacted by tradename and plant impairment and obsolescence charges of $7.8 million and an increase in intangible assets amortization. 2004 compared to 2003 Consumer Domestic Net Sales increased $245.0 million to $1,077.1 million for the year. The increase was largely due to the Armkel and oral care business acquisitions, which contributed an additional $214.9 million in 28 Table of Contents sales, and the reversal of $9.6 million of prior year promotion reserves due to a change in estimate. At the product line level, after accounting for the effect of the previously mentioned items, net sales of deodorizing and cleaning products rose strongly, laundry products rose slightly and personal care products declined. At the brand level, sales of ARM & HAMMER and XTRA liquid laundry detergent, ARM & HAMMER SUPER SCOOP cat litter, and ARM & HAMMER toothpaste were all above 2003, while sales of laundry detergent powder, fabric softeners and antiperspirants were lower. The trend of higher liquid laundry detergent and lower powder detergent sales continued in 2004 as an increasing number of consumers switched to the liquid form of the product. Consumer Domestic Income Before Taxes and Minority Interests increased $23.0 million to $112.7 million in 2004 as compared to $89.7 million in 2003. This was primarily a result of the Armkel and oral care business acquisitions. This increase was negatively impacted by the inventory related purchase accounting charge in 2004 of $8.2 million, $4.8 million in plant obsolescence and impairment charges and a tradename impairment charge of $1.9 million. The results of 2003 include the effect of a $5.9 million inventory related purchase accounting charge. Existing Consumer Domestic products earnings contributions were slightly higher in 2004 as a result of higher gross profit partially offset by higher marketing in support of Deodorizing and Cleaning products, certain Personal Care products, new product activity and SG&A expenses. The segment earnings from affiliates was significantly lower than in 2003 as a result of the Armkel acquisition, whose results since May 28, 2004 were included in the segment operating results. Interest expense was significantly higher due to the debt required to purchase Armkel, debt assumed as part of the Armkel acquisition and the full year effect of interest associated with the debt to purchase the oral care business. Consumer International 2005 compared to 2004 Consumer International Net Sales increased $120.5 million or 68.2% to $297.3 million for the year. This is primarily due to $105.8 million of sales associated with the former Armkel international business during the five months ended May 27, 2005 and $4.2 million relating to favorable foreign exchange rates. The balance of the increase is primarily due to growth in Canada, which saw stronger sales of household products, England, which had higher sales of test kits and skin care products and Brazil, as a result of the skin care product acquired in late 2005. Also included in the segment results was $1.3 million associated with the reduction of promotion reserves due to a change in estimate. Income before Taxes and Minority Interest for the year was $14.3 million, a reduction of $1.0 million as compared to last year. While 2005 results benefited from the inclusion of the former Armkel business for the five month period ended May 28, 2005, this was more than offset by tradename impairment charges of $3.0 million and the charge for the Andes litigation and higher marketing expenses. (For a further explanation of the Andes litigation, please refer to item c in footnote 16, Commitments, contingencies and guarantees.) During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company recorded a $6.4 million restructuring charge (which includes both severance and asset impairment charges) associated with the closure of a consumer packaged goods plant at one of its international locations. The prior year was negatively impacted by a $1.6 million inventory step-up charge. 2004 compared to 2003 Consumer International Net Sales rose $139.7 million to $176.7 million. This increase included $138.0 million that was attributable to the former Armkel foreign subsidiaries and $2.4 million associated with favorable foreign exchange rates. Existing product sales were virtually unchanged. Consumer International Income Before Taxes and Minority Interest of $15.3 million was $3.7 million or 31.5% higher than in 2003 primarily due to contributions from the former Armkel foreign subsidiaries. Higher operating profit of $9.6 million was partially offset by lower equity in earnings of affiliates of $3.8 million and an allocation of interest expense. The 2004 results included a $2.3 million inventory related purchase accounting charge relating to the Armkel acquisition and a charge included in SG&A for the termination of a pension plan. 29 Table of Contents Specialty Products 2005 compared to 2004 Specialty Products Net Sales grew $12.8 million or 6.1% to $221.0 million, as a result of higher sales of animal nutrition products and specialty chemical products. Specialty Products Income before Taxes and Minority Interest for the year decreased $3.6 million to $14.3 million. The decrease is primarily due to fixed asset impairment charges at the segment foreign operations of $3.2 million. Higher contribution from higher sales of animal nutrition and specialty chemical products were offset by higher manufacturing costs worldwide. 2004 compared to 2003 Specialty Products Net Sales increased $20.4 million or 10.9% to $208.3 million in 2004 due to higher sales of animal nutrition and specialty chemical products. Also impacting the sales increase was favorable foreign exchange rates of approximately $2.2 million. Specialty Products Income Before Taxes and Minority Interest of $18.0 million was $1.8 million or 11.1% above the prior year. This increase was due to higher gross profit contributions by both animal nutrition and specialty chemical products, partially offset by higher marketing expenses in support of animal nutrition products and a higher amount of allocated interest expense. Competitive Environment Many of our competitors are large companies, including The Procter & Gamble Company, Unilever, Inc., The Clorox Company, Colgate-Palmolive Company, S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc., Henkel, Reckett Benckiser, Pfizer, Inverness and SSL International, many of which have greater financial resources than the Company. These companies have the capacity to outspend the Company if they attempt to gain market share. Because of the competitive environment facing retailers, the Company faces pricing pressure from these customers, particularly the high-volume retail store customers, who have increasingly sought to obtain pricing concessions or better trade terms. These concessions or terms could reduce the Company margins. Furthermore, if the Company is unable to maintain price or trade terms acceptable to its trade customers, the customers could increase product purchases from our competitors, which would harm the Company sales and profitability. Consumer products, particularly those that are value-priced, such as laundry and household cleaning products are subject to significant price competition. From time to time, the Company may need to reduce the prices for some of its products to respond to competitive and customer pressures and to maintain market share. The Company competes in the oral care and personal care and deodorizing businesses using the unique strengths of its ARM & HAMMER trademark and baking soda technology. These are highly innovative markets, characterized by a continuous flow of new products and line extensions, and requiring heavy advertising and promotion. In the toothpaste category, after leading its category in growth several years ago, driven by the success of ARM & HAMMER ADVANCE WHITE toothpaste, the Company share dropped in 2003 mainly as a result of competitive new products and aggressive spending by other manufacturers in the category. However in 2004, share increased modestly based upon the introduction of ARM & HAMMER ENAMEL CARE. Shares in 2005 declined slightly. Early in 2004, the Company launched ARM & HAMMER ENAMEL CARE toothpaste, its most important oral care innovation in several years. ENAMEL CARE is based on proprietary formulation and packaging 30 Table of Contents technology which combines the cleaning and whitening properties of baking soda with fluoride and patented liquid calcium in a dual chamber tube to fill tooth surfaces and restore enamel luster. The product is available in two variants: Advanced Cleaning and Natural Whitening. In 2005, the Company introduced ARM & HAMMER ENAMEL CARE with Breath Defense, which combines LIQUID CALCIUM technology with additional long-lasting breath benefits. In addition, the entire ARM & HAMMER toothpaste line has been re-staged with new packaging graphics designed to return the brand to its original emphasis on therapeutic benefits. In 2006, the Company will introduce an improved version of ARM & HAMMER ENAMEL CARE toothpaste with Liquid Calcium to strengthen tooth enamel. In 2005, the Company launched MENTADENT REPLENISHING WHITE toothpaste with liquid calcium technology to strengthen tooth enamel and prevent stains from forming. Other important personal care initiatives, included additions to the ARM & HAMMER ULTRAMAX antiperspirant line in 2004. In 2005, the entire ARRID antiperspirant line was restaged with improved formulas, fragrances and packaging. This restage helped to reduce the rate of share decline during the second half of 2005. The domestic condom market is highly concentrated in product offerings with a limited number of competitors. The market is divided between premium brands and price brands, with companies competing on the basis of quality, innovation and price. The major domestic producers are the Company, with its TROJAN, NATURALAMB and CLASS ACT brands, SSL International with its Durex and Avanti brands, and Ansell with its Lifestyles brand. The Company is the market leader with an approximate 70% share in the U.S. The Company is currently the leading advertiser in the U.S. condom category based on dollars spent. In 2004, the Company added two new products to the TROJAN condom line, SHARED PLEASURE and MAGNUM WITH WARM SENSATION, a unique lubricant system which warms the skin on contact for advanced pleasure. In 2005, the Company introduced TROJAN MINT TINGLE, a uniquely flavored lubricated condom. In addition, the successful Warming Sensations lubricating system introduced last year was extended to the HER PLEASURE line of TROJAN condoms. There will be several new additions to the TROJAN product line in 2006, including a new ultra-thin condom. In 2005, the Company launched ELEXA, a premium line of sexual health products for women. The line is located in the feminine care aisle of the store and includes condoms and other products that are designed to provide women with the freedom to pursue a healthy and fulfilling sex life. The domestic market for home pregnancy and ovulation test kits is divided between premium and value brands. The Company markets its FIRST RESPONSE pregnancy kits in the premium segment with a superior use 5 days before a missed period claim and ANSWER in the value segment of the category. The home pregnancy test kit industry is highly competitive and in 2003 the first digital pregnancy kit was introduced by Inverness . In 2004, Pfizer also introduced digital pregnancy kits . The major domestic pregnancy test kit producers are the Company, Pfizer and Inverness . In 2005, the Company introduced ANSWER Daily Ovulation Tracker, which makes ovulation tracking simpler. In 2005, the Company achieved the number one share position with a 26% share in the U.S. A major new enhancement to the FIRST RESPONSE pregnancy kit product line will be launched in the first half of 2006. The domestic depilatories and waxes market is highly concentrated with a limited number of competitors. Products compete based on their functionality, innovation and price. The major domestic manufacturers are the Company with its NAIR brand, Del Labs with its Sally Hansen brand, Reckitt Benckiser with its Veet brand. The Company believes that, as a result of its dedicated advertising and promotional programs, distinct packaging and several successful line extensions, NAIR is positioned to continue to be a major participant in lotion and cream depilatories. In 2004, the Company introduced a No Touch line of depilatory products. In 2005, there were several new additions to the NAIR depilatory line, including a novel bladeless shaving kit. In 2006, the entire NAIR product line will be relaunched with a significantly improved product in new packaging. During 2003, the Company completed the national distribution of ARM & HAMMER EASY FLUSH Clumping Cat Litter, a major new addition to its cat litter line. The Company also repackaged its XTRA Liquid Laundry Detergent line in vibrant new bottle colors cued to the product fragrance variants, and expanded distribution of this product line in the mass channel. In late 2004, the Company launched ARM & HAMMER 31 Table of Contents Multi-Cat clumping cat litter, a superior deodorizing litter designed for the large number of households with two or more cats. Early in 2005, the Company introduced ARM & HAMMER Detergent Plus a Touch of Softener which combines detergent and fabric softener technologies to meet the needs of consumers who want trusted cleaning efficacy with a softening benefit. The Company is currently introducing a reformulated and improved version of its Perfume & Dye Free liquid laundry detergent for sensitive skin, building on the reputation of the ARM & HAMMER trademark for being strong but gentle. The Company is also expanding distribution of a concentrated version of ARM & HAMMER laundry detergent powder previously only available in limited distribution. In addition, new product introductions for the pet and deodorizing categories are planned for the second and third quarters of 2006. Internationally, the Company products compete in similar, competitive categories. Some of the Company U.S. branded products are also marketed in other countries, holding leading or number two market share positions. Examples include: TROJAN in Canada, Mexico, and the U.K. and NAIR, in Canada, Mexico, France, Australia, and the U.K. In Spain, the Company depilatory products are marketed under the TAKY brand name. The Company also has a position in the cosmetic whitening dentifrice segment with its PEARL DROPS brand in the U.K., Australia, Italy, and Germany (under the PERLWEISS brand), as well as in France (where the Company products are marketed as EMAIL DIAMANT). The Company markets home pregnancy test kits in many countries, under such brand names as FIRST RESPONSE, DISCOVER, CONFIDELLE, and ANSWER. This category has been negatively affected in international markets by the introduction of many lower-priced and private label products, but the Company has seen some growth for its international business recently as it introduced the use 4 days before an expected period claim. In the skin care category the Company markets such brands as LINEANCE and BARBARA GOULD in France, the former for anti-cellulite and general body care and the latter for facial care. In Spain, the Company markets EUDERMIN hand care cream, in the mass market class of trade, where it has a number two position. Recently this line has been expanded to include body and foot care products. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company purchased a small skin care brand in South America. In various countries the Company also markets OTC pharmaceutical products. These include GRAVOL and OVOL, the leading anti-nauseant and anti-gas brands in Canada, the PANGAVIT range of vitamin supplements in Mexico, STERIMAR, a sea-water nasal hygiene product sold in France and in about fifty other countries, including most recently Mexico. In the Specialty Products segment, competition within the specialty chemicals and animal nutrition product lines remains intense. The specialty chemicals business operates in a competitive environment influenced by capacity utilization, buyers leverage and the impact of raw material and energy costs. Both the specialty chemical and animal nutrition businesses have experienced increases in key raw material and energy costs. In addition, the animal nutrition business is affected by the general health of the dairy economy. Both businesses are passing on cost increases where possible and are developing products and applications designed to be differentiated by their value in use. The Company continues to pursue opportunities to build a specialized industrial cleaning business using our aqueous-based technology. In 1999, the Company extended its alliance with Safety-Kleen Corp. to build a specialty cleaning products business based on our technology and their sales and distribution organization. The second year of this alliance was impacted by Safety-Kleen financial difficulties, leading to a Chapter 11 filing in June of 2000, and a major reorganization implemented during the second half of that year. Safety-Kleen Corp. emerged from bankruptcy in 2003. In 2005 The ArmaKleen Company introduced AQUAWORKS Paint and Ink Remover. While this opportunity has demonstrated more stability and continues to have potential for growth, the long-term prospects of the business will not be known for some time. 32 Table of Contents Liquidity and capital resources Net Debt The Company had outstanding total debt of $756.5 million and cash of $126.7 million (of which $51.1 million resides in foreign subsidiaries). Total debt less cash ( Net debt ) was $629.8 million at December 31, 2005. The Company had outstanding total debt of $858.7 million, and cash of $145.5 million, resulting in net debt of $713.2 million at December 31, 2004. The decrease in the Company net debt position of $83.4 million is primarily due to strong cash flow from operations which was used to invest in property, plant and equipment, purchase the SPINBRUSH business from P&G, pay cash dividends and make both mandatory and voluntary debt payments. Year Ending December 31, (in thousands) 2005 2004 2003 Cash Flow Analysis Net cash provided by operation activities $ 190,107 $ 199,030 $ 119,309 Net cash (used in) investing activities (105,114 ) (229,807 ) (142,649 ) Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities (101,224 ) 96,381 21,859 Net Cash Provided by Operations The Company net cash provided by operations decreased $8.9 million, to $190.1 million in 2005. The decrease in net cash provided by operations was due primarily to an increase in working capital (exclusive of cash and cash equivalents) and other liabilities of $4.9 million in 2005, while in 2004, these items decreased by $63.3 million from 2003. The impact of the increase in working capital was partially offset by higher operating income before non-cash charges for depreciation, amortization, plant obsolescence, restructuring and impairment charges. For the year ended December 31, 2005, the components of working capital impacted operating cash flow as follows: Accounts receivable increased by $28.4 million as compared to fiscal year end 2004. This increase was largely due to the Company strong fourth quarter net sales, which were 6.5% higher than the fourth quarter of 2004. Accounts receivable in 2004 decreased $42.7 million as compared to 2003 due to the impact of the Armkel acquisition, which had higher than average accounts receivable on the date of acquisition. Inventories increased in 2005 by $9.8 million due to the impact of higher raw and packaging costs experienced in 2005, inventory in support of the new ELEXA brand and the need to support higher sales. Inventories declined in 2004 by $4.9 million reflecting lower raw material inventories. The net increase of $34.3 million in accounts payable, taxes payable and other liabilities includes the additional reserve recorded in connection with the Andes litigation of $8.3 million and the timing of tax payments. The increase in 2004 as compared to 2003 is primarily related to higher accrued employee compensation costs and higher sales promotion accruals. Net Cash Used in Investing Activities Cash used in investing activities in 2005 of $105.1 million reflected $81.1 million utilized for the acquisitions of SPINBRUSH and the skin care product in South America, and investments of $37.7 million in property, plant and equipment. These uses of cash were partially offset by proceeds of $14.7 million associated mainly with the sale of the Cranbury facility. Cash used in investing activities in 2004 of $229.8 million primarily reflected $194.2 million utilized in the Armkel acquisition and investments of $35.6 million in property, plant and equipment. Net Cash Used in Financing Activities During 2005, net cash used in financing activities was $101.2 million. This represents Term Loan B voluntary debt payments of $100.0 million, the redemption of all the remaining 9 1 / 2 % Senior Subordinated Notes of $6.4 million and the payments of dividends of $15.3 million. These uses were partially offset by proceeds from stock option exercises of $17.2 million. 33 Table of Contents On December 23, 2005, the Company entered into an amended and restated credit agreement (the Credit Agreement ) with a number of banks and other financial institutions. This amended and restated Credit Agreement provides for a five year Term Loan A in a principal amount of $300.0 million, and may be increased by up to an additional $250.0 million through an accordion feature upon the satisfaction of certain conditions, and continues the existing five year multi-currency revolving credit and letter of credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $100.0 million. The obligations of the Company under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company and certain of its domestic subsidiaries. Those domestic subsidiaries have also guaranteed the loan obligations under the Credit Agreement. Certain of the covenants in the amended and restated credit agreement were also modified. The Term Loan and the Revolving Loans bear interest under one of two rate options, selected by the Company, equal to (a) either (i) a eurocurrency rate (adjusted for any reserve requirements) ( Eurocurrency Rate ) or (ii) the greater of the prime rate, the secondary market rate for three-month certificates of deposit (adjusted for any reserve requirements) plus the applicable FDIC assessment rate plus 1.0%, or the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5% ( Alternate Base Rate ), plus (b) an applicable margin. On the closing date of the new agreement, the applicable margin was (a) 1.00% for the Eurocurrency rate and (b) 0% for the alternate rate. The term loan was used to refinance the Company Term Loan B and the revolving loans are available for general corporate purposes. Adjusted EBITDA is a required component of the financial covenants contained in the Company primary credit facility and Senior Subordinated Notes. Management believes that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors as a financial indicator of the Company ability to service its indebtedness. Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other entities and should not be considered as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities, which is determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Financial covenants include a total debt to Adjusted EBITDA leverage ratio and an interest coverage ratio, which, if not met, could result in an event of default and trigger the early termination of the credit facility and notes, if not remedied within a certain period of time. The definition of Adjusted EBITDA in the notes is not materially different than that of the credit agreement. Adjusted EBITDA was approximately $288.4 million for 2005. The leverage ratio (total debt to Adjusted EBITDA) for 2005 was 2.59 versus the Credit Agreement maximum of 4.25 which will be in effect as of March 31, 2006, and the interest coverage ratio (Adjusted EBITDA to total interest expense) was 6.54 versus the Agreement minimum of 3.0. This Credit Agreement is secured by the assets of the Company and certain domestic subsidiaries. The reconciliation of Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities (the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure) to Adjusted EBITDA is as follows (in millions): Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 190.1 Interest Expense 44.1 Current Income Tax Provision 49.7 Change in Working Capital and Other Liabilities 4.9 Investment Income (4.0 ) Other 3.6 Adjusted EBITDA (per loan agreement) $ 288.4 Net Cash Used in Investing Activities $ (105.1 ) Net Cash Used in Financing Activities $ (101.2 ) 34 Table of Contents Commitments as of December 31, 2005 The table below summarizes the Company material contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2005. Payments Due by Period (In thousands) Total 2006 2007 to 2008 2009 to 2010 After 2010 Short & Long-Term Debt Syndicated Financing Loans $ 300,000 $ 15,000 $ 60,000 $ 225,000 $ Senior Subordinated Notes 250,000 250,000 Convertible Debentures 100,000 100,000 Securitization of A/R Facility 92,500 92,500 Bank Overdrafts 2,985 2,985 Various Debt from International Banks 11,058 10,797 261 756,543 121,282 60,261 225,000 350,000 Interest on Fixed Rate Debt (1) 250,001 20,250 40,500 40,500 148,751 Operating Lease Obligations 65,219 14,907 21,635 16,674 12,003 Other Long-Term Liabilities Letter of Credit (2) 5,716 5,716 Guarantees (3) 100 100 Surety/Performance Bonds (4) 636 636 Purchase Obligations (5) 73,308 51,578 21,730 Total $ 1,151,523 $ 214,469 $ 144,126 $ 282,174 $ 510,754 (1) Represents interest on the Company 5.25% senior convertible debentures due 2033 and interest on the 6% senior subordinated notes due in 2012. (2) Letters of credit with several banks guarantee payment for items such things as insurance claims in the event of the Company insolvency and one year of lease payments on a warehouse. (3) Guarantees represent minimum performance based payment obligations in connection with the Unilever oral care business acquisition. (4) Surety/performance bonds were established for construction of the Company headquarters addition in Princeton, NJ and for construction activities at the Company North Brunswick, NJ plant. (5) The Company has outstanding purchase obligations with suppliers at the end of 2005 for raw, packaging and other materials and services in the normal course of business. These purchase obligation amounts represent only those items which are based on agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and do not represent total anticipated purchases. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements The Company does not have off-balance sheet financing or unconsolidated special purpose entities. Financial Condition The Company generally relies on operating cash flows supplemented by borrowings to meet its financing requirements. The Company broad product portfolio, strong brand names and market positions have provided a stable base of cash flow. Our broad product line is marketed through multiple distribution channels. The Company believes that, as is the case with other basic consumer products, consumers purchase most of its products largely independent of economic cycles. However, the Company ability to meet its financial obligations depends on successful financial and operating performance. The Company cannot guarantee that its 35 Table of Contents business strategy will succeed or that it will achieve the anticipated financial results. The Company financial and operational performance depends upon a number of factors, many of which are beyond its control. These factors include: Competitive conditions in the categories of the consumer products industry in which the Company competes; The Company ability to retain certain principal customers, such as Wal-Mart; Operating difficulties, operating costs or pricing pressures the Company may experience; Passage of legislation or other regulatory developments that affect the Company adversely; Delays in implementing any strategic projects; and Current geo-political events. The Company has a total debt-to-capital ratio of approximately 52%. At December 31, 2005 the Company had approximately $94.3 million of additional domestic borrowing capacity available through the revolving loans under its Credit Agreement and a $250 million accordion feature associated with the Term Loan. Management believes that operating cash flow, coupled with the Company access to credit markets, will be sufficient to meet the anticipated cash requirements for the coming year. However, the Company cannot give assurance that it will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that it will be able to obtain sufficient funding to satisfy all its obligations, including those noted above. If the Company is unable to pay its obligations, it will be required to pursue one or more alternative strategies, such as selling assets, refinancing or restructuring indebtedness or raising additional equity capital. However, the Company cannot give assurance that any alternative strategies will be feasible or prove adequate to satisfy its obligations. OTHER ITEMS Market risk Concentration of Risk A group of three Consumer Domestic customers accounted for approximately 25% of consolidated net sales in 2005, including a single customer, Wal-Mart, which accounted for approximately 18%. A group of three Consumer Domestic customers accounted for approximately 26% of consolidated net sales in 2004, including Wal-Mart, which accounted for approximately 18%. A group of three Consumer Domestic customers accounted for approximately 26% of consolidated net sales in 2003, including Wal-Mart, which accounted for approximately 17%. As part of the USA Detergents merger agreement in 2001, the Company divested USA Detergents non-laundry business and other non-core assets to former USA Detergents executives under the new company name of USA Metro, Inc. ( USAM ), subsequently renamed USA Detergents ( USAD ). The Company had a concentration of risk with USAD at December 31, 2005 in the form of trade accounts receivable and an amount due for leased space of approximately $3.4 million at December 31, 2005 and approximately $2.8 million at December 31, 2004, a $0.6 million equity interest in USAD and a note receivable of $2.0 million (a balloon payment on the note is due in early 2007). This note has a carrying value of approximately $1.4 million using an effective interest rate of 17%. Interest Rate Risk The Company has total debt outstanding at December 31, 2005 of $756.5 million, of which $350.0 million or 46% carries a fixed rate of interest. The remaining debt balance is primarily comprised of $300 million in Term Loans under the Credit Agreement (which may be increased by $250 million upon the satisfaction of 36 Table of Contents certain conditions), $92.5 million outstanding under the receivables purchase agreement and various loans with Brazilian banks of approximately $11.1 million The weighted average interest rate on all these borrowings at December 31, 2005, excluding deferred financing costs and commitment fees, was approximately 5.72%. The Company domestic operations and its Brazilian subsidiary have other short and long-term debt that are floating rate obligations. If the floating rate were to change by 10% from the December 31, 2005 level, additional annual interest expense associated with the floating rate debt would be approximately $2.3 million. Foreign Currency The Company is subject to exposure from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily U.S. Dollar/Euro, U.S. Dollar/British Pound, U.S. Dollar/Canadian Dollar, U.S. Dollar/Mexican Peso, U.S. Dollar/Australian Dollar and U.S. Dollar/Brazilian Real. As a result of the Armkel acquisition, the Company assumed intercompany loans with certain of its subsidiaries. The Company is exposed to foreign exchange accounting remeasurement gains and losses from these intercompany loans. The Company has entered into several foreign exchange contracts to hedge the net accounting remeasurement exposure on these loans. At December 31, 2005, the Company hedged 9.7 million Euros, which is approximately 91% of the Euro debt position, with an average rate of 1.24 U.S. dollars per Euro. The terms of these contracts are for periods of less than twelve months. The purpose of the Company foreign currency hedging activities is to protect the Company from the risk that the eventual dollar net cash inflows or outflows will be adversely affected by changes in exchange rates. These contracts do not qualify for hedge accounting in accordance with SFAS No. 133 and are marked to market in Other Expenses in the Company Income Statement. The Company, from time to time, enters into forward exchange contracts to hedge anticipated but not yet committed sales or purchases denominated in the Canadian dollar, the British pound and the Euro. There were no contracts at December 31, 2005 to hedge these transactions and the Company had no outstanding material contracts at December 31, 2004. The Company is also subject to translation exposure of the Company foreign subsidiaries financial statements. A hypothetical 10% change in the exchange rates for the U.S. Dollar to the currencies noted above at December 31, 2005 and 2004 would result in an annual currency translation gain or loss of approximately $1.9 million in 2005 and $1.0 million in 2004. Equity Derivatives The Company has entered into equity derivative contracts of its own stock in order to minimize the impact on earnings resulting from fluctuations in the liability to plan participants for contributions designated to Company stock in the Company deferred compensation plan as a result of changes in quoted fair values. These contracts, which consist of cash settled call options in the amount of 177,500 shares, were approximately 67% of the notional shares in the plan and are marked to market through earnings. As a result of these contracts, the Company recognized income (expense) of approximately ($0.3) million in 2005, $2.1 million in 2004, and $1.5 million in 2003, which reduced the charge for deferred compensation. Related Party Transactions Prior to the Armkel acquisition, the Company achieved substantial synergies by combining certain of its operations with those of Armkel, particularly in the areas of sales, manufacturing and distribution, and most service functions. Armkel retained its core marketing, research & development, and financial planning capabilities, and manufactured condoms, but purchased virtually all the support services it required for its U.S. domestic business from the Company under a management services agreement. 37 Table of Contents For the five months ended May 28, 2004, the Company invoiced Armkel $10.2 million for administrative and management oversight services (which was included as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses), purchased $0.8 million of deodorant anti-perspirant inventory produced by Armkel in the first five months of 2004 and sold Armkel $0.7 million of ARM & HAMMER products to be sold in international markets. As noted in Concentration of Risk above, the Company divested the USA Detergents non-laundry business and other non-core assets to former USA Detergents executives in connection with the acquisition of USA Detergents. The Company has a $0.6 million ownership interest in USAD. The Company supplies USAD with certain laundry and cleaning products it produces to meet the needs of USAD markets at cost plus a mark-up. In addition, the Company leases manufacturing and office space to USAD under a separate agreement. During 2005 and 2004, the Company sold $23.1 million, and $24.9 million, respectively, of laundry and cleaning products to USAD. Furthermore, the Company billed USAD $0.2 million and USAD billed the Company $0.1 million for leased space. For open amounts receivable at December 31, 2005 and 2004, see Concentration of Risk. The Company only financial interest in Armkel, prior to its acquisition of Kelso interest in Armkel, and in USAD has been the Company direct equity investments in Armkel and USAD. The Company had no relationship with the other former equity holders of Armkel and the equity holders of USAD. For this reason, the Company believes it has had no incentive to negotiate with either Armkel or USAD in a manner that is not in the best interests of its stockholders generally. In connection with its Armand and ArmaKleen joint ventures and its partnership with a supplier of sodium raw materials, the Company believes it has no incentive to negotiate with any of those entities in a manner that is not in the best interests of stockholders generally, since it has no equity interest in the other partners. The Company has entered into agreements with these entities within the ordinary course of business. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, 2004, 2003, the Company invoiced Armand $1.7, $1.5 and $1.6 million for administration and management oversight services (which was included as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses) respectively. Intercompany sales of Armand products to the Company over the same periods were $10.7, $8.4 and $6.4 million respectively. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the Company had outstanding receivables with Armand of $1.0 and $0.8 million. Also, the Company has outstanding accounts payable with Armand of $0.7 and $0.7 million as of December 31, 2005 and 2004 respectively. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2005, 2004, 2003, the Company invoiced ArmaKleen $2.6, $2.6 and $3.3 million for administration and management oversight services (which was included as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses) respectively. Intercompany sales of inventory to ArmaKleen over the same periods were $4.7, $4.8 and $5.0 million respectively. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the Company had outstanding receivables with ArmaKleen of $0.7 and $0.1 million respectively. 38 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING Management of Church & Dwight Co., Inc (the Company ) is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. Management evaluated the Company internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2005. In making this assessment, management used the framework established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). As a result of this assessment and based on the criteria in the COSO framework, management has concluded that, as of December 31, 2005, the Company internal control over financial reporting was effective. The Company independent registered public accounting firm, Deloitte & Touche LLP, have audited management assessment of the Company internal control over financial reporting. Their opinion on management assessment and their opinions on the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting and on the Company financial statements appear on pages 40 and 41 of this annual report on Form 10-K. /s/ J AMES R. C RAIGIE /s/ Z VI E IREF James R. Craigie Zvi Eiref President and Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer March 8, 2006 39 Table of Contents REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Church & Dwight Co., Inc. Princeton, New Jersey We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Church & Dwight Co., Inc. and subsidiaries (the Company ) as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, and the related consolidated statements of income, stockholders equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2005. Our audits also included the financial statement schedule listed in the Index at Item 15. These financial statements and financial statement schedule are the responsibility of the Company management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statements and financial statement schedule based on our audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion. In our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company and subsidiaries at December 31, 2005 and 2004, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2005, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also, in our opinion, such financial statement schedule, when considered in relation to the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, presents fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein. We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2005, based on the criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated March 8, 2006 expressed an unqualified opinion on management assessment of the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting and an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting. /s/ D ELOITTE & T OUCHE LLP Parsippany, New Jersey March 8, 2006 40 Table of Contents REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Church & Dwight Co., Inc. Princeton, New Jersey We have audited management assessment, included in the accompanying Management Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting, that Church & Dwight Co., Inc. and subsidiaries (the Company ) maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2005, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. The Company management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on management assessment and an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, evaluating management assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinions. A company internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the company principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the company board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. In our opinion, management assessment that the Company maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2005, is fairly stated, in all material respects, based on the criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2005, based on the criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule as of and for the year ended December 31, 2005 of the Company and our report dated March 8, 2006, expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements and financial statement schedule. /s/ D ELOITTE & T OUCHE LLP Parsippany, New Jersey March 8, 2006 41 Table of Contents 
