CIK: 313927
Company Name: CHURCH DWIGHT CO INC DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-02-26


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS ( MD&A ) Overview The Company develops, manufactures and markets a broad range of consumer and specialty products. It recognizes revenues and profits from selling its products under a variety of brands, including ARM & HAMMER and TROJAN, to consumers through supermarkets, drug stores and mass merchandisers; and to industrial customers and distributors. On May 28, 2004, the Company acquired the joint venture interest in Armkel LLC ( Armkel ) owned by affiliates of Kelso & Company, and Armkel was merged into the Company. This is sometimes referred as the Armkel acquisition. Armkel initially was formed to purchase a portion of the consumer products business of Carter-Wallace. On October 31, 2005, the Company acquired the SPINBRUSH battery-operated toothbrush business from The Procter & Gamble Company ( P&G ) which was funded from $75.0 million of the Company available cash. The accompanying financial statements reflect the final asset allocation, which assigned a significant amount of the purchase price to intangible assets. On June 2, 2006, the Company reacquired from USA Detergents ( USAD ) the distribution rights to sell Xtra laundry detergent and Nice N Fluffy liquid fabric softener in Canada for $7.0 million and agreed to make an additional performance-based payment of a maximum of $2.5 million based upon the performance of the Canadian sales during the one year period following the closing date. The acquisition was funded out of the Company available cash. The accompanying financial statements reflect the final asset allocation, which assigned the purchase price to intangible assets. On August 7, 2006, the Company acquired substantially all of the net assets of Orange Glo International, Inc., ( OGI Acquisition ), which include laundry and cleaning products such as OXICLEAN, a premium-priced laundry pre-wash additive, KABOOM bathroom cleaner and ORANGE GLO household cleaner. The Company paid approximately $325.4 million, plus fees of approximately $4.4 million, which was financed through a $250.0 million addition to its existing bank credit facility and available cash. The transaction was structured as an asset purchase and the preliminary appraisal value of the net assets is reflected in the accompanying balance sheet. The discussion of results of operations of these acquisitions are reflected in the results of operations since their respective acquisition dates. The Company operates in three primary segments, Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products. The Consumer Domestic segment includes household products for deodorizing such as ARM & HAMMER baking soda and cat litter products; laundry and cleaning products, such as XTRA and ARM & HAMMER laundry detergents, OXICLEAN, and SCRUB FREE and BRILLO cleaning products; and personal care products, such as TROJAN condoms, NAIR depilatories and waxes, FIRST RESPONSE and ANSWER home pregnancy and ovulation test kits, ARRID antiperspirant and ARM & HAMMER, MENTADENT, CLOSE-UP, PEPSODENT and AIM toothpastes, as well as SPINBRUSH battery-operated toothbrushes. Our Consumer International segment sells a variety of personal care products, some of which use the same brands as our domestic product lines, in international markets, including France, the United Kingdom, Canada, Mexico, Australia, Brazil and Spain. Our Specialty Products ( SPD ) segment is the largest U.S. producer of sodium bicarbonate, which it sells together with other specialty inorganic chemicals for a variety of industrial, institutional, medical and food applications. This segment also sells a range of animal nutrition and specialty cleaning products. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2006, our Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products segments represented approximately 72%, 17% and 11%, respectively, of net sales. 20 Table of Contents For the three year period ended December 31, 2006, the Company diluted earnings per share has grown at an average rate of 17.9%, its sales has increased from $1,056.9 million in 2003 to $1,945.7 million in 2006 and its income from operations has increased from $111.9 million in 2003 to $252.1 million in 2006. These increases principally reflect sales of products acquired in the aforementioned acquisitions. During 2005 and 2006, the Company experienced extraordinary price increases for raw and packaging materials, diesel fuel and energy costs, partially as a result of strong demand from China and supply interruptions in 2005 caused by hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The hurricanes devastating damage to oil and chemical production facilities in the Gulf region resulted in widespread shortages. These shortages, continued in 2006, and coupled with market forces concerned about the adequacy of oil supply, continued to impact pricing in 2006. While the Company was able to identify alternative supply sources and maintain normal service levels, the costs charged by these sources were much higher than costs previously charged by the Company principal suppliers. Nevertheless, the Company was able to partially offset these higher costs through cost improvement programs and pricing actions taken over the last twelve months. The Company operates in highly competitive consumer product markets, in which cost efficiency, new product offerings and innovation are critical to success. The consumer products markets are particularly mature in North America and are characterized by high household penetration, particularly with respect to the Company most significant product categories such as laundry detergents and oral care. Furthermore, because of ongoing retail sector consolidation and the competitive environment facing retailers, the Company faces pricing pressure from these customers, particularly the high-volume retail store customers, who have increasingly sought to obtain pricing concessions or better trade terms. To protect its existing market share or to capture additional market share, the Company increased expenditures for promotions and advertising and introduced new products and line extensions. In order to fund the additional marketing expenses, the Company must sustain ongoing cost cutting initiatives. Furthermore, through its acquisitions and cost improvement initiatives, the Company has been able to lower its overall unit costs and increase the productivity of its various manufacturing facilities. Critical Accounting Policies Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations addresses matters set forth in our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principals generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, our observation of trends in industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Our critical accounting policies include: Revenue Recognition and Promotional and Sales Return Reserves Most of the Company revenue represents sales of finished goods inventory and is recognized when delivered or picked up by our customers. The reserves for consumer and trade promotion liabilities and sales returns are established based on our best estimate of the amounts necessary to settle future and existing claims on products sold as of the balance sheet date. Promotional reserves are provided for sales incentives, such as coupons to consumers, and sales incentives provided to customers, (such as slotting, cooperative advertising, incentive discounts based on volume of sales and other arrangements made directly to customers). All such costs are netted against sales. Slotting costs are recorded when the product is delivered to the customer. Cooperative advertising costs are recorded when the customer places the advertisement for the Company products. Discounts relating to price reduction arrangements are recorded when the related sale takes place. Costs associated with end-aisle or other in-store displays are recorded when product that is subject to the promotion is sold. The Company relies on historical experience and forecasted data to determine the required reserves. For example, the Company uses historical experience to project coupon redemption rates to determine reserve 21 Table of Contents requirements. Based on the total face value of Consumer Domestic coupons redeemed over the past several years, if the actual rate of redemptions were to deviate by 0.1% from the rate for which reserves are accrued in the financial statements, an approximately $1.1 million difference in the reserve required for coupons would result. With regard to other promotional reserves and sales returns, the Company uses experience-based estimates, customer and sales organization inputs and historical trend analysis in arriving at the reserves required. If the Company estimates for promotional activities and sales returns were to differ by 10% the impact to promotional spending and sales return accruals would be approximately $6.0 million. While management believes that its promotional and sales returns reserves are reasonable and that appropriate judgments have been made, estimated amounts could differ materially from actual future obligations. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, the Company reduced promotion liabilities by approximately $4.5 million, $8.1 million and $10.2 million, respectively based on actual experience and updated information. Impairment of goodwill, trademarks and other intangible assets and property, plant and equipment Carrying values of goodwill, trademarks and other indefinite lived intangible assets are reviewed periodically for possible impairment in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 142, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets . The Company impairment review is based on a discounted cash flow approach that requires significant judgment with respect to volume, revenue and expense growth rates, and the selection of an appropriate discount rate. Management uses estimates based on expected trends in making these assumptions. With respect to goodwill, impairment occurs when the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the discounted present value of cash flows for that reporting unit. For trademarks and other intangible assets, an impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the net present value of estimated future cash flows, which represents the estimated fair value of the asset. The Company uses its judgment in assessing whether assets may have become impaired between annual valuations. Indicators such as unexpected adverse economic factors, unanticipated technological change, distribution losses, or competitive activities and acts by governments and courts may indicate that an asset has become impaired. Property, plant and equipment and other long-lived assets are reviewed periodically for possible impairment in accordance with SFAS No. 144, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets . The Company impairment review is based on an undiscounted cash flow analysis at the lowest level at which cash flows of the long-lived assets are largely independent of other groups of Company assets and liabilities. The analysis requires management judgment with respect to changes in technology, the continued success of product lines, and future volume, revenue and expense growth rates. The Company conducts annual reviews for idle and underutilized equipment, and reviews business plans for possible impairment implications. Impairment occurs when the carrying value of the asset exceeds the future undiscounted cash flows. When an impairment is indicated, the estimated future cash flows are then discounted to determine the estimated fair value of the asset and an impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the net present value of estimated future cash flows. In 2006, the Company recognized tradename impairment and equipment obsolescence charges of approximately $16.8 million, of which $12.7 million, $3.8 million and $0.3 million were included in the operating results of the Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and SPD segments, respectively. In 2005, the Company recognized tradename, equipment obsolescence and plant impairment charges of $18.7 million, of which $7.8 million, $7.7 million and $3.2 million were included in the Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and SPD segments, respectively. In 2004, the Company recognized tradename, equipment obsolescence and plant impairment charges of approximately $6.7 million, which were charged to the Consumer Domestic segment. The estimates and assumptions used in connection with impairment analyses are consistent with the business plans and estimates that the Company uses to manage its business operations. The use of different assumptions would increase or decrease the estimated value of future cash flows and would have increased or decreased any impairment charge taken. Future outcomes may also differ. If the Company products fail to 22 Table of Contents achieve estimated volume and pricing targets, market conditions unfavorably change or other significant estimates are not realized, then the Company revenue and cost forecasts may not be achieved, and the Company may be required to recognize additional impairment charges. Inventory valuation When appropriate, the Company writes down the carrying value of its inventory to the lower of cost or market (net realizable value), including any costs to sell or dispose. The Company identifies any slow moving, obsolete or excess inventory to determine whether a valuation allowance is needed. The determination of whether inventory items are slow moving, obsolete or in excess of needs requires estimates and assumptions about the future demand for the Company products, technological changes, and new product introductions. In addition, the Company allowance for obsolescence may be impacted by the reduction of the number of stock keeping units ( SKU ). Excluding acquisitions, the number of Domestic SKU has been reduced in half over the last 3 years. The Company evaluates its inventory levels and expected usage on a periodic basis and records adjustments as required. Adjustments to the inventory net realizable value were $8.8 million at December 31, 2006, and $5.8 million at December 31, 2005. Valuation of pension and postretirement benefit costs The Company pension and postretirement benefit costs are developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions provided by the Company to its actuaries, including the discount rate and expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. Material changes in the Company pension and postretirement benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions. The discount rate is subject to change each year, consistent with changes in applicable high-quality, long-term corporate bond indices. Based on the expected duration of the benefit payments for our pension plans and postretirement plans we refer to applicable indices such as the Moody AA Corporate Bond Index to select a rate at which we believe the pension benefits could be effectively settled. Based on the published rates as of December 31, 2006, that matched our estimated cash flows for the plans, the Company used a discount rate of 5.75% for its three domestic plans. The Company weighted average discount rate as of December 31, 2006, is 5.38% as compared to 5.36% used at December 31, 2005. The expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets is selected by taking into account a historical trend, the expected duration of the projected benefit obligation for the plans, the asset mix of the plans, and known economic and market conditions at the time of valuation. Based on these factors, the Company weighted average expected long-term rate for the 2006 year is 6.80%, a decline of 57 basis points from the 7.37% rate used at December 31, 2005. This decrease is due principally to a decrease in expected returns in U.K. pension plans. A 50 basis point change in the expected long-term rate of return would result in less than a $0.5 million change in pension expense for 2007. In accordance with SFAS No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions , the Company recognized an additional minimum pension liability of $0.5 million included in long-term benefit obligations and recorded a charge, net of tax, to accumulated other comprehensive income which decreased stockholders equity. The SFAS No. 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit and Other Postretirement Plans , impact to the balance sheet was an increase to the 2006 pension and postretirement accrued benefit liabilities of $0.7 million and $2.8 million, respectively. The amounts were recorded, net of tax, directly to the ending balance of accumulated other comprehensive income and not as a component of comprehensive income, in accordance with the new standard. The Company made cash contributions of approximately $11.2 million to its defined benefit pension plans in 2006. The Company estimates it will be required to make cash contributions to its pension plans of approximately $9.2 million in 2007. 23 Table of Contents Tax contingencies The Company records liabilities in income taxes payable for potential assessments in various tax jurisdictions. The liabilities relate to tax return positions which, although supportable by the Company, may be challenged by the tax authorities. The Company adjusts these liabilities as a result of changes in tax legislation, interpretations of laws by courts, rulings by tax authorities, changes in estimates and the closing of the statute of limitations. The Company tax rate includes the impact of the liabilities and any changes to the liabilities. Settlement of any issue with the tax authorities would require the use of cash. Favorable resolution of an issue would be recognized as a reduction to the Company annual tax rate. Recent Accounting Pronouncements On January 1, 2006, the Company adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 123 (revised 2004) Share Based Payment ( SFAS No. 123R ), which requires the determination of the fair value of share-based compensation at the grant date and the recognition of the related expense over the period in which the share-based compensation vests. The Company adopted SFAS No. 123R using the modified prospective transition method under which the Company recognizes compensation cost on or after the effective date of the Company adoption of SFAS No. 123R for the portion of outstanding awards for which the requisite service has not yet been rendered, based on the grant date fair value of those awards calculated under the original SFAS 123 for pro forma disclosures. Prior period financial statements have not been restated. In 2006, the Company recorded a pre-tax charge of $10.3 million associated with the fair-value of unvested stock options, of which $9.0 million was included in selling, general and administrative expenses and $1.3 million in cost of goods sold. The after-tax impact of the charge was $6.4 million. Diluted EPS was negatively impacted by $0.09 per share. On July 13, 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued FASB Interpretation Number 48 ( FIN 48 ), Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. FIN 48 seeks to reduce the significant diversity in practice associated with recognition and measurement in the accounting for income taxes. It applies to all tax positions accounted for in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes. The effective date of FIN 48 is the first fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2006. The Company is still evaluating the impact of the interpretation and does not expect it to have a material impact on its financial position. SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements , was issued in September 2006 and is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007. SFAS No. 157 provides a single definition of fair value to be utilized under other accounting pronouncements that require fair value measurements, establishes a framework for measuring fair value in generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. The statement generally is to be applied prospectively, so that it does not require any new fair value measurements. The Company is currently assessing what impact, if any, the adoption of this statement will have on its consolidated financial statements. SFAS No. 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans , was issued in September 2006 and is effective for the Company as of the end of the Company fiscal year ended December 31, 2006. SFAS No. 158 is an amendment of SFAS Nos. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R) and is intended to improve financial reporting of pension and postretirement plans. This statement requires employers to a) recognize the funded status of a benefit plan, b) recognize as a component of other comprehensive income, net of tax, the gains or losses and prior service costs or credits that arise during the period but are not recognized as components of net periodic benefit cost, c) measure the defined benefit plan assets and obligations as of the date of the employer fiscal year-end, and d) include additional disclosures in the notes to the financial statements about effects on net periodic benefit cost that arise from delayed recognition of the gains or losses, prior service costs or credits, and transition assets or obligations. The Company recorded the effect of SFAS No. 158 in the December 31, 2006 balance sheet. 24 Table of Contents SFAS No. 159, The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities including an amendment of FASB Statement No. 115 , was issued on February 15, 2007, and is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007. SFAS No. 159 permits companies to choose to measure selected financial assets and liabilities at fair value. If the fair value option is elected, a company will report unrealized gains and losses on those assets and liabilities in each subsequent reporting date. The Company is currently assessing what impact, if any, the adoption of this statement will have on its consolidated financial statements. SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 108 ( SAB 108 ), which expresses the staff views regarding the effects of prior year misstatements when quantifying misstatements in current year financial statements, was issued in September 2006. The SEC staff issued SAB 108 to address the diversity in practice in quantifying material financial statement misstatements and the potential, under current practice, for the build up of improper amounts on the balance sheet. The effective date of SAB 108 is for fiscal years ending on or before November 15, 2006. This pronouncement did not have any impact on the Company consolidated financial statements. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2006, 2005 AND 2004 The discussion of results of operations at the consolidated level presented below is followed by a more detailed discussion of results of operations by segment. The discussion of our segment operating results is presented on a historical basis for the years ending December 31, 2006, 2005, and 2004. The segment discussion also addresses certain product line information. The Company reporting units are consistent with its reportable segments. Consolidated results 2006 compared to 2005 Net Sales Net Sales increased $209.2 million or 12.0% to $1,945.7 million, compared to $1,736.5 million in 2005. Included in the 2006 results are $180.5 million associated with the acquisitions of the SPINBRUSH battery-operated toothbrush business, a skin care brand in Brazil, and OGI. The Company assumed responsibility for all SPINBRUSH sales and other functions in the U.S., Canada and the U.K. on April 1, 2006, and has recognized the gross amount of sales and expenses from the SPINBRUSH business for the U.S. and foreign locations since that date. During the transition period prior to April 1, 2006, when the seller of the SPINBRUSH business maintained these responsibilities, the Company accounted for the net cash received as other revenue. The full year results were also affected by favorable foreign exchange rates of $6.8 million, reduction of promotion reserves of $4.5 million, based on updated information, including actual experience, price increases that became effective February 1, 2006 and lower volumes. Due to the timing of previously planned promotional events, especially for laundry products, the full benefit of the price increases were not realized until the second quarter of 2006. The Company estimates that the effect of increased prices affected net sales by approximately 3%. Lower volumes reduced sales by less than 2%. Operating Costs The Company gross profit increased by $124.1 million to $761.1 million in 2006 as compared to 2005 and its gross margin increased 240 basis points to 39.1% in 2006 from 36.7% in 2005. Approximately 110 basis points of the improvement was associated with the acquired businesses and the balance of the increase is primarily due to the effect of price increases and cost improvement programs of approximately 350 basis points, partially offset by an increase in commodity costs over the past year of approximately 290 basis points, particularly for oil-based raw and packaging materials used in the laundry and specialty products businesses. Gross margin in 2005 was negatively affected by a charge associated with the closure of a sub-scale, consumer products manufacturing operation abroad, and plant impairment and equipment obsolescence charges. The absence of these charges in 2006 helped improve gross margin by 50 basis points. 25 Table of Contents Marketing expenses for 2006 increased $33.2 million as compared to 2005, primarily due to support for acquired businesses. Selling, general and administrative expenses ( SG&A ) of $292.4 million in 2006 increased $51.6 million or 21.4% as compared to 2005. The 2006 expense includes tradename impairment charges of $14.3 million, stock based compensation expense of $9.3 million primarily associated with the Company adoption of SFAS No. 123R on January 1, 2006, an increase of approximately $10.0 million of fixed and variable personnel and related expenses, higher deferred compensation expenses of $2.6 million, higher variable selling expense associated with higher net sales of $4.3 million, higher research and development professional fee expenses of $3.9 million and operating and amortization expense in support of the acquired businesses. The prior year includes $6.3 million of tradename impairment charges and an $8.3 million charge related to litigation involving Andes Trading de Mexico S.A. (the Andes litigation ). For a further explanation, please refer to Item 3 of this report. Other Income and Expenses The increase in equity in earnings of affiliates of $2.3 million reflects improved operating margins associated with the Company Armand Products joint venture and the formation of a small joint venture by one of the Company European subsidiaries. Interest expense in 2006 increased $9.9 million as compared to 2005 as a result of the increase in debt to fund the OGI Acquisition and higher interest rates partially offset by lower average pre-existing debt outstanding. Investment income for 2006 increased $1.3 million as compared to 2005 as a result of higher interest rates. Other income/expense in 2006 primarily includes the fair market value of common stock the Company received in connection with the demutualization of an insurance company in which the Company was the policyholder of a guaranteed annuity contract associated with a defined benefit plan, and foreign exchange gains related to intercompany loans between the Company subsidiaries. In 2005, the Company reported foreign exchange losses associated with these loans. Net loss on early extinguishment of debt in 2005 of $1.2 million is associated with the fourth quarter 2005 refinancing of the Company term loan. Taxation The effective tax rate for 2006 was 34.8%, compared to 29.8% in 2005. This year rate includes a $4.2 million reduction of tax liabilities primarily as a result of the completion of a prior year federal tax audit, partially offset by a partial valuation allowance of $1.9 million for one of the Company foreign subsidiaries. The effective tax in 2005 reflects a $7.4 million reduction of tax liabilities of which $6.2 million relates to the expiration of the statute of limitations in connection with certain tax positions and $1.2 million was due to a lower effective state tax rate. 2005 compared to 2004 Net Sales Net Sales increased by $274.4 million or 18.8% to $1,736.5 million, compared to $1,462.1 million in 2004. The increase was largely due to the May 2004 Armkel acquisition, which contributed sales through May 27, 2005 of $208.1 million. Also contributing to the increase was the reversal of promotion reserves of $8.1 million, and favorable foreign exchange rates of $4.0 million. Effective price increases on certain domestic products and the third quarter introduction of ELEXA, a premium line of sexual health products for women, contributed to the higher sales. Late in 2005, the Company purchased the SPINBRUSH battery-operated toothbrush business from P&G. The Company accounted for the net cash received during a transition period in which P&G continued to provide significant services as other revenue, which amounted to an immaterial amount for the year. 26 Table of Contents Operating Costs The Company gross margin of 36.7% was virtually unchanged as compared to the 36.5% gross margin in 2004. The 2005 gross margin was affected by a $6.4 million charge associated with the closure of a sub-scale, consumer products manufacturing operation abroad, and plant impairment and equipment obsolescence charges of $7.8 million. The gross margin was also impacted by higher commodity costs, particularly for oil-based raw and packaging materials used in household and specialty products businesses, partially offset by the effect of cost improvement programs, pricing actions and the previously mentioned reversal of promotion reserves. Gross margin was positively impacted by the full year effect of the Armkel acquisition, whose brands carry a higher gross margin than the Company existing product lines prior to the acquisition. The 2004 gross margin was affected by a $10.5 million inventory related purchase accounting charge associated with the Armkel acquisition and $4.8 million in plant obsolescence and impairment charges. Marketing expenses of $183.4 million increased $22.2 million or 13.8% from 2004, reflecting $28.0 million associated with the acquired Armkel brands during the first five months of 2005. Expenses for the introduction of ELEXA were more than offset by lower expenses for certain other Personal Care and Laundry and Cleaning products. Selling, general and administrative expenses ( SG&A ) of $240.8 million increased $40.4 million or 20.1% as compared to 2004. Costs associated with the former Armkel business for the five months ended May 27, 2005 were approximately $38.0 million. Included in the 2005 SG&A expenses are tradename impairment charges of $6.3 million and an $8.3 million charge related to litigation involving Andes Trading de Mexico S.A. (the Andes litigation ). Other SG&A costs decreased in 2005 due to lower deferred and performance based compensation costs of approximately $3.0 million, and lower Sarbanes-Oxley Act related expenses of $2.2 million. Included in 2004 SG&A is $4 million of severance costs and the termination costs relating to a foreign subsidiary pension plan, and a $1.9 million tradename impairment charge. Other Income and Expenses The decrease in equity in earnings of affiliates of $10.3 million reflects the consolidation of the former Armkel business since the May 28, 2004 acquisition date. Included in the Company equity earnings from Armkel in 2004 is a $2.5 million tradename impairment charge. The combined results of the Company other equity investments, Armand Products Company ( Armand ) and The ArmaKleen Company ( ArmaKleen ), increased by $0.5 million. Interest expense of $44.1 million was $2.7 million higher than 2004. The increase can be attributed primarily to increased debt that was assumed by the Company as part of the Armkel acquisition, and the full year effect of new debt required to purchase the remaining interest in Armkel. Included in 2004 interest expense was $4.9 million associated with the Company settlement of an appraisal action brought by former Carter-Wallace shareholders and an indemnification arrangement involving Armkel and the Company, which acquired Carter-Wallace consumer products business in 2001. Net loss on early extinguishment of debt of $1.2 million is associated with the fourth quarter refinancing of the Company term loan. In 2004, the Company incurred charges of $22.9 million including an $8.0 million charge associated with the Company bank debt refinancing to effect the acquisition of Armkel and a $14.9 million charge related to the redemption of the Armkel 9 1 / 2 % Senior Subordinated Notes due 2009 assumed as part of the Armkel acquisition. Taxation The effective tax rate for 2005 was 29.8% as compared to 30.3% in 2004. The tax rate in 2005 was favorably impacted by the reversal of tax accruals of $7.4 million, of which $6.2 million related to the expiration 27 Table of Contents of the statute of limitations in connection with tax positions and $1.2 million was due to a lower effective state tax rate. The 2004 tax rate was favorably impacted by prior year research and development tax credits and other items totaling $4.6 million. Segment results for 2006, 2005 and 2004 Segment results are presented based upon segments as described in Note 17 of the notes to the Company audited consolidated financial statements. The Company has three reportable segments based on differences in the nature of products and organizational and ownership structures. Specifically, the Company has identified the following segments: Consumer Domestic, Consumer International and Specialty Products. The Company also has a Corporate segment. Segment revenues are derived from the sale of the following products: Segment Products Consumer Domestic Household and personal care products Consumer International Primarily personal care products Specialty Products Specialty chemical products The Company continues to have a 50 percent ownership interest in the Armand and ArmaKleen partnerships as of December 31, 2006. In 2006, the Company U.K. Specialty Products subsidiary formed a joint venture with Esseco Group SRL, to market sulphur dioxide based chemical products. The Company investment in this venture was approximately $0.1 million. Since the Company did not control these entities as of December 31, 2006, they were accounted for under the equity method in the consolidated financial statements, and the Company equity in earnings are included in Income Before Taxes and Minority Interest of the Corporate segment. On May 28, 2004, the Company purchased the remaining 50% of Armkel that it did not own, and Armkel was merged into the Company. Operating results for the former Armkel business have been fully consolidated in the Consumer Domestic and Consumer International segments for periods subsequent to May 28, 2004. The Company equity in earnings of Armkel domestic operations for the period up to May 28, 2004 are included in Income Before Taxes and Minority Interest of the Consumer Domestic segment, and equity in earnings of Armkel international operations for the period up to May 28, 2004 are included in Income Before Taxes and Minority Interest of the Consumer International segment. Some of the subsidiaries that are included in the Consumer International segment manufacture and sell personal care products to the Consumer Domestic segment. These sales are eliminated from the Consumer International segment results. The domestic results of operations for OGI are included in the Consumer Domestic segment commencing with the August 6, 2006, acquisition date. The results of operations for OGI foreign operations since August 6, 2006, are included in the Consumer International segment. 28 Table of Contents The following table presents selected financial information relating to the Company segments for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2006. The segment discussion also presents product line fluctuations. (Dollars in thousands) Consumer Domestic Consumer Intl SPD Corporate Total Net Sales 2006 $ 1,388,500 $ 336,868 $ 220,293 $ $ 1,945,661 2005 1,218,221 297,241 221,044 1,736,506 2004 1,077,101 176,694 208,267 1,462,062 Income Before Taxes & Minority Interest 2006 $ 166,490 $ 25,305 $ 14,164 $ 7,135 $ 213,094 2005 142,669 14,322 14,343 3,549 174,883 2004 112,672 15,320 17,984 (18,533 ) 127,443 (1) In determining Income before Minority Interest and Income Taxes, interest expense, investment earnings, and other income (expense) were allocated to the segments based upon each segment relative operating profit. Product line revenues for external customers for the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004 were as follows: (In thousands) 2006 2005 2004 Household Products $ 832,957 $ 713,489 $ 680,309 Personal Care Products 555,543 504,732 396,792 Total Consumer Domestic 1,388,500 1,218,221 1,077,101 Total Consumer International 336,868 297,241 176,694 Total SPD 220,293 221,044 208,267 Total Consolidated Net Sales $ 1,945,661 $ 1,736,506 $ 1,462,062 Consumer Domestic 2006 compared to 2005 Consumer Domestic net sales were $1,388.5 million in 2006, an increase of $170.3 million or 14.0% as compared to 2005. The increase is primarily due to sales of SPINBRUSH and OGI products. These acquisitions contributed approximately $155.0 million of incremental net sales. The Company assumed responsibility for all SPINBRUSH sales and other functions in the U.S., Canada and the U.K. on April 1, 2006, and recognized the gross amount of sales and expenses from the SPINBRUSH business within the consolidated statement of earnings for the U.S. and most foreign locations during the second quarter. During the transition period prior to April 1, 2006, when the seller of the SPINBRUSH business maintained these responsibilities, the Company accounted for the net cash received as other revenue. Sales of the segment pre-existing product lines increased slightly as a result of higher prices, partially offset by slightly lower volume. Effective February 1, 2006, the Company implemented price increases ranging from 4% to over 10% for products representing about 35% of its U.S. consumer products portfolio net sales. These products include ARM & HAMMER and XTRA liquid laundry detergents, ARM & HAMMER SUPER SCOOP cat litter and ARM & HAMMER baking soda. Management believes the price increase caused the Company to experience lower product demand as consumers adjusted to the higher prices. However, management believes that these price increases have improved the Company margins and contributed to achieving its financial goals. Higher sales also reflected growth in liquid laundry detergents, pregnancy kits and pet care, and the reduction of promotion reserves of $2.7 million, based on updated information, including actual experience, partially offset by lower toothpaste and deodorant sales. 29 Table of Contents Consumer Domestic Income before Minority Interest and Income Taxes was $166.5 million in 2006, a $23.8 million increase as compared to 2005. The increase is primarily due to the contributions from OGI and SPINBRUSH products and the effect of higher gross margins for liquid laundry detergents. The higher profitability was partially offset by higher oil-based manufacturing and freight costs and higher SG&A expenses (primarily stock option expense, higher personnel related expenses, higher research and development costs, higher legal and professional fees and costs associated with the OGI and SPINBRUSH businesses). The segment profitability was also negatively impacted by tradename and equipment obsolescence charges of $13.5 million in 2006 and an increase in intangible assets amortization and higher allocated interest expense. 2005 compared to 2004 Consumer Domestic Net Sales increased $141.1 million or 13.1% to $1,218.2 million in 2005. Personal Care Products increased $107.9 million primarily due to sales associated with the domestic results of the former Armkel products of $102.3 million for the five months ended May 27, 2005, higher sales of condoms and diagnostic kits and sales associated with ELEXA, partially offset by lower oral care product sales. Household product sales increased $33.2 million or 4.9% due to higher sales of ARM & HAMMER and XTRA liquid laundry products, and ARM & HAMMER SUPER SCOOP cat litter, partially offset by lower sales of powdered laundry detergent. Among other increases included in the segment results is $6.8 million associated with the reduction of promotion reserves due to a change in estimate. In an effort to reduce the impact of higher raw and packaging costs, the Company implemented price increases during the latter part of 2004 and 2005 for Consumer Domestic products that generated approximately 20% of Consumer Domestic sales volume. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company announced price increases ranging from 4% to over 10% for products representing about 35% of its U.S. consumer products portfolio, effective February 1, 2006. The products affected include ARM & HAMMER and XTRA liquid laundry detergents, ARM & HAMMER SUPER SCOOP cat litter and ARM & HAMMER baking soda. Due to the timing of previously agreed promotional events, the full benefit of the price increase was not realized until the second quarter of 2006. Consumer Domestic Income before Taxes and Minority Interest increased $30.0 million to $142.7 million. This is primarily due to the increased contribution from the former Armkel products for the entire year, the profit impact resulting from higher sales of liquid laundry detergent, TROJAN, FIRST RESPONSE and cat litter products, lower marketing expenses for certain personal care products lower performance based compensation costs, and lower interest expense (in 2004, interest expense reflected the segment allocation of the interest expense portion of the settlement of the appraisal action brought by former Carter-Wallace shareholders). In addition, 2004 results reflected impairment charges of $6.7 million and a $10.5 million inventory step-up charge. The increased profitability was partially offset by higher manufacturing and freight costs in 2005 resulting from higher oil and natural gas prices due in part to Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, which the Company estimated to be $6.0 million. These cost increases were partially offset by the effect of substantial cost improvements, as well as price increases for about 20% of the segment products (in terms of net sales volume) which were implemented during 2005. The segment profitability was also negatively impacted by tradename and plant impairment and obsolescence charges of $7.8 million and an increase in intangible assets amortization. Consumer International 2006 compared to 2005 Consumer International net sales were $336.9 million in 2006, an increase of $39.6 million or 13.3% as compared to 2005. The 2006 net sales reflect $25.7 million associated with the OGI and SPINBRUSH products and the skin care product acquired late in 2005, favorable exchange rates of $6.9 million and the reduction of promotion reserves of $1.8 million, based on updated information, including actual experience. Other products in the segment experienced slight volume and pricing gains. Strong sales in Canada, U.K. and Australia were offset by lower sales of certain skin care brands in Europe. Consumer International Income before Minority Interest and Income Taxes was $25.3 million in 2006, an increase of $11.0 million as compared to 2005. The increase is a result of the contribution from the products of 30 Table of Contents the acquired businesses. Moreover, the 2005 period reflected a litigation charge of $8.3 million and a $6.4 million restructuring charge (which includes both severance and asset impairment charges) associated with the closure of a consumer packaged goods plant at one of its international locations. Partially offsetting the increase was higher manufacturing and distribution costs, an unfavorable sales mix (more lower margin household products), and an increase in marketing expenses in England in support of certain personal care products. Both years include tradename impairment charges which totaled $3.3 million in 2006 and $3.0 million in 2005. 2005 compared to 2004 Consumer International Net Sales increased $120.5 million or 68.2% to $297.3 million for the year. This is primarily due to $105.8 million of sales associated with the former Armkel international business during the five months ended May 27, 2005 and $ 4.2 million relating to favorable foreign exchange rates. The balance of the increase is primarily due to growth in Canada, which saw stronger sales of household products, the UK, which had higher sales of test kits and skin care products and Brazil, as a result of the skin care product acquired in late 2005. Also included in the segment results was $1.3 million associated with the reduction of promotion reserves due to a change in estimate. Income before Taxes and Minority Interest for the year was $14.3 million, a reduction of $1.0 million as compared to last year. While 2005 results benefited from the inclusion of the former Armkel business for the five month period ended May 28, 2005, this was more than offset by tradename impairment charges of $3.0 million, the charge for the Andes litigation and higher marketing expenses. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company recorded a $6.4 million restructuring charge (which includes both severance and asset impairment charges) associated with the closure of a consumer packaged goods plant at one of its international locations. The prior year was negatively impacted by a $1.6 million inventory step-up charge. Specialty Products 2006 compared to 2005 Specialty Products net sales were $220.3 million for 2006, a decrease of $0.8 million as compared to 2005. The decrease is due to lower volumes, particularly animal nutrition products, largely offset by higher selling prices for specialty chemicals. Specialty Products Income before Minority Interest and Income Taxes were $14.2 million in 2006, essentially unchanged from 2005. This principally reflects higher manufacturing costs for certain animal nutrition products, increased SG&A expenses and higher allocated interest expense, offset by the effect of higher prices. In 2005, Specialty Products Income before Minority Interest and Income Taxes included fixed asset impairment charges at the segment foreign operations of $3.2 million. 2005 compared to 2004 Specialty Products Net Sales grew $12.8 million or 6.1% to $221.0 million, as a result of higher sales of animal nutrition products and specialty chemical products. Specialty Products Income before Taxes and Minority Interest for the year decreased $3.6 million to $14.3 million. The decrease is primarily due to fixed asset impairment charges at the segment foreign operations of $3.2 million. Higher contribution from higher sales of animal nutrition and specialty chemical products were offset by higher manufacturing costs worldwide. Competitive Environment Many of our competitors are large companies, including The Procter & Gamble Company, Unilever, Inc., The Clorox Company, Colgate-Palmolive Company, S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc., Henkel, Reckitt Benckiser, 31 Table of Contents Johnson & Johnson, Inverness and SSL International, many of which have greater financial resources than the Company. These companies have the capacity to outspend the Company if they attempt to gain market share. Because of the competitive environment facing retailers, the Company faces pricing pressure from these customers, particularly the high-volume retail store customers, who have increasingly sought to obtain pricing concessions or better trade terms. These concessions or terms could reduce the Company margins. Furthermore, if the Company is unable to maintain price or trade terms acceptable to its trade customers, the customers could increase product purchases from competitors and reduce purchases from the Company, which would harm the Company sales and profitability. Consumer products, particularly those that are value-priced, such as laundry and household cleaning products, are subject to significant price competition. From time to time, the Company may need to reduce the prices for some of its products to respond to competitive and customer pressures and to maintain market share. The Company competes in the oral care and personal care and deodorizing businesses using the unique strengths of its ARM & HAMMER trademark and baking soda technology. These are highly innovative markets, characterized by a continuous flow of new products and line extensions, and requiring heavy advertising and promotion. In the toothpaste category, after leading its category in growth several years ago, driven by the success of ARM & HAMMER ADVANCE WHITE toothpaste, the Company share dropped in 2003 mainly as a result of competitive new products and aggressive spending by other manufacturers in the category. However in 2004, share increased modestly based upon the introduction of ARM & HAMMER ENAMEL CARE. Shares in 2005 declined slightly and shares in 2006 were unchanged from 2005. Early in 2004, the Company launched ARM & HAMMER ENAMEL CARE toothpaste, a product based on proprietary formulation and packaging technology which combines the cleaning and whitening properties of baking soda with fluoride. Late in 2005, the Company entered the battery-operated toothbrush market as a result of the SPINBRUSH acquisition. The key competitors in this category are Proctor & Gamble and Colgate. SPINBRUSH currently holds the number one share position in the category. In 2007, the Company is introducing new SPINBRUSH Pro Slim toothbrushes and a two-speed version of SPINBRUSH. The domestic condom market is highly concentrated in product offerings with a limited number of competitors. The market is divided between premium brands and price brands, with companies competing on the basis of quality, innovation and price. The major domestic producers are the Company, with its TROJAN, NATURALAMB and CLASS ACT brands, SSL International with its Durex and Avanti brands, and Ansell with its Lifestyles brand. The Company is the market leader with an approximate 73% share in the U.S. The Company is currently the leading advertiser in the U.S. condom category based on dollars spent. In 2004, the Company added two new products to the TROJAN condom line, SHARED PLEASURE and MAGNUM WITH WARM SENSATION, a unique lubricant system which warms the skin on contact for advanced pleasure. In addition, the Warming Sensations lubricating system introduced last year was extended to the HER PLEASURE line of TROJAN condoms. In 2005, the Company introduced TROJAN MINT TINGLE, a uniquely flavored lubricated condom. In 2005, we introduced ELEXA, a line of sexual health products. While the product line did not meet our expectations, it did raise overall condom awareness, which contributed to an increase in TROJAN market share. In 2006, the Company introduced a new ultra-thin TROJAN condom. In 2007, the Company plans to add an intense ribbed TROJAN condom as well as an expanded line of vibrating rings. The domestic market for home pregnancy and ovulation test kits is divided between premium and value brands. The Company markets its FIRST RESPONSE pregnancy kits in the premium segment with a superior first to detect positioning and ANSWER in the value segment of the category. The home pregnancy test kit 32 Table of Contents industry is highly competitive. The major domestic pregnancy test kit producers are the Company, Johnson & Johnson and Inverness . In 2005, the Company introduced ANSWER Daily Ovulation Tracker, which makes ovulation tracking simpler. The domestic depilatories and waxes market is highly concentrated with a limited number of competitors. Products compete based on their functionality, innovation and price. The major domestic manufacturers are the Company with its NAIR brand, Del Labs with its Sally Hansen brand, and Reckitt Benckiser with its Veet brand. The Company believes that, as a result of its dedicated advertising and promotional programs, distinct packaging and several successful line extensions, NAIR is positioned to continue to be a major participant in lotion and cream depilatories. In 2004, the Company introduced a No Touch line of depilatory products. In 2005, there were several new additions to the NAIR depilatory line, including a novel bladeless shaving kit. In 2007, the Company plans to introduce the NAIR Pretty line and a new NAIR sensitive formula line consisting of five new products. In 2006, the Company launched in limited distribution XTRA SCENTSATIONS, a highly fragranced and concentrated liquid laundry detergent and ARM & HAMMER ESSENTIALS, a concentrated liquid laundry detergent formulated with plant-based soaps and containing no dyes, phosphates or bleaches. In 2007, the Company is significantly expanding distribution of these items. In 2006, the Company entered the pre-wash laundry additive category with the acquisition of OXICLEAN. The Company principal competitors in this category are S.C. Johnson & Son Inc, Reckitt Benckiser and The Clorox Company. Significant competitive activity adversely affected the product line three years ago, but the product line recovered, and, through a strong brand image and high consumer loyalty, is the number one product in the category. In 2007, the Company plans to introduce a new OXICLEAN SPRAY AWAY portable instant stain remover. Internationally, the Company products compete in similar competitive categories. Some of the Company U.S. branded products are also marketed in other countries, holding leading or number two market share positions. Examples include: TROJAN in Canada, Mexico, and the U.K. and NAIR in Canada, Mexico, France, Australia, and the U.K. In Spain, the Company depilatory products are marketed under the TAKY brand name. The Company also has a position in the cosmetic whitening dentifrice segment with its PEARL DROPS brand in the U.K., Australia, Italy, and Germany (under the PERLWEISS brand), as well as in France (where the Company products are marketed as EMAIL DIAMANT). The Company markets home pregnancy test kits in many countries, under such brand names as FIRST RESPONSE, DISCOVER, CONFIDELLE, and ANSWER. This category has been negatively affected in international markets by the introduction of many lower-priced and private label products, but the Company has seen some growth for its international business recently as it introduced the use 4 days before an expected period claim. In the skin care category, the Company markets such brands as LINEANCE and BARBARA GOULD in France, the former for anti-cellulite and general body care and the latter for facial care. In Spain, the Company markets EUDERMIN hand care cream in the mass market class of trade, where it has a number two position. Recently this line has been expanded to include body and foot care products. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company purchased a small skin care brand in South America. In various countries the Company also markets over the counter pharmaceutical products. These include GRAVOL and OVOL, the leading anti-nauseant and anti-gas brands in Canada, the PANGAVIT range of vitamin supplements in Mexico, and STERIMAR, a sea-water nasal hygiene product sold in France and in about fifty other countries, and most recently in Mexico. In 2007, the Company formed a small subsidiary in China to assist in launching new products and to manage the contract manufacturers who produce SPINBRUSH. 33 Table of Contents In the Specialty Products segment, competition within the specialty chemicals and animal nutrition product lines remains intense. The specialty chemicals business operates in a competitive environment influenced by capacity utilization, buyers leverage and the impact of raw material and energy costs. Both the specialty chemical and animal nutrition businesses have experienced increases in key raw material and energy costs. In addition, the animal nutrition business is affected by the general health of the dairy economy. Both businesses are passing on cost increases where possible and are developing products and applications designed to be differentiated by their value in use. The Company has a joint venture with the Safety-Kleen Corporation called The ArmaKleen Company. The ArmaKleen Company was formed to build a specialty cleaning products business based on the Company technology and Safety-Kleen sales and distribution organization. This joint venture distributes the Company proprietary product line of aqueous cleaners along with the Company ARMEX blast media line. The Company continues to pursue opportunities to build this industrial cleaning business using the Company aqueous-based technology as well as The ArmaKleen Company ARMEX blast media line of products, which is designed for the removal of a wide variety of surface coatings. Liquidity and capital resources Net Debt The Company had outstanding total debt of $933.3 million and cash of $110.5 million (of which $51.3 million resides in foreign subsidiaries). Total debt less cash ( Net debt ) was $822.8 million at December 31, 2006. The Company had outstanding total debt of $756.5 million, and cash of $126.7 million, resulting in net debt of $629.8 million at December 31, 2005. The increase in the Company net debt position of $193.0 million is primarily due to $250.0 million of new debt incurred in 2006 to purchase OGI and a $16.2 million reduction in cash, offset by debt repayments of $72.9 million. In 2007, the Company anticipates its forecasted cash from operations will be sufficient to meet its capital expenditure program costs, pay its dividends at current rates and meet its mandatory debt repayment schedule. Year Ending December 31, (in thousands) 2006 2005 2004 Cash Flow Analysis Net cash provided by operating activities $ 186,444 $ 190,107 $ 199,030 Net cash used in investing activities (385,516 ) (105,114 ) (229,807 ) Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities 177,653 (101,224 ) 96,381 Net Cash Provided by Operations The Company net cash provided by operations decreased $3.7 million, to $186.4 million in 2006. The decrease in net cash provided by operations was due primarily to an increase in working capital (exclusive of cash and cash equivalents) and other liabilities of $38.1 million in 2006, while in 2005, these items increased by $4.9 million. The increase in working capital in 2006 was primarily due to the OGI and SPINBRUSH acquisitions. The impact of the increase in working capital was partially offset by higher operating income before non-cash charges for stock based compensation, depreciation, amortization and plant obsolescence, restructuring and impairment charges. In 2005, the Company net cash provided by operations decreased $8.9 million, to $190.1 million. The decrease in net cash provided by operations was primarily due to an increase in working capital (exclusive of cash and cash equivalents) and other liabilities of $4.9 million in 2005, while in 2004, these items decreased by $63.3 million from 2003. The impact of the increase in working capital was partially offset by higher operating income before non-cash charges for depreciation, amortization, plant obsolescence, restructuring and impairment charges. For the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005 and 2004, the components of working capital which impacted operating cash flow is as follows: Accounts receivable increased by $14.3 million in 2006 as compared to fiscal year end 2005. This increase was largely due to the Company strong fourth quarter net sales, which were 22% higher than the fourth quarter 34 Table of Contents of 2005. This is primarily associated with the OGI and SPINBRUSH acquisitions. In 2005, accounts receivable increased by $28.4 million as compared to fiscal year end 2004. That increase was largely due to the Company strong fourth quarter net sales, which were 6.5% higher than the fourth quarter of 2004. Accounts receivable in 2004 decreased $42.7 million as compared to 2003 due to the impact of the Armkel acquisition, which had higher than average accounts receivable on the date of acquisition. Inventories increased in 2006 by $38.8 million due to the OGI and SPINBRUSH acquisitions. Inventories increased in 2005 by $9.8 million due to the impact of higher raw and packaging costs experienced in 2005, inventory in support of the new ELEXA brand and the need to support higher sales. Inventories declined in 2004 by $4.9 million reflecting lower raw material inventories. The net decrease of $6.2 million in accounts payable, taxes payable and other liabilities in 2006 is related to the timing of payments related to increased payables at December 31, 2005. The net increase of $34.3 million in accounts payable, taxes payable and other liabilities in 2005 includes the additional reserve recorded in connection with the Andes litigation of $8.3 million and the timing of tax payments. The increase in 2004 as compared to 2003 is primarily related to higher accrued employee compensation costs and higher sales promotion accruals. Net Cash Used in Investing Activities Cash used in investing activities in 2006 of $385.5 million reflected $337.5 million utilized for the OGI and USAD Canadian acquisitions and investments of $47.6 million in property, plant and equipment. Cash used in investing activities in 2005 of $105.1 million reflected $81.1 million utilized for the acquisitions of SPINBRUSH and the skin care product in South America, and investments of $37.7 million in property, plant and equipment. These uses of cash were partially offset by proceeds of $14.7 million associated mainly with the sale of the Company former Cranbury facility. Cash used in investing activities in 2004 of $229.8 million primarily reflected $194.2 million utilized in the Armkel acquisition and investments of $35.6 million in property, plant and equipment. 2007 capital expenditures are expected to be less than the investments made in 2006. Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities During 2006 the Company increased its total amount of debt by $176.8 million. The increase resulted from $250.0 million borrowed to fund the OGI Acquisition and making both voluntary and mandatory debt repayments of $72.9 million. In addition, the Company paid cash dividends of $16.9 million. These decreases were partially offset by proceeds and tax benefits on stock option exercises of $19.8 million. During 2005, net cash used in financing activities was $101.2 million. This represented Term Loan B voluntary debt payments of $100.0 million, the redemption of all the remaining 9 1/2% Senior Subordinated Notes of $6.4 million and the payments of dividends of $15.3 million. These uses were partially offset by proceeds from stock option exercises of $17.2 million. The Company entered into two cash flow hedge agreements, one effective as of September 29, 2006, and the other effective as of December 29, 2006, to reduce the impact of interest rate fluctuations on its Tranche A term loan debt. Each hedge covers $100.0 million of zero-cost collars for 5 and 3 years, respectively, with a cap of 6.50% and a floor of 3.57%. There was no income statement impact as a result of these agreements as all changes in the hedging option fair value are recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income on the balance sheet. Adjusted EBITDA On December 23, 2005, the Company entered into an amended and restated credit agreement (the Credit Agreement ) with a number of banks and other financial institutions. This amended and restated Credit Agreement provides for a five year Term Loan A in a principal amount of $300.0 million, and may be increased by up to an additional $250.0 million through an accordion feature upon the satisfaction of certain conditions, and continues the existing five year multi-currency revolving credit and letter of credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $100.0 million. On August 7, 2006, the Company existing bank credit facility was 35 Table of Contents amended and increased to allow for the $250.0 million the Company needed to fund the OGI Acquisition. The obligations of the Company under the Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company and certain of its domestic subsidiaries. Those domestic subsidiaries have also guaranteed the loan obligations under the Credit Agreement. Certain of the covenants in the amended and restated credit agreement were also modified. The Term Loan and the Revolving Loans bear interest under one of two rate options, selected by the Company, equal to (a) either (i) a eurocurrency rate (adjusted for any reserve requirements) ( Eurocurrency Rate ) or (ii) the greater of the prime rate, the secondary market rate for three-month certificates of deposit (adjusted for any reserve requirements) plus the applicable FDIC assessment rate plus 1.0%, or the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5% ( Alternate Base Rate ), plus (b) an applicable margin. On the closing date of the new agreement, the applicable margin was (a) 1.00% for the Eurocurrency rate and (b) 0% for the alternate rate. The term loan was used to refinance the Company Term Loan B and the revolving loans are available for general corporate purposes. Adjusted EBITDA is a required component of the financial covenants contained in the Company primary credit facility and Senior Subordinated Notes. Management believes that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors as a financial indicator of the Company ability to service its indebtedness. Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other entities and should not be considered as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities, which is determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Financial covenants include a total debt to Adjusted EBITDA leverage ratio and an interest coverage ratio, which, if not met, could result in an event of default and trigger the early termination of the credit facility and notes, if not remedied within a certain period of time. The definition of Adjusted EBITDA in the notes is substantially similar to the definition in the credit agreement. Adjusted EBITDA was approximately $348.1 million for 2006. The leverage ratio (total debt to Adjusted EBITDA) for 2006 was 2.70 versus the Credit Agreement maximum of 4.00 and the interest coverage ratio (Adjusted EBITDA to total interest expense) was 6.44 versus the Agreement minimum of 3.0. The Credit Agreement is secured by the assets of the Company and certain domestic subsidiaries. The reconciliation of Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities (the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure) to Adjusted EBITDA is as follows (in millions): Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 186.4 Interest Expense 54.0 Current Income Tax Provision 65.1 Change in Working Capital and Other Liabilities 30.5 Tax Benefit on Stock Options Exercised 7.6 Investment Income (5.3 ) Other 9.8 Adjusted EBITDA (per loan agreement) $ 348.1 Net Cash Used in Investing Activities $ (385.5 ) Net Cash Used in Financing Activities $ 177.7 36 Table of Contents Commitments as of December 31, 2006 The table below summarizes the Company material contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2006. Payments Due by Period (In thousands) Total 2007 2008 to 2009 2010 to 2011 After 2011 Short & Long-Term Debt Syndicated Financing Loans $ 481,069 $ 38,144 $ 102,892 $ 244,823 $ 95,210 Senior Subordinated Notes 250,000 250,000 Convertible Debentures (1) 100,000 100,000 Securitization of A/R Facility 100,000 100,000 Bank Overdrafts 1,979 1,979 Various Debt from International Banks 288 288 933,336 140,411 102,892 244,823 445,210 Interest on Fixed Rate Debt (2) 229,751 20,250 40,500 40,500 128,501 Operating Lease Obligations 101,597 17,022 25,626 18,681 40,268 Other Long-Term Liabilities Letters of Credit (3) 13,188 13,188 Surety/Performance Bonds (4) 11,452 11,452 Purchase Obligations (5) 72,593 47,964 24,629 Total $ 1,361,917 $ 250,287 $ 193,647 $ 304,004 $ 613,979 (1) On each of August 15, 2010, August 15, 2013, August 15, 2018, August 15, 2023 and August 15, 2028, or in the event of a change in control, holders may require the Company to repurchase all or any portion of the debentures at a purchase price equal to 100.0% of the principal amount of the debentures, plus accrued and unpaid interest to the date of repurchase. The Company must pay cash for any debentures repurchased on August 15, 2010. However, the Company may choose to pay cash, shares of its common stock, or a combination of cash or shares of its common stock for any debentures repurchased on August 15, 2013, August 15, 2018, August 15, 2023 or August 15, 2028 or following a change in control. (2) Represents interest on the Company 5.25% senior convertible debentures due 2033 and interest on the 6% senior subordinated notes due in 2012. The Company did not include interest expense on its variable rate debt as it cannot predict future interest rates. (3) Letters of credit with several banks guarantee payment for items such as insurance claims in the event of the Company insolvency, one year of lease payments on a warehouse and certain inventory purchases. (4) A surety bond was posted for the Andes Trading litigation for $10.5 million (see Legal Proceedings in Item 3 of this report for additional details regarding the litigation). Additional surety/performance bonds were established for certain of the Company construction activities. (5) The Company has outstanding purchase obligations with suppliers at the end of 2006 for raw, packaging and other materials and services in the normal course of business. These purchase obligation amounts represent only those items which are based on agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and do not represent total anticipated purchases. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements The Company does not have off-balance sheet financing or unconsolidated special purpose entities. Financial Condition The Company generally relies on operating cash flows supplemented by borrowings to meet its financing requirements. The Company broad product portfolio, strong brand names and market positions have provided a 37 Table of Contents stable base of cash flow. Our broad product line is marketed through multiple distribution channels. The Company believes that, as is the case with other basic consumer products, consumers purchase most of its products largely independent of economic cycles. However, the Company ability to meet its financial obligations depends on successful financial and operating performance. The Company cannot guarantee that its business strategy will succeed or that it will achieve anticipated financial results. The Company financial and operational performance depends upon a number of factors, many of which are beyond its control. These factors include: Competitive conditions in the categories of the consumer products industry in which the Company competes; The Company ability to retain certain principal customers, such as Wal-Mart; Operating difficulties, operating costs or pricing pressures the Company may experience; Passage of legislation or other regulatory developments that affect the Company adversely; Delays in implementing any strategic projects; and Current geo-political events. The Company has a total debt-to-capital ratio of approximately 52%. At December 31, 2006 the Company had $75.4 million of additional borrowing capacity available through the revolving loans under its Credit Agreement and a $250.0 million accordion feature associated with the Term Loan. Management believes that operating cash flow, coupled with the Company access to credit markets, will be sufficient to meet the anticipated cash requirements for the coming year. The Company cannot give assurance that it will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that it will be able to obtain sufficient funding to satisfy all its obligations, including those noted above. If the Company is unable to pay its obligations, it will be required to pursue one or more alternative strategies, such as selling assets, refinancing or restructuring indebtedness or raising additional equity capital. The Company cannot give assurance that any alternative strategies will be feasible or prove adequate to satisfy its obligations. OTHER ITEMS Market risk Concentration of Risk A group of three Consumer Domestic customers accounted for approximately 29% of consolidated net sales in 2006, including a single customer, Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., which accounted for approximately 21%. A group of three Consumer Domestic customers accounted for approximately 25% of consolidated net sales in 2005 including Wal-Mart, which accounted for approximately 18%. This group also accounted for approximately 25% of net sales (of which Wal-Mart accounted for 18%) in 2004. As part of the USA Detergents merger agreement in 2001, the Company divested USA Detergents non-laundry business and other non-core assets to former USA Detergents executives under the new company name of USA Metro, Inc. ( USAM ), subsequently renamed USA Detergents ( USAD ). The Company had a concentration of risk with USAD at December 31, 2006 in the form of accounts receivable of $2.4 million at December 31, 2006 and approximately $3.4 million at December 31, 2005, and a $0.6 million equity interest in USAD and a note receivable of $2.2 million. Interest Rate Risk The Company has total debt outstanding at December 31, 2006 of $933.3 million, of which $350.0 million or 37% carries a fixed rate of interest. The remaining debt balance is primarily comprised of $300.0 million in 38 Table of Contents Term Loans under the Credit Agreement (which may be increased by $250.0 million upon the satisfaction of certain conditions), $100.0 million outstanding under the receivables purchase agreement and a loan with a Brazilian bank of approximately $0.3 million. The weighted average interest rate on all these borrowings at December 31, 2006, excluding deferred financing costs and commitment fees, was approximately 6.1%. The Company entered into two cash flow hedge agreements, one effective as of September 29, 2006, and the other effective as of December 29, 2006, to reduce the impact of interest rate fluctuations on its Tranche A term loan debt. Each hedge covers $100.0 million of zero-cost collars for 5 and 3 years, respectively with a cap of 6.50% and a floor of 3.57%. There was no income statement impact as a result of these agreements as all changes in the hedging option fair value were recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income on the balance sheet. The Company domestic operations and its Brazilian subsidiary have other short and long-term debt that are floating rate obligations. If the floating rate were to change by 100 basis points from the December 31, 2006 level, annual interest expense associated with the floating rate debt would change by approximately $5.8 million. Foreign Currency The Company is subject to exposure from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily U.S. Dollar/Euro, U.S. Dollar/British Pound, U.S. Dollar/Canadian Dollar, U.S. Dollar/Mexican Peso, U.S. Dollar/Australian Dollar and U.S. Dollar/Brazilian Real. As a result of the Armkel acquisition, the Company assumed intercompany loans with certain of its subsidiaries. The Company was exposed to foreign exchange accounting remeasurement gains and losses from these intercompany loans. The Company previously entered into several foreign exchange contracts to hedge the net accounting remeasurement exposure on these loans. However, at December 31, 2006, the Company had no outstanding hedges as the foreign exchange exposure has been virtually eliminated through the repayment of certain intercompany loans. The purpose of the Company foreign currency hedging activities was to protect the Company from the risk that the eventual dollar net cash inflows or outflows would be adversely affected by changes in exchange rates. These contracts did not qualify for hedge accounting in accordance with SFAS No. 133 and were marked to market in Other Expenses in the Company Income Statement. The Company, from time to time, enters into forward exchange contracts to hedge anticipated but not yet committed sales or purchases denominated in the Canadian dollar, the British pound and the Euro. There were no contracts at December 31, 2006 to hedge these transactions and the Company had no outstanding material contracts at December 31, 2006. The Company is also subject to translation exposure of the Company foreign subsidiaries financial statements. A hypothetical 10% change in the exchange rates for the U.S. Dollar to the currencies noted above at December 31, 2006 and 2005 would result in an annual currency translation gain or loss of approximately $2.3 million in 2006 and $1.9 million in 2005. Equity Derivatives The Company has entered into equity derivative contracts of its own stock in order to minimize the impact on earnings resulting from fluctuations in the liability to plan participants for contributions designated to Company stock in the Company deferred compensation plan as a result of changes in quoted fair values. These contracts, which consist of cash settled call options in the amount of 177,500 shares, covered approximately 58% of the notional shares in the plan and are marked to market through earnings. As a result of these contracts, the Company recognized income (expense) of approximately $1.2 million in 2006, ($0.3) million in 2005, and $2.1 million in 2004, which reduced (increased) the total charge for deferred compensation. 39 Table of Contents Related Party Transactions Prior to the Armkel acquisition, the Company achieved substantial synergies by combining certain of its operations with those of Armkel, particularly in the areas of sales, manufacturing and distribution, and most service functions. Armkel retained its core marketing, research & development, and financial planning capabilities, and manufactured condoms, but purchased virtually all the support services it required for its U.S. domestic business from the Company under a management services agreement. For the five months ended May 28, 2004, the Company invoiced Armkel $10.2 million for administrative and management oversight services (which was included as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses), purchased $0.8 million of deodorant anti-perspirant inventory produced by Armkel in the first five months of 2004 and sold Armkel $0.7 million of ARM & HAMMER products to be sold in international markets. In connection with its acquisition of USA Detergents in 2001, the Company divested the non-laundry business and other non-core assets to former executives of USA Detergents. The Company has a $0.6 million ownership interest in the business operated by the former USA Detergents executives, which initially was known as USA Metro and is now known as USA Detergents ( USAD ). The Company has been supplying USAD with certain laundry and cleaning products at cost plus a mark-up, and USAD had the exclusive rights to sell these products in Canada. In addition, the Company leases office and laboratory space to USAD under a separate agreement. On June 2, 2006, the Company reacquired the distribution rights from USAD to sell Xtra laundry detergent and Nice N Fluffy liquid fabric softener in Canada for $7.0 million and agreed to make an additional performance-based payment of a maximum of $2.5 million based upon the one year sales performance during the one year period following the closing date. The acquisition was funded out of the Company available cash. If a payment is required, it will be accounted for as additional purchase price and reflected as an increase to goodwill. During 2006 and 2005, the Company sold $15.8 million, and $23.1 million, respectively, of laundry and cleaning products to USAD. Furthermore, the Company billed USAD $0.2 million and $0.2 million for leased space during 2006 and 2005, respectively. For open amounts receivable at December 31, 2006 and 2005, see Concentration of Risk. The Company only financial interest in Armkel prior to the Armkel acquisition, and in USAD, has been the Company direct equity investments in Armkel and USAD. The Company had no relationship with the other former equity holders of Armkel and the equity holders of USAD. For this reason, the Company believes it has had no incentive to negotiate with either Armkel (prior to the Armkel acquisition) or USAD in a manner that is not in the best interests of its stockholders generally. In connection with its Armand and ArmaKleen joint ventures and its partnership with a supplier of sodium raw materials, the Company believes it has no incentive to negotiate with any of those entities in a manner that is not in the best interests of stockholders generally, since it has no equity interest in the other partners. The Company has entered into agreements with these entities in the ordinary course of business. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2006, 2005, 2004, the Company invoiced Armand $1.6, $1.7 and $1.5 million for administration and management oversight services (which was included as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses), respectively. Intercompany sales of Armand products to the Company over the same periods were $9.7, $10.7 and $8.4 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the Company had outstanding receivables from Armand of $0.6 and $1.0 million. Also, the Company has outstanding accounts payable with Armand of $0.6 and $0.7 million as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2006, 2005, 2004, the Company invoiced ArmaKleen $2.8, $2.6 and $2.6 million for administration and management oversight services (which was included as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses), respectively. Intercompany sales of inventory to ArmaKleen over the same periods were $5.2, $4.7 and $4.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, the Company had outstanding receivables with ArmaKleen of $0.7 and $0.7 million, respectively. 40 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING Management of Church & Dwight Co., Inc (the Company ) is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. Management evaluated the Company internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2006. In making this assessment, management used the framework established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). As a result of this assessment and based on the criteria in the COSO framework, management has concluded that, as of December 31, 2006, the Company internal control over financial reporting was effective. The Company independent registered public accounting firm, Deloitte & Touche LLP, have audited management assessment of the Company internal control over financial reporting. Their opinion on management assessment and their opinions on the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting and on the Company financial statements appear on pages 42 and 43 of this annual report on Form 10-K. /s/ J AMES R. C RAIGIE /s/ M ATTHEW T. F ARRELL James R. Craigie Matthew T. Farrell President and Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer February 23, 2007 41 Table of Contents REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Church & Dwight Co., Inc. Princeton, New Jersey We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Church & Dwight Co., Inc. and subsidiaries (the Company ) as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, and the related consolidated statements of income, stockholders equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2006. Our audits also included the financial statement schedule listed in the Index at Item 15. These financial statements and financial statement schedule are the responsibility of the Company management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statements and financial statement schedule based on our audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion. In our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2006 and 2005, and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2006, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also, in our opinion, such financial statement schedule, when considered in relation to the basic consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, present fairly, in all material respects, the information set forth therein. As discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements, effective January 1, 2006 the Company adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No. 123(R) Share-Based Payment. We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2006, based on the criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated February 23, 2007 expressed an unqualified opinion on management assessment of the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting and an unqualified opinion on the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting. D ELOITTE & T OUCHE LLP Parsippany, New Jersey February 23, 2007 42 Table of Contents REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Church & Dwight Co., Inc. Princeton, New Jersey We have audited management assessment, included in the accompanying Management Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting, that Church & Dwight Co., Inc. and subsidiaries (the Company ) maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2006, based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. The Company management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on management assessment and an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, evaluating management assessment, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinions. A company internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the company principal executive and principal financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the company board of directors, management, and other personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. In our opinion, management assessment that the Company maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2006, is fairly stated, in all material respects, based on the criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2006, based on the criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated financial statements and financial statement schedule as of and for the year ended December 31, 2006 of the Company and our report dated February 23, 2007 expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements and financial statement schedule and included an explanatory paragraph regarding the Company adoption of Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No. 123(R) Share-Based Payment on January 1, 2006. D ELOITTE & T OUCHE LLP Parsippany, New Jersey February 23, 2007 43 Table of Contents 
