CIK: 318154
Company Name: AMGEN INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-03-09


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Forward looking statements This report and other documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) contain forward looking statements that are based on current expectations, estimates, forecasts and projections about us, our future performance, our business or others on our behalf, our beliefs and our management assumptions. In addition, we, or others on our behalf, may make forward looking statements in press releases or written statements, or in our communications and discussions with investors and analysts in the normal course of business through meetings, webcasts, phone calls, and conference calls. Words such as expect, anticipate, outlook, could, target, project, intend, plan, believe, seek, estimate, should, may, assume, continue, variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve certain risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that are difficult to predict. We describe our respective risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that could affect the outcome or results of operations in Factors That May Affect Amgen . We have based our forward looking statements on our management beliefs and assumptions based on information available to our management at the time the statements are made. We caution you that actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed, implied, or forecast by our forward looking statements. Reference is made in particular to forward looking statements regarding product sales, reimbursement, expenses, earnings per share, liquidity and capital resources, and trends. Except as required under the federal securities laws and the rules and regulations of the SEC, we do not have any intention or obligation to update publicly any forward looking statements after the distribution of this report, whether as a result of new information, future events, changes in assumptions, or otherwise. Overview The following management discussion and analysis ( MD&A ) is intended to assist the reader in understanding Amgen. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We are a global biotechnology company that discovers, develops, manufactures, and markets human therapeutics based on advances in cellular and molecular biology. Our mission is to serve patients. As a science-based, patient-focused organization, we discover and develop innovative therapies to treat serious illness. We operate in one business segment human therapeutics. Therefore, our results of operations are discussed on a consolidated basis. We primarily earn revenues and income and generate cash from sales of human therapeutic products in the areas of nephrology, supportive cancer care, and inflammatory disease. For the year ended December 31, 2004, total revenues were $10,550 million and net income was $2,363 million, or $1.81 per share. As of December 31, 2004, cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were $5,808 million. For the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002, product sales represented 95%, 94%, and 90% of total revenues, respectively. Over the last two years, our product sales growth has been primarily driven by sales of Aranesp , ENBREL , and Neulasta , which benefited from market share gains and/or market growth. We expect these products to continue to drive sales growth in the near term. Most patients receiving our principal products for approved indications, excluding ENBREL , are covered by both government and private payers health care programs. Therefore, our product sales are and will be affected by government and private payer reimbursement policies. Reduction in reimbursement could adversely affect our results of operations. For example, the MMA was enacted into law in December 2003. We expect that, beginning in 28 Table of Contents 2005, reimbursement changes resulting from the MMA are likely, to a degree, to negatively affect product sales of some of our marketed products. For additional information on reimbursement and its impact on our business, see Reimbursement in Item 1. Business . Although we have achieved market share gains during 2004, we expect that continued gains will be a challenge as we operate in a highly competitive environment. Going forward, we expect to continue to focus on market share gains, but we also expect to increase our focus on growing the market. See Competition in Item 1. Business for further information on the impact of competition on our business. International product sales for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002 represented 17%, 14%, and 10% of total product sales and consisted principally of European sales. International product sales have grown substantially since 2002 as a result of the launches of Aranesp and Neulasta and continued market penetration. International product sales grew 54% during 2004 and 123% during 2003. Our international sales are impacted by foreign currency changes (see Results of Operations discussion below). International product sales growth during 2004 and 2003 benefited by $164 million and $166 million, respectively, from foreign currency exchange rate changes. However, both positive and negative impacts from movements in foreign exchange rates have been mitigated by the natural, opposite impact to our international operating expenses and as a result of our foreign currency hedging activities. Our hedging activities seek to offset the impact, both positive and negative, that foreign exchange rate changes may have on our net income. As such, the impact to our results of operations from changes in foreign currency exchange rates has been largely mitigated. For 2004, operating income increased $257 million primarily as a result of our product sales growth. Operating income as a percentage of product sales was 34% for 2004 compared to 39% for 2003. This decrease was primarily attributable to the impact of the 2004 IPR&D charge of $554 million relating to the acquisition of Tularik. During 2004, we increased our operating expenses to support our product sales growth and to invest in R&D to advance our product pipeline. In 2005, our operating expenses are expected to further increase in support of our anticipated product sales growth, and as a result of our continued investment in R&D to advance our pipeline. We focus our R&D efforts on human therapeutics delivered in the form of proteins, monoclonal antibodies, and small molecules in the areas of oncology, inflammation, metabolic disorders, neuroscience, and general medicine. We focus on the development of novel therapeutics for the treatment of serious illness. We take a modality-independent approach to R&D that is, we identify targets, then choose the modality best suited to address a specific target. To enhance our internal R&D efforts, we have acquired and licensed certain product and technology rights and have established R&D collaborations. On August 13, 2004, we acquired Tularik at a purchase price of approximately $1.5 billion in a transaction accounted for as a business combination. Tularik was a company engaged in drug discovery related to cell signaling and the control of gene expression. In connection with the Tularik acquisition, we incurred a charge of $554 million associated with writing off the fair value of IPR&D acquired (see Note 7, Acquisitions in the consolidated financial statements). The IPR&D write-off represents the estimated fair value of the various acquired R&D projects in Tularik pipeline that, as of the acquisition date, had not reached technological feasibility and had no alternative future use. See Research and Development and Selected Product Candidates in Item 1. Business for further information on our product pipeline. We expect to continue to invest significantly in R&D. There are many economic and industry-wide factors that affect our business, including, among others, those relating to broad reimbursement changes, increased complexity and cost of R&D, increasingly intense competition for our currently marketed products and product candidates, complex and expanding regulatory requirements, and intellectual property protection. See Item 1. Business and Factors That May Affect Amgen for further information on these economic and industry-wide factors and their impact on our business. 29 Table of Contents Results of Operations Product sales For the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002, total product sales by geographic region were as follows (amounts in millions): 2004 Change 2003 Change 2002 Total U.S. $ 8,279 22 % $ 6,764 50 % $ 4,497 Total International 1,698 54 % 1,104 123 % 494 Total product sales $ 9,977 27 % $ 7,868 58 % $ 4,991 See Principal Products in Item 1. Business for a discussion of our principal products and their approved indications. Product sales are influenced by a number of factors, including demand, third-party reimbursement availability and policies, pricing strategies, wholesaler inventory management practices, foreign currency exchange effects, new product launches and indications, competitive products, product supply, and acquisitions. Sales growth in 2004 was principally driven by demand for Aranesp , ENBREL , and Neulasta . U.S. sales for Aranesp and Neulasta were impacted by higher incentives earned by customers under performance-based contracts. International product sales growth benefited by $164 million from foreign currency exchange rate changes. In the near term, we expect sales growth to continue to be driven primarily by Aranesp , ENBREL , and Neulasta . We believe that changes in reimbursement for our products are likely to adversely affect, to a degree, the prescription and administration of our products by healthcare providers, impacting sequential sales growth and historical sales trends. In prior years, certain of our products have reported sales in the first quarter that were comparable or slightly less than reported sales in the fourth quarter of the previous year. However, due to the uncertainties surrounding the impact of reimbursement, we are unsure that such historical sales trends will continue. EPOGEN / Aranesp For the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002, total EPOGEN and Aranesp sales by geographic region were as follows (amounts in millions): 2004 Change 2003 Change 2002 EPOGEN U.S. $ 2,601 7 % $ 2,435 8 % $ 2,261 Aranesp U.S. 1,533 56 % 980 244 % 285 Aranesp International 940 67 % 564 331 % 131 Aranesp Total 2,473 60 % 1,544 271 % 416 Total EPOGEN and Aranesp $ 5,074 28 % $ 3,979 49 % $ 2,677 The increases in combined EPOGEN and worldwide Aranesp sales for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 were primarily driven by worldwide demand for Aranesp . The increase for the year ended December 31, 2003 reflects the mid-year 2002 approval of Aranesp for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced anemia in the United States and Europe. The growth in reported EPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2004 was primarily driven by demand, which reflects dialysis patient population growth and a continued focus in the renal community on patient outcomes, and to a lesser extent, increases in wholesaler inventory levels. For the year ended December 31, 2003, the growth in reported EPOGEN sales was primarily due to demand, and to a lesser extent, spillover (See Summary of Critical Accounting Policies EPOGEN revenue recognition and Note 1, Summary of significant accounting policies Product sales to the consolidated financial statements). Demand was driven by growth in the dialysis patient population and improved patient outcomes. 30 Table of Contents Patients receiving treatment for anemia associated with end stage renal disease with EPOGEN are covered primarily under medical programs provided by the federal government. We believe EPOGEN sales growth will primarily depend on dialysis patient population growth and changes in reimbursement rates or a change in the basis for reimbursement by the federal government (see Factors That May Affect Amgen Our sales depend on payment and reimbursement from third-party payers, and, to the extent that reimbursement for our products is reduced, this could negatively impact the utilization of our products. ). We believe EPOGEN sales growth will also be dependent, in part, on future governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our products and cost containment pressures from the federal government on health care providers. Further, EPOGEN competes to a slight degree with Aranesp in the United States as some health care providers use Aranesp to treat anemia associated with chronic renal failure instead of EPOGEN . To the extent that future Aranesp sales in the United States are impacted by the effects of reimbursement and pricing strategies (see Aranesp below), we would expect further competition between EPOGEN and Aranesp for the treatment of anemia associated with chronic renal failure for patients who are on dialysis. The increase in U.S. Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2004 was driven by demand, which benefited from market share gains in both oncology and nephrology and market growth. Sales growth was impacted by higher incentives earned by customers attaining higher sales volumes and growth under performance-based contracts. The increase in international Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2004 was principally driven by demand, and to a lesser extent, favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates. International Aranesp sales growth for 2004 benefited by $92 million from foreign currency exchange rate changes. The increase in U.S. Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2003 was principally driven by demand, reflecting the mid-year 2002 launch of Aranesp for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced anemia in the United States. The increase in international Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2003 was principally driven by demand, reflecting the mid-year 2002 launch of Aranesp for the treatment of chemotherapy-induced anemia in Europe, and to a lesser extent, favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates. International Aranesp sales growth for 2003 benefited by $87 million from favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates. We believe future worldwide Aranesp sales growth will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: reimbursement by third party payers (including governments and private insurance plans) (see Factors That May Affect Amgen Our sales depend on payment and reimbursement from third-party payers, and, to the extent that reimbursement for our products is reduced, this could negatively impact the utilization of our products. ); cost containment pressures from governments and private insurers on health care providers; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our products; penetration of new and existing markets; patient population growth; the effects of pricing strategies; competitive products or therapies, including follow-on biologic products in Europe; the development of new treatments for cancer; and changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Neulasta / NEUPOGEN For the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002, total Neulasta and NEUPOGEN sales by geographic region were as follows (amounts in millions): 2004 Change 2003 Change 2002 Neulasta U.S. $ 1,476 26 % $ 1,175 153 % $ 464 Neulasta International 264 230 % 80 N/A Neulasta Total $ 1,740 39 % $ 1,255 170 % $ 464 NEUPOGEN U.S. 778 (12 )% 881 (15 )% 1,042 NEUPOGEN International 397 3 % 386 14 % 338 NEUPOGEN Total 1,175 (7 )% 1,267 (8 )% 1,380 Total Neulasta and NEUPOGEN $ 2,915 16 % $ 2,522 37 % $ 1,844 31 Table of Contents The increase in combined worldwide Neulasta and NEUPOGEN sales for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 was driven by worldwide demand for Neulasta . The increase for the year ended December 31, 2003 reflects the April 2002 launch of Neulasta . The increase in U.S. Neulasta sales for the year ended December 31, 2004 was primarily driven by demand, which benefited from new clinical data demonstrating the value of first cycle use. Sales growth was impacted by higher incentives earned by customers attaining higher sales volumes and growth under performance-based contracts. The increase in international Neulasta sales for the year ended December 31, 2004 was primarily due to demand, which reflects continued market penetration since the January 2003 launch of Neulasta in Europe, and to a lesser extent, favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates. International Neulasta sales growth for 2004 benefited by $27 million from foreign currency exchange rate changes. The increase in U.S. Neulasta sales for the year ended December 31, 2003 was primarily driven by U.S. demand, which reflects the conversion of NEUPOGEN patients to Neulasta resulting from the April 2002 Neulasta launch. International Neulasta sales for the year ended December 31, 2003 reflect the January 2003 launch of Neulasta in Europe. The decrease in U.S. NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2004 was primarily due to a decline in demand. The increase in international NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2004 was due to favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates partially offset by a decline in demand. International NEUPOGEN sales growth for 2004 benefited by $38 million from foreign currency exchange rate changes. Both the United States and international decreases in demand reflect the conversion of NEUPOGEN patients to Neulasta . The decrease in NEUPOGEN sales in the United States for the year ended December 31, 2003 was principally due to the conversion of patients from NEUPOGEN to Neulasta . The increase in international NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2003 was entirely due to favorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates. We believe future worldwide Neulasta and NEUPOGEN sales growth will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: reimbursement by third-party payers (including governments and private insurance plans) (see Factors That May Affect Amgen Our sales depend on payment and reimbursement from third-party payers, and, to the extent that reimbursement for our products is reduced, this could negatively impact the utilization of our products. ); cost containment pressures from governments and private insurers on health care providers; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our products; penetration of existing markets; patient population growth; the effects of pricing strategies; competitive products or therapies, including follow-on biologic products in Europe; the development of new treatments for cancer; and changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Future chemotherapy treatments that are less myelosuppressive may require less Neulasta / NEUPOGEN , however, other future chemotherapy treatments that are more myelosuppressive, such as dose dense chemotherapy, could require more Neulasta / NEUPOGEN . NEUPOGEN competes with Neulasta in the United States and Europe. U.S. NEUPOGEN sales have been adversely impacted by conversion to Neulasta . However, we believe that most of the conversion in the United States has occurred. We believe that we are experiencing conversion of NEUPOGEN patients to Neulasta in Europe, but we believe that this conversion will occur to a lesser extent than that experienced in the United States. However, we cannot accurately predict the rate or timing of future conversion of NEUPOGEN patients to Neulasta in Europe. ENBREL For the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002, total ENBREL sales by geographic region were as follows (amounts in millions): 2004 Change 2003 Change 2002 ENBREL U.S. $ 1,827 46 % $ 1,254 262 % $ 346 ENBREL International 73 59 % 46 188 % 16 Total ENBREL $ 1,900 46 % $ 1,300 259 % $ 362 32 Table of Contents ENBREL sales growth for the year ended December 31, 2004 was driven by demand, benefiting from ENBREL competitive profile and significant growth of biologics in the rheumatology and dermatology markets. In the dermatology market, ENBREL has grown significantly since its approval for moderate to severe psoriasis in April of 2004 and has become the number one prescribed systemic therapy in this market. ENBREL sales for the year ended December 31, 2003 were primarily driven by the addition of new patients in both rheumatology and dermatology. The increase from the prior year reflects that we only recorded ENBREL sales beginning on July 16, 2002, subsequent to the close of the Immunex acquisition. These sales were adversely impacted by supply constraints. We believe that future ENBREL sales growth will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: the effects of competing products or therapies; penetration of existing and new markets, including potential new indications; the availability and extent of reimbursement by government and third-party payers; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our products (see Factors That May Affect Amgen Our sales depend on payment and reimbursement from third-party payers, and, to the extent that reimbursement for our products is reduced, this could negatively impact the utilization of our products ); and limits on the current supply of and sources of ENBREL . Selected operating expenses The following table summarizes selected operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002 (amounts in millions): 2004 2003 2002 Product sales $ 9,977 $ 7,868 $ 4,991 Operating expenses: Cost of sales (excludes amortization of acquired intangible assets) $ 1,731 $ 1,341 $ 736 % of product sales 17 % 17 % 15 % Research and development $ 2,028 $ 1,655 $ 1,117 % of product sales 20 % 21 % 22 % Write-off of acquired in-process research and development $ 554 $ $ 2,992 Selling, general and administrative $ 2,556 $ 1,957 $ 1,449 % of product sales 26 % 25 % 29 % Cost of sales Cost of sales, which excludes the amortization of acquired intangible assets (see Consolidated Statements of Operations ), increased 29% for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily driven by higher sales volumes, and to a lesser extent, higher manufacturing costs due to changes in the product mix. In 2005, we expect cost of sales to be affected by further product mix changes, including the impact of higher ENBREL sales as it has significantly higher manufacturing costs and royalty expenses as compared to our other principal products. Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2003 increased 82% over the prior year, primarily due to higher sales. The increase in cost of sales as a percentage of product sales in 2003 primarily reflects an increase of ENBREL sales as a percentage of total product sales. ENBREL has significantly higher manufacturing costs and royalty expense compared to our other products. Additionally, the manufacturing costs of the Rhode Island production facility, which began producing in December 2002, are greater than those of our contract manufacturer, BI Pharma. Research and development R&D expenses are primarily comprised of salaries and benefits associated with R&D personnel, overhead and occupancy costs, clinical trial and related clinical manufacturing costs, contract services, and other outside costs. R&D expenses increased 23% for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily driven by higher staff-related costs including the addition of R&D personnel from Tularik, and to a lesser extent, higher costs relating to clinical manufacturing and key clinical trials costs, including the commencement of large-scale 33 Table of Contents phase 3 trials for AMG 162, Amgen investigational therapy for bone loss. In 2004, staff-related costs and clinical manufacturing and clinical trial costs increased approximately $233 million and $122 million, respectively. In 2005, we expect our R&D expenses to increase primarily due to higher clinical manufacturing and clinical trial costs to support our development efforts for AMG 162 and Aranesp (TREAT) (see Item 1. Business Research and Development and Selected Product Candidates ). In 2003, R&D expenses increased 48% over the prior year, primarily due to higher outside R&D costs, principally licensing and milestone fees which include the Biovitrum AB up-front fee of $87 million, higher staff-related costs, and higher clinical manufacturing costs. In 2003, outside R&D costs, staff-related costs and clinical manufacturing costs increased approximately $252 million, $163 million, and $92 million, respectively. Acquired in-process research and development IPR&D represents an estimate of the fair value of the various R&D projects and technologies in the acquired company pipeline that, as of the acquisition date, had not reached technological feasibility and had no alternative future use. In 2004 and 2002, we incurred charges of $554 million and $2,992 million, respectively, associated with writing off the fair value of IPR&D acquired in the Tularik and Immunex acquisitions, respectively (see Note 7, Acquisitions in the consolidated financial statements). Selling, general and administrative Selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expenses are primarily comprised of salaries and benefits associated with sales and marketing, finance, legal, and other administrative personnel; outside marketing expenses; overhead and occupancy costs; and other general and administrative costs. SG&A increased 31% for the year ended December 31, 2004, primarily due to higher staff-related costs and higher outside marketing expenses, which reflects higher spending to support our products in competitive markets and sales growth. Outside marketing expenses include the Wyeth profit share related to ENBREL , which has increased due to ENBREL sales growth. In 2004, staff-related costs and outside marketing expenses increased approximately $255 million and $236 million, respectively. In 2005, we expect higher Wyeth profit share expense due to expected ENBREL sales growth; however, we expect to see some leveraging of our 2004 SG&A spending during 2005. Additionally, SG&A expenses in the fourth quarter are expected to increase over the previous three quarters in a trend similar to that which has occurred in previous years. In 2003, SG&A expenses increased 35%, over the prior year primarily due to higher outside marketing expenses, which includes higher Wyeth profit share as a result of ENBREL sales growth, and higher staff-related costs to support new products in competitive markets and sales growth. In 2003, outside marketing expenses, which include the Wyeth profit share, increased approximately $276 million and staff-related costs increased approximately $207 million. Other items, net In 2003, other items, net consisted of a benefit for the recovery of costs and expenses associated with a legal award related to an arbitration proceeding with Johnson & Johnson of $74 million, partially offset by a charitable contribution to the Amgen Foundation of $50 million. In 2002, other items, net consisted of a benefit of $40 million related to the recovery of certain expenses accrued in the fourth quarter of 2001 related to terminating collaboration agreements with various third parties and a legal award associated with the product license arbitration with Johnson & Johnson of $151 million, partially offset by a charitable contribution to the Amgen Foundation of $50 million. See Note 12, Other items, net , to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion. Income taxes Our effective tax rate was 30.4%, 28.8%, and (103.3%) for 2004, 2003, and 2002 respectively. Our effective tax rate for 2004 has increased primarily due to the write-off of non-deductible IPR&D costs of $554 million in connection with the acquisition of Tularik. This increase was partially offset by an increase in the amount of foreign earnings intended to be invested indefinitely outside the United States. 34 Table of Contents Our negative effective tax rate for 2002 was due to the pre-tax loss resulting from the write-off of non-deductible IPR&D costs of $2,992 million in connection with the acquisition of Immunex. The 2003 effective tax rate was higher than the 2002 effective tax rate primarily due to Immunex IPR&D write-off in 2002 and the loss of the possession tax credit in 2003 partially offset by an increase in the amount of foreign earnings intended to be invested indefinitely outside the United States. During 2002, we restructured our Puerto Rico manufacturing operations using a controlled foreign corporation. As permitted in Accounting Principles Board Opinion ( APB ) No. 23, Accounting for Income Taxes Special Areas , we do not provide U.S. income taxes on our controlled foreign corporations undistributed earnings that are intended to be invested indefinitely outside the United States. On October 22, 2004, the President of the United States signed the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (the Jobs Act ), which provides a temporary incentive to repatriate undistributed foreign earnings. However, uncertainty remains as to how to interpret numerous provisions in the Jobs Act. As such, we are currently evaluating the repatriation provisions of the Jobs Act and our 2004 results of operations do not reflect any impact relating to such repatriation provisions. See Note 3, Income taxes , to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion. Stock option expense In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standard ( SFAS ) No. 123R, Share-Based Payment . SFAS No. 123R will require us to account for our stock options using a fair-value-based method as described in such statement and recognize the resulting compensation expense in our financial statements. We currently account for our employee stock options using the intrinsic value method under APB No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees and related Interpretations, which generally results in no employee stock option expense. We plan to adopt SFAS No. 123R using the modified-retrospective transition method on July 1, 2005 and do not plan to restate our financial statements for periods ending prior to January 1, 2005. We expect that our after tax expense for stock options for the full twelve months in 2005 will range between $170 million to $220 million, or $0.13 to $0.17 per share. The estimated after tax expense for 2005 is less than the corresponding pro forma expense amount for 2004 ($292 million, see Note 1, Summary of significant accounting policies Employee stock options in the consolidated financial statements) principally due to a reduction in the estimated number of stock options to be granted in 2005 and a reduction in the estimated fair value of our stock options, which is primarily due to a lower estimated future volatility of our stock price, reflecting the consideration of implied volatility in our publicly traded equity instruments. However, the actual annual expense in 2005 is dependent on a number of factors including the number of stock options granted, our common stock price and related expected volatility, and other inputs utilized in estimating the fair value of the stock options at the time of grant. Accordingly, the adoption in 2005 of SFAS No. 123R will have a material impact on our results of operations. Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table summarizes selected financial data (amounts in millions): December 31, December 31, 2004 2003 Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities $ 5,808 $ 5,123 Total assets 29,221 26,113 Current debt 1,173 Non-current debt 3,937 3,080 Stockholders equity 19,705 19,389 We believe that existing funds, cash generated from operations, and existing sources of and access to financing are adequate to satisfy our working capital, capital expenditure and debt service requirements for the foreseeable future, as well as to support our stock repurchase programs. However, in order to provide for greater financial flexibility and liquidity, we may raise additional capital from time to time. 35 Table of Contents Cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities Of the total cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities at December 31, 2004, approximately $2.1 billion represents cash generated from operations in foreign tax jurisdictions and is intended for use outside the United States (see Results of Operations Income taxes ). If these funds are repatriated for use in our U.S. operations, additional taxes on certain of these amounts would be required to be paid. Based on our preliminary analysis to date, we are limited under the Jobs Act to repatriate up to $500 million in foreign profits to take advantage of the 85% dividends received deduction. The primary objectives for our marketable securities portfolio, which is primarily comprised of fixed income investments, is liquidity and safety of principal. Investments are made with the objective of achieving the highest rate of return, consistent with these two objectives. Our investment policy limits investments to certain types of instruments issued by institutions primarily with investment grade credit ratings and places restrictions on maturities and concentration by type and issuer. Financing activities As of December 31, 2004, we had Convertible Notes (30-year, zero-coupon senior convertible notes) with an accreted value of $2.9 billion outstanding and having an aggregate face amount of $3.95 billion and yield to maturity of 1.125%. The original issue discount of $1.13 billion is being accreted to the balance of the Convertible Notes and recognized as interest expense over the life of the Convertible Notes using the effective interest method. The holders of the Convertible Notes may require us to purchase all or a portion of their notes on various dates, the earliest of which is March 1, 2005, at a price equal to the original issuance price plus the accrued original issue discount ( accreted value ) through the purchase dates. In such event, under the terms of the Convertible Notes, we have the right to pay the purchase price in cash and/or shares of common stock, which would be issued at the then current market price. On March 2, 2005, as a result of certain holders of the Convertible Notes exercising their March 1, 2005 put option, we repurchased $1,175 million, or approximately 40%, of the outstanding Convertible Notes at their then-accreted value for cash. Concurrently, we amended the terms of the Convertible Notes to add an additional put date in order to permit the remaining holders, at their option, to cause us to repurchase the Convertible Notes on March 1, 2006 at the then-accreted value. Accordingly, the portion of the Convertible Notes outstanding at December 31, 2004 not repurchased on March 2, 2005 was classified as long-term debt (see Note 4, Financing arrangements Convertible notes to the consolidated financial statements). Our Convertible Notes are rated A2 by Moody and A+ by Standard & Poor s. Holders of the Convertible Notes may convert each of their notes into 8.8601 shares of common stock of Amgen (the conversion rate ) at any time on or before the maturity date. The conversion price per share as of any day will equal the original issuance price plus the accrued original issue discount to that day, divided by the conversion rate, or $83.22 per share as of December 31, 2004. In November 2004, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.00% senior notes due 2009 (the 2009 Notes ) and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.85% senior notes due 2014 (the 2014 Notes ). The net proceeds of $1,989 million are intended to be used for purchases of shares under our stock repurchase program and for general corporate purposes, including capital expenditures and working capital. In July 2004, we established a $1.0 billion five-year unsecured revolving credit facility to be used for general corporate purposes, including commercial paper support. Additionally, we increased the size of our commercial paper authorization by $1.0 billion to $1.2 billion. No amounts were outstanding under the credit facility or commercial paper program as of December 31, 2004. We have a $1.0 billion shelf registration (the $1 Billion Shelf ) which allows us to issue debt securities, common stock, and associated preferred share purchase rights, preferred stock, warrants to purchase debt securities, common stock or preferred stock, securities purchase contracts, securities purchase units and depositary shares. The $1 Billion Shelf was established to provide for further financial flexibility and the securities available for issuance may be offered from time to time with terms to be determined at the time of issuance. As of December 31, 2004, no securities had been issued under the $1 Billion Shelf. As of December 31, 2004, we had $200 million of long-term debt securities outstanding. These long-term debt securities consisted of: 1) $100 million of debt securities that bear interest at a fixed rate of 6.5% and 36 Table of Contents mature in 2007 (the 2007 Notes ) under a $500 million debt shelf registration (the $500 Million Shelf ), and 2) $100 million of debt securities that bear interest at a fixed rate of 8.1% and mature in 2097 (the Century Notes ). Our outstanding long-term debt is rated A2 by Moody and A+ by Standard & Poor s. Under the $500 Million Shelf, all of the remaining $400 million of debt securities available for issuance may be offered from time to time under our medium-term note program with terms to be determined at the time of issuance. Certain of our financing arrangements contain non-financial covenants and as of December 31, 2004, we are in compliance with all applicable covenants. Cash flows The following table summarizes our cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002 (amounts in millions): 2004 2003 2002 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 3,697 $ 3,567 $ 2,249 Net cash used in investing activities (1,399 ) (3,210 ) (2,864 ) Net cash (used in) provided by financing activities (1,609 ) (1,372 ) 1,778 Operating Cash provided by operating activities has been and is expected to continue to be our primary recurring source of funds. The increase in cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2004 resulted primarily from higher cash receipts from customers driven by the growth in product sales. This increase was partially offset primarily by the timing of cash payments relating to our tax liabilities (See consolidated statements of cash flows). Investing Capital expenditures totaled $1,336 million in 2004 compared with $1,357 million in the prior year. Capital expenditures in 2004 primarily related to the Thousand Oaks site expansion, the new ENBREL manufacturing plant in Rhode Island, and the Puerto Rico manufacturing expansion. Capital expenditures in 2003 primarily related to the new ENBREL manufacturing plant in Rhode Island, the Puerto Rico manufacturing expansion, and the Seattle research center which was completed in January 2004. We currently estimate 2005 spending on capital projects and equipment to be consistent with 2004. The most significant of these expenditures are expected to relate to the new ENBREL manufacturing plant in Rhode Island, the Puerto Rico manufacturing expansion, and the Thousand Oaks site expansion. Financing In December 2003, the Board of Directors (the Board ) authorized us to repurchase up to $5.0 billion of common stock. Additionally, in December 2004, the Board authorized us to repurchase up to an additional $5.0 billion of common stock. As of December 31, 2004, $5,969 million was available for stock repurchases. The amount we spend and the number of shares repurchased varies based on a variety of factors including the stock price and blackout periods in which we are restricted from repurchasing shares. Repurchases under our stock repurchase programs reflect, in part, our confidence in the long-term value of Amgen common stock. A summary of our repurchase activity for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 is as follows (amounts in millions): 2004 2003 Shares Dollars Shares Dollars First quarter 10 $ 650 8 $ 451 Second quarter 17 1,000 7 449 Third quarter 24 1,398 5 324 Fourth quarter 18 1,024 10 577 Total 69 $ 4,072 30 $ 1,801 37 Table of Contents See Part II Item 5 Market for Registrants Common Equity and Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities Item 5(c). Changes in Securities, Use of Proceeds and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities for additional information regarding our stock repurchase programs. In November 2004, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.00% senior notes due 2009 (the 2009 Notes ) and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 4.85% senior notes due 2014 (the 2014 Notes ). The net proceeds of $1,989 million are intended to be used for purchases of shares under our stock repurchase program and for general corporate purposes, including capital expenditures and working capital. We receive cash from the exercise of employee stock options and proceeds from the sale of stock pursuant to the employee stock purchase plan. Employee stock option exercises and proceeds from the sale of stock by us pursuant to the employee stock purchase plans provided $453 million and $529 million of cash during the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options will vary from period to period based upon, among other factors, fluctuations in the market value of our stock relative to the exercise price of such options. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are currently material or reasonably likely to be material to our financial position or results of operations. Contractual Obligations Contractual obligations represent future cash commitments and liabilities under agreements with third parties, and exclude contingent liabilities for which we cannot reasonably predict future payment. Accordingly, the table below excludes contractual obligations relating to milestone and royalty payments due to third parties contingent upon certain future events. Such events could include, but are not limited to, development milestones, regulatory approvals and product sales. Additionally, the expected timing of payment of the obligations presented below is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the timing of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon terms or amounts for some obligations. The following chart represents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2004, aggregated by type (in millions): Payments Due by Period Less Than 1-3 3-5 More Than Contractual Obligations Total 1 Year Years Years 5 Years Long-term debt obligations(1) $ 6,584 $ 1,278 (2) $ 2,068 (2) $ 1,190 $ 2,048 Operating lease obligations 656 81 131 96 348 Purchase obligations(3) 2,291 1,087 525 298 381 Total contractual obligations $ 9,531 $ 2,446 $ 2,724 $ 1,584 $ 2,777 (1) The long-term obligation amounts in the above table differ from the related carrying amounts on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2004 due to the accretion of the original issue discount on the Convertible Notes and the inclusion of future interest payments. Future interest payments are included on the 2007 Notes, the 2009 Notes, the 2014 Notes, and the Century Notes at fixed rates of 6.5%, 4.00%, 4.85%, and 8.1%, respectively, through maturity in 2007, 2009, 2014, and 2097, respectively. (2) Holders of the Convertible Notes may require us to purchase all or a portion of the notes on specific dates as early as March 1, 2005 at the original issuance price plus accrued original issue discount ( accreted value ) through the purchase dates. On March 2, 2005, as a result of certain holders of the Convertible Notes exercising their March 1, 2005 put option, we repurchased $1,175 million, or approximately 40%, of the outstanding Convertible Notes at their then-accreted value for cash. Concurrently, we amended the terms of the Convertible Notes to add an additional put date in order to permit the remaining holders, at their option, to cause us to repurchase the Convertible Notes on March 1, 2006 at the then-accreted value. The amounts above reflect the Convertible Notes accreted value repurchased on March 1, 2005 and the remaining Convertible Notes accreted value on March 1, 2006, the next put date. In the event 38 Table of Contents we are required to repurchase the remaining Convertible Notes, we may choose to pay the purchase price in cash and/or shares of common stock, which would be issued at the then current market price. See Note 4, Financing arrangements to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the terms of the Convertible Notes. (3) Purchase obligations primarily relate to (1) our long-term supply agreement with BI Pharma for the manufacture of commercial quantities of ENBREL , which are based on firm commitments for the purchase of production capacity for ENBREL and reflect certain estimates such as production run success rates and bulk drug yields achieved; (2) R&D commitments (including those related to clinical trials) for new and existing products; (3) capital expenditures which primarily relate to the Thousand Oaks site expansion, the new Rhode Island manufacturing plant, and the Puerto Rico manufacturing expansion; and (4) open purchase orders for the acquisition of goods and services in the ordinary course of business. Our obligation to pay certain of these amounts may be reduced based on certain future events. Summary of Critical Accounting Policies The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and the notes to the financial statements. Some of those judgments can be subjective and complex, and therefore, actual results could differ materially from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Product sales, sales incentives and returns Sales of our products other than EPOGEN (see EPOGEN revenue recognition below) are recognized when shipped and title and risk of loss have passed. This typically occurs at the time products are shipped to the customer, generally a wholesale distributor. In the United States, we utilize these wholesalers as the principal means of distributing our products to healthcare providers such as clinics, hospitals, and pharmacies. Products we sell outside the United States are principally distributed to hospitals and/or wholesalers depending upon the distribution practice in each country for which the product has been launched. We monitor the inventory levels of our products at our wholesale distributors using third-party data, and we believe that wholesaler inventories have been maintained at appropriate levels (generally two to three weeks) given end-user demand. Accordingly, historical fluctuations in wholesaler inventory levels have not significantly impacted our method of estimating sales incentives and returns. Accruals for estimated rebates (including Medicaid), wholesaler chargebacks, discounts, and other incentives (collectively sales incentives ) are recorded in the same period that the related sales are recorded and are recognized as a reduction in product sales. Sales incentive accruals are based on reasonable estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales. These estimates take into consideration current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, internal and external historical data, and forecasted customer buying patterns. Sales incentives are product-specific and, therefore, for any given year, can be impacted by the mix of products sold. Reductions in product sales relating to sales incentives are comprised of the following (amounts in millions): 2004 2003 Rebates $ 1,033 $ 520 Wholesaler chargebacks 1,069 553 Discounts and other incentives 490 286 Total sales incentives $ 2,592 $ 1,359 Rebates earned by healthcare providers such as clinics, hospitals and pharmacies in the United States are the sales incentives that are most difficult to estimate. These rebates are performance-based offers that are primarily based on attaining contractually specified sales volumes and growth. As a result, the calculation of 39 Table of Contents the accrual for these rebates is complicated by the need to estimate customer buying patterns and the resulting applicable contractual rebate rate(s) to be earned over a contractual period. These rebates totaled $1,033 million in 2004 and $520 million in 2003. We believe that the methodology we use to accrue for rebates is reasonable and appropriate given current facts and circumstances. However, actual results may differ. For example, a 5 percent change in the revenue reduction attributable to rebates recognized in 2004 would have had an approximate $50 million effect on our reported product sales in 2004. Wholesaler chargebacks are another type of arrangement included in sales incentives that relates to our contractual agreements to sell products to healthcare providers in the United States at fixed prices that are lower than the list prices we charge wholesalers. When the healthcare providers purchase our products through wholesalers at these reduced prices, the wholesaler charges us for the difference between the prices they pay us and the prices they sold the products to the healthcare providers. These chargebacks from wholesalers totaled $1,069 million in 2004 and $553 million in 2003. Accruals for wholesaler chargebacks are less difficult to estimate than rebates and closely approximate actual results since chargeback amounts are fixed at the date of purchase by the healthcare provider and we settle these deductions generally within a few weeks of incurring the liability. Amounts accrued for sales incentives are adjusted when trends or significant events indicate that adjustment is appropriate. Accruals are also adjusted to reflect actual results. However, such adjustments to date have not been material to our results of operations or financial position. The following table summarizes amounts recorded in accrued liabilities regarding sales incentives (amounts in millions): Balance at Amounts Balance at Beginning Charged Against End of of Period Product Sales* Payments Period Year ended December 31, 2004 $ 358 $ 2,592 $ 2,361 $ 589 Year ended December 31, 2003 $ 212 $ 1,359 $ 1,213 $ 358 * Includes immaterial amounts related to prior year product sales based on changes in estimates. Such amounts represented less than 1% of amounts charged against product sales for both 2004 and 2003. Accruals for estimated sales returns are recorded in the same period that the related product sales are recorded and are recognized as reductions in product sales. Returns are estimated through comparison of historical return data to their related sales on a production lot basis. Historical rates of return are determined for each product and are adjusted for known or expected changes in the marketplace specific to each product when appropriate. Historically, sales returns have been insignificant, amounting to approximately 1% of gross product sales. EPOGEN revenue recognition We have the exclusive right to sell Epoetin alfa for dialysis, certain diagnostics, and all non-human, non-research uses in the United States. We granted to Johnson & Johnson a license relating to Epoetin alfa for sales in the United States for all human uses except dialysis and diagnostics. Pursuant to this license, Amgen and Johnson & Johnson are required to compensate each other for Epoetin alfa sales that either party makes into the other party exclusive market, sometimes referred to as spillover . Accordingly, we do not recognize product sales we make into the exclusive market of Johnson & Johnson and do recognize the product sales made by Johnson & Johnson into our exclusive market. Sales in our exclusive market are derived from our sales to our customers, as adjusted for spillover. We are employing an arbitrated audit methodology to measure each party spillover based on independent third-party data on shipments to end users and their estimated usage. Data on end user usage is derived in part using market sampling techniques, and accordingly, the results of such sampling can produce variability in the amount of recognized spillover. We initially recognize spillover based on estimates of shipments to end users and their usage, utilizing historical third-party data and subsequently adjust such amounts based on revised third-party data as received. Differences between initial estimates of spillover and amounts based on revised third-party data could produce materially different amounts for recognized EPOGEN sales. However, such differences to date have not been material. 40 Table of Contents Deferred income taxes Our effective tax rate reflects the impact of undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes have been provided because such earnings are intended to be invested indefinitely outside the United States based on our projected cash flow, working capital, and long-term investment requirements of our U.S. and foreign operations. If future events, including material changes in estimates of cash, working capital, and long-term investment requirements necessitate that certain assets associated with these earnings be repatriated to the United States, an additional tax provision and related liability would be required which could materially impact our future effective tax rate. The Jobs Act provides a temporary incentive to repatriate undistributed foreign earnings. However, we are currently evaluating the repatriation provisions of the Jobs Act, as there is uncertainty as to how to interpret many of its provisions. Contingencies In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in various types of legal proceedings such as intellectual property disputes, contractual disputes, tax claims, and governmental investigations. Certain of these proceedings are discussed in Item 3. Legal Proceedings . We record accruals for such contingencies to the extent we conclude their occurrence is both probable and estimable. We consider all relevant factors when making assessments regarding these contingencies. Our income tax returns are routinely audited by the Internal Revenue Service and various state and foreign tax authorities. Significant disputes may arise with these tax authorities involving issues of the timing and amount of deductions and allocations of income among various tax jurisdictions because of differing interpretations of tax laws and regulations. We periodically evaluate our exposures associated with tax filing positions. While we believe our positions comply with applicable laws, we record liabilities based upon estimates of the ultimate outcomes of these matters. While it is not possible to predict accurately or determine the eventual outcome of these matters, we do not believe any such items currently pending will have a material adverse effect on our annual consolidated financial statements, although an adverse resolution in any quarterly reporting period of one or more of these items could have a material impact on the results of operations for that period. Tularik purchase price allocation The purchase price for Tularik was allocated to the tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. An independent third-party valuation firm was engaged to assist in determining the fair values of various research and development projects and technologies in Turlarik pipeline that, as of the acquisition date, had not reached technological feasibility and had no alternative future use. This valuation required the use of significant estimates and assumptions including but not limited to: determining the timing and expected costs to complete the in-process projects, projecting regulatory approvals, estimating future cash flows from product sales resulting from completed products and in-process projects, and developing appropriate discount rates and probability rates by project. We believe the fair values assigned to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed are based upon reasonable assumptions given current available facts and circumstances. However, certain estimates for the purchase price allocation may change due to unanticipated events and as subsequent information becomes available. Factors That May Affect Amgen The following items are representative of the risks, uncertainties, and assumptions that could affect the outcome of the forward looking statements. 41 Table of Contents Our sales depend on payment and reimbursement from third-party payers, and, to the extent that reimbursement for our products is reduced, this could negatively impact the utilization of our products. In both domestic and foreign markets, sales of our products are dependent, in part, on the availability of reimbursement from third-party payers such as state and federal governments, under programs such as Medicare and Medicaid in the United States, and private insurance plans. In certain foreign markets, the pricing and profitability of our products generally are subject to government controls. In the United States, there have been, there are, and we expect there will continue to be, a number of state and federal laws and/or regulations, or in some cases draft legislation or regulations that could limit the amount that state or federal governments will pay to reimburse the cost of pharmaceutical and biologic products. For example, the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act (or the Medicare Modernization Act (MMA)) was enacted into law in December 2003. In addition, we believe that private insurers, such as managed care organizations, may adopt their own reimbursement reductions in response to legislation or regulations, including, without limitation, the MMA. However, we believe that private payers ability to fully implement reimbursement mechanisms in alignment with government legislation or regulations is limited. For example, we are aware of a few private payers who have adopted an average sales price methodology similar in structure to that of the MMA. However, the reimbursement rates based on such methodology are substantially greater than those under the current MMA reimbursement rates. We expect that, beginning in 2005, reimbursement changes resulting from the MMA are likely, to a degree, to negatively affect product sales of some of our marketed products. The main components of the MMA that affect our currently marketed products are as follows: Through 2004 the Average Wholesale Price (AWP) mechanism was the basis of Medicare Part B payment for covered outpatient drugs and biologics. Effective January 1, 2005, in the physician clinic market segment, Aranesp , Neulasta and NEUPOGEN will be reimbursed under a new Medicare Part B system that reimburses each product at 106% of its average sales price ( ASP ) (sometimes referred to as ASP+6% ). On November 3, 2004, The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) released final rules for revisions to payment policies under the physician fee schedule for 2005. CMS then calculated each of Amgen product ASPs based on data submissions from us. ASPs will remain in effect for one quarter and will be updated quarterly thereafter. The 2005 reimbursement rates for Aranesp , Neulasta , and NEUPOGEN (calculated at 106% of the ASPs and initially based on third quarter 2004 company data), are lower than our 2004 reimbursement rates as the ASP methodology incorporates sales incentives offered to healthcare providers. Per the MMA, effective January 1, 2006, physicians in this market segment will have the choice under the competitive acquisition program (CAP) between purchasing and billing for drugs under the ASP+6% system or obtaining drugs from vendors selected by CMS via a competitive bidding process. The Medicare hospital outpatient prospective payment system (OPPS), which determines payment rates for specified covered outpatient drugs and biologics in the hospital outpatient setting, will continue to utilize AWP as the basis for reimbursement in 2005. On November 3, 2004, CMS issued a final rule for the reimbursement of Aranesp in 2005. Under this final rule, as in 2003 and 2004, CMS continued the application of an equitable adjustment such that the Aranesp reimbursement rate for 2005 is based on the AWP of PROCRIT . For 2005 the reimbursement rate for Aranesp is 83% of the AWP for PROCRIT , down from 88% of the AWP for PROCRIT in 2004, with a dose conversion ratio of 330 U PROCRIT to 1 mcg Aranesp , the same ratio as 2004. Effective January 1, 2006, the OPPS system will change from an AWP based reimbursement system to a system based on average acquisition cost . This change will affect Aranesp , Neulasta and NEUPOGEN when administered in the hospital outpatient setting. Although we do not know how CMS will define the OPPS average acquisition cost, it is possible that CMS could link acquisition cost to ASP, which could lower the reimbursement rate. Pursuant to final rules issued by CMS on November 3, 2004, Medicare reimbursement for EPOGEN used in the dialysis setting for calendar year 2005 has been changed from the previous rate of $10 per 1,000 Units to $9.76 per 1,000 Units, a rate based upon an average acquisition cost for 2003 determined by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) and adjusted for price inflation based on the Producer Price Index for pharmaceutical products. Pursuant to the CMS final rules, the difference between the 42 Table of Contents 2004 reimbursement rates for all drugs separately billed outside the dialysis composite rate (including EPOGEN ) and the 2005 reimbursement rates for such drugs will be added to the composite rate that dialysis providers receive for dialysis treatment. Again in 2006, the EPOGEN rate may change, as the MMA provided for discretion in either continuing to pay for these separately reimbursed dialysis drugs at acquisition cost, or switching to an ASP based system. The payment rate for dialysis drugs not studied by the OIG, including Aranesp , will be ASP+6%. We believe these changes driven by the MMA are lowering the 2005 reimbursement rate for all areas in which CMS provides reimbursement for EPOGEN , Aranesp , Neulasta and NEUPOGEN . However, because we cannot predict the impact of any such changes on how, or under what circumstances, healthcare providers will prescribe or administer our products, as of the date of this filing, we cannot predict the full impact of the MMA on our business; however, it is likely to be, to a degree, negative. In addition, on July 8, 2004, CMS released a proposed revision to the Hematocrit Measurement Audit Program Memorandum (HMA-PM), a Medicare payment review mechanism used by CMS to audit EPOGEN utilization and appropriate hematocrit outcomes of dialysis patients. As of the date of this filing, the comment period for the proposed revision has expired and no final program memorandum has been issued. The proposed policy would not permit reimbursement for EPOGEN in the following circumstances without medical justification: EPOGEN doses greater than 40,000 Units per month in a patient with a hemoglobin greater than 13 grams per deciliter or doses greater than 20,000 Units per month in a patient with hemoglobin greater than 14 grams per deciliter. If the proposed revision, which has not yet been finalized, is adopted as the final form, it could result in a reduction in utilization of EPOGEN . Although the proposed revision was scheduled to go into effect as early as January 1, 2005, it is unclear as to when it may be implemented. Amgen and the dialysis community have provided public comment based on data analysis suggesting that revision to the proposed policy is unwarranted. Given the importance of EPOGEN utilization for maintaining the quality of care for dialysis patients, the precise impact of such a change on provider utilization remains unclear. If, and when, reimbursement rates or availability for our marketed products changes adversely or if we fail to obtain adequate reimbursement for our current or future products, health care providers may limit how much or under what circumstances they will prescribe or administer them, which could reduce the use of our products or cause us to reduce the price of our products. This could result in lower product sales or revenues, which could have a material adverse effect on us and our results of operations. For example, in the United States the use of EPOGEN in connection with treatment for end-stage renal disease is funded primarily by the U.S. federal government. In early 1997, CMS, formerly known as Healthcare Financing Administration (HCFA), instituted a reimbursement change for EPOGEN , which materially and adversely affected our EPOGEN sales until the policies were revised. Also, we believe the increasing emphasis on cost-containment initiatives in the United States has and will continue to put pressure on the price and usage of our products, which may adversely impact product sales. Further, when a new therapeutic product is approved, the governmental and/or private coverage and reimbursement for that product is uncertain. We cannot predict the availability or amount of reimbursement for our approved products or product candidates, including those at a late stage of development, and current reimbursement policies for marketed products may change at any time. Sales of all our products are and will be affected by government and private payer reimbursement policies. Reduction in reimbursement for our products could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. Our current products and products in development cannot be sold if we do not maintain regulatory approval. We and certain of our licensors and partners conduct research, preclinical testing, and clinical trials for our product candidates. In addition, we manufacture and contract manufacture and certain of our licensors and partners manufacture our product candidates. We also manufacture and contract manufacture, price, sell, distribute, and market or co-market our products for their approved indications. These activities are subject to extensive regulation by numerous state and federal governmental authorities in the United States, such as the FDA and CMS, as well as in foreign countries, including Europe. Currently, we are required in the United States and in foreign countries to obtain approval from those countries regulatory authorities before we can manufacture (or have our third-party manufacturers produce product), market and sell our products in those countries. In our experience, obtaining regulatory approval is costly and takes many years, and after it is 43 Table of Contents obtained, it remains costly to maintain. The FDA and other U.S. and foreign regulatory agencies have substantial authority to terminate clinical trials, require additional testing, delay or withhold registration and marketing approval, require changes in labeling of our products, and mandate product withdrawals. Substantially all of our marketed products are currently approved in the United States and most are approved in Europe and in other foreign countries for specific uses. However, later discovery of unknown problems with our products could result in restrictions on the sale or use of such products, including potential withdrawal of the product from the market. If new medical data suggests an unacceptable safety risk or previously unidentified side-affects, we may voluntarily withdraw, or regulatory authorities may mandate the withdrawal of such product from the market for some period or permanently. We currently manufacture and market all our approved principal products, and we plan to manufacture and market many of our potential products. See We may be required to perform additional clinical trials or change the labeling of our products if we or others identify side effects after our products are on the market. Even though we have obtained regulatory approval for our marketed products, these products and our manufacturing processes are subject to continued review by the FDA and other regulatory authorities. In addition, ENBREL is manufactured both by us at our Rhode Island manufacturing facility and by third-party contract manufacturers, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma KG ( BI Pharma ) and Genentech, Inc. ( Genentech ). Fill and finish of bulk product produced both at our Rhode Island manufacturing facility and at Genentech is done by us and third-party service providers. BI Pharma, Genentech, and these third-party service providers are also subject to FDA regulatory authority. (See Limits on supply for ENBREL may constrain ENBREL sales. ) In addition, later discovery of unknown problems with our products or manufacturing processes or those of our contract manufacturers or third-party service providers could result in restrictions on the sale, manufacture, or use of such products, including potential withdrawal of the products from the market. If regulatory authorities determine that we or our contract manufacturers or third-party service providers have violated regulations or if they restrict, suspend, or revoke our prior approvals, they could prohibit us from manufacturing or selling our marketed products until we or our contract manufacturers or third-party service providers comply, or indefinitely. In addition, if regulatory authorities determine that we or our licenser or partner conducting research and development activities on our behalf have not complied with regulations in the research and development of a product candidate, then they may not approve the product candidate and we will not be able to market and sell it. If we were unable to market and sell our products or product candidates, our business and results of operations would be materially and adversely affected. If our intellectual property positions are challenged, invalidated, circumvented or expire, or if we fail to prevail in present and future intellectual property litigation, our business could be adversely affected. The patent positions of pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies can be highly uncertain and often involve complex legal, scientific, and factual questions. To date, there has emerged no consistent policy regarding breadth of claims allowed in such companies patents. Third parties may challenge, invalidate, or circumvent our patents and patent applications relating to our products, product candidates, and technologies. In addition, our patent positions might not protect us against competitors with similar products or technologies because competing products or technologies may not infringe our patents. For certain of our product candidates, there are third parties who have patents or pending patents that they may claim prevent us from commercializing these product candidates in certain territories. Patent disputes are frequent, costly, and can preclude or delay commercialization of products. We are currently, and in the future may be, involved in patent litigation. For example, we are involved in an ongoing patent infringement lawsuit against Transkaryotic Therapies, Inc. ( TKT ) and Aventis with respect to our erythropoietin patents. If we lose or settle this or other litigations at certain stages or entirely, we could be: subject to competition and/or significant liabilities; required to enter into third-party licenses for the infringed product or technology; or required to cease using the technology or product in dispute. In addition, we cannot guarantee that such licenses will be available on terms acceptable to us, or at all. Our success depends in part on our ability to obtain and defend patent rights and other intellectual property rights that are important to the commercialization of our products and product candidates. We have filed applications for a number of patents and have been granted patents or obtained rights relating to erythropoietin, natural and recombinant G-CSF, darbepoetin alfa, pegfilgrastim, etanercept, and our other products and potential products. We market our erythropoietin, recombinant G-CSF, darbepoetin alfa, 44 Table of Contents pegfilgrastim, and etanercept products as EPOGEN , NEUPOGEN , Aranesp , Neulasta , and ENBREL , respectively. For additional information on our material patents see Patents and Trademarks in Item 1. Business. We also have been granted or obtained rights to patents in Europe relating to: erythropoietin; G-CSF; pegfilgrastim (pegylated G-CSF); etanercept; two relating to darbepoetin alfa; and hyperglycosylated erythropoietic proteins. Our European patent relating to erythropoietin expired on December 12, 2004 and our European patent relating to G-CSF expires on August 22, 2006. We believe that after the expiration of each of these patents, other companies could receive approval for and market follow-on or biosimilar products to each of these products in Europe; presenting additional competition to our products. (See Our marketed products face substantial competition and other companies may discover, develop, acquire or commercialize products before or more successfully than we do. ) While we do not market erythropoietin in Europe as this right belongs to Johnson & Johnson (through KA), we do market Aranesp in the EU, which competes with Johnson & Johnson and others erythropoietin products. We believe that the EU is currently in the process of developing regulatory requirements related to the development and approval of new competitive products. Until such requirements are finalized, we cannot predict when follow-on or biosimilar products could appear on the market in the EU or to what extent such additional competition would impact future Aranesp and NEUPOGEN / Neulasta sales in the EU. However, based on the process and timing outlined by the EMEA, we believe product specific guidelines are not likely to be finalized until 2006. Limits on supply for ENBREL may constrain ENBREL sales. U.S. and Canadian supply of ENBREL is impacted by many manufacturing variables, such as the timing and actual number of production runs, production success rate, bulk drug yield, and the timing and outcome of product quality testing. For example, in the second quarter of 2002, the prior co-marketer with respect to ENBREL , experienced a brief period where no ENBREL was available to fill patient prescriptions, primarily due to variation in the expected production yield from BI Pharma. If we are at any time unable to provide an uninterrupted supply of ENBREL to patients, we may lose patients, physicians may elect to prescribe competing therapeutics instead of ENBREL , and ENBREL sales will be adversely affected, which could materially and adversely affect our results of operations. See We are dependent on third parties for a significant portion of our supply and the fill and finish of ENBREL ; and our sources of supply are limited. We are dependent on third parties for a significant portion of our supply and the fill and finish of ENBREL ; and our sources of supply are limited. We currently produce a substantial portion of annual ENBREL supply at our Rhode Island manufacturing facility. However, we also depend on third parties for a significant portion of our ENBREL supply as well as for the fill and finish of ENBREL that we manufacture. BI Pharma is our primary third-party manufacturer of ENBREL bulk drug; accordingly, our U.S. and Canadian supply of ENBREL is currently significantly dependent on BI Pharma production schedule for ENBREL . We would be unable to produce ENBREL in sufficient quantities to substantially offset shortages in BI Pharma scheduled production if BI Pharma or other third-party manufacturers used for the fill and finish of ENBREL bulk drug were to cease or interrupt production or services or otherwise fail to supply materials, products, or services to us for any reason, including due to labor shortages or disputes, due to regulatory requirements or action, or due to contamination of product lots or product recalls. This in turn could materially reduce our ability to satisfy demand for ENBREL , which could materially and adversely affect our operating results. Factors that will affect our actual supply of ENBREL at any time include, without limitation, the following: BI Pharma does not produce ENBREL continuously; rather, it produces the bulk drug substance through a series of periodic campaigns throughout the year. Our Rhode Island manufacturing facility is currently dedicated to ENBREL production. The amount of commercial inventory available to us at any time depends on a variety of factors, including the timing and actual number of BI Pharma production runs, the actual number of runs at our Rhode Island manufacturing facility, and, for either the Rhode Island or BI Pharma facilities, the level of production yields and success rates, the timing and outcome of product quality testing, and the amount of filling and packaging capacity. 45 Table of Contents BI Pharma schedules the vialing production runs for ENBREL in advance, based on the expected timing and yield of bulk drug production runs. Therefore, if BI Pharma realizes production yields beyond expected levels, or provides additional manufacturing capacity for ENBREL , it may not have sufficient vialing capacity for all of the ENBREL bulk drug that it produces. As a result, even if we are able to increase our supply of ENBREL bulk drug, BI Pharma may not be able to fill and finish the extra bulk drug in time to prevent any supply interruptions. We are dependent on third parties for some fill and finish and packaging of ENBREL bulk drug substance manufactured at our Rhode Island facility. If third-party fill and finish and packaging manufacturers are unable to provide sufficient capacity or otherwise unable to provide services to us, then supply of ENBREL could be adversely affected. Our current plan to increase U.S. and Canadian supply of ENBREL includes completion of an additional large-scale cell culture commercial manufacturing facility adjacent to the current Rhode Island manufacturing facility. We expect to submit this facility for FDA approval in 2005. Additionally, we have entered into a manufacturing agreement with Genentech to produce ENBREL at Genentech manufacturing facility in South San Francisco, California and the FDA approved this facility for ENBREL production in October 2004. Under the terms of the agreement, Genentech is expected to produce ENBREL through 2005, with an extension through 2006 by mutual agreement. ENBREL bulk drug substance produced at the Genentech facility will be produced in campaigns similar to those conducted at BI Pharma. Consequently, supply from the Genentech facility is expected to also be dependent on the timing and number of production runs in addition to the other manufacturing, filling, and packaging risk discussed above. In addition, Wyeth is constructing a new manufacturing facility in Ireland, which is expected to increase the U.S. and Canadian supply of ENBREL . If the additional ENBREL manufacturing capacity at the Rhode Island site, or in Ireland are not completed on time, or if these manufacturing facilities do not receive FDA or the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medical Products (EMEA) approval before we encounter supply constraints, our ENBREL sales would be restricted, which could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. (See Limits on supply for ENBREL may constrain ENBREL sales. ) If these third-party manufacturing facilities are completed and approved by the various regulatory authorities, our costs of acquiring bulk drug may fluctuate. We formulate, fill and finish substantially all our products at our Puerto Rico manufacturing facility; if significant natural disasters or production failures occur at this facility, we may not be able to supply these products. We currently perform all of the formulation, fill and finish for EPOGEN , Aranesp , NEUPOGEN and Neulasta and some formulation, fill and finish operations for ENBREL at our manufacturing facility in Juncos, Puerto Rico. Our global supply of these products is dependent on the uninterrupted and efficient operation of this facility. Power failures, the breakdown, failure or substandard performance of equipment, the improper installation or operation of equipment, natural or other disasters, including hurricanes, or failures to comply with regulatory requirements, including those of the FDA, among others, could adversely affect our formulation, fill and finish operations. As a result, we may be unable to supply these products, which could adversely and materially affect our product sales. Although we have obtained limited insurance to protect against business interruption loss, there can be no assurance that such coverage will be adequate or that such coverage will continue to remain available on acceptable terms, if at all. The extent of the coverage of our insurance could limit our ability to mitigate for lost sales and could result in such losses materially and adversely affecting our operating results. Our marketed products face substantial competition and other companies may discover, develop, acquire or commercialize products before or more successfully than we do. We operate in a highly competitive environment. Our products compete with other products or treatments for diseases for which our products may be indicated. For example, ENBREL competes in certain circumstances with rheumatoid arthritis products marketed by Biogen IDEC Inc., Centocor, Inc., Johnson & Johnson, Abbott, Genentech, Pfizer, Novartis, and Sanofi-Aventis, as well as the generic drug methotrexate, and may face competition from other potential therapies being developed. Additionally, Aranesp competes with Johnson & Johnson in the United States and the EU. Further, if our currently marketed products are 46 Table of Contents approved for new uses, or if we sell new products, we may face new, additional competition that we do not face today. Additionally, some of our competitors, including biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, market products or are actively engaged in research and development in areas where we have products or where we are developing product candidates or new indications for existing products. In the future, we expect that our products will compete with new drugs currently in development, drugs approved for other indications that may be approved for the same indications as those of our products, and off-label use of drugs approved for other indications. Our European patent relating to erythropoietin expired on December 12, 2004 and our European patent relating to G-CSF expires on August 22, 2006. We believe that after the expiration of each of these patents, other companies could receive approval for and market follow-on or biosimilar products to each of these products in Europe; presenting additional competition to our products. While we do not market erythropoietin in Europe as this right belongs to Johnson & Johnson (through KA), we do market Aranesp in the EU, which competes with Johnson & Johnson and others erythropoietin products. We believe that the EU is currently in the process of developing regulatory requirements related to the development and approval of follow-on or biosimilar products. Until such requirements are finalized, we cannot predict when follow-on or biosimilar products could appear on the market in the EU or to what extent such additional competition would impact future Aranesp and NEUPOGEN / Neulasta sales in the EU. However, based on the process and timing outlined by the EMEA, we believe product specific guidelines are not likely to be finalized until 2006. Our products may compete against products that have lower prices, superior performance, are easier to administer, or that are otherwise competitive with our products. Our inability to compete effectively could adversely affect product sales. Large pharmaceutical corporations may have greater clinical, research, regulatory, manufacturing, marketing, financial experience and human resources than we do. In addition, some of our competitors may have technical or competitive advantages over us for the development of technologies and processes. These resources may make it difficult for us to compete with them to successfully discover, develop, and market new products and for our current products to compete with new products or new product indications that these competitors may bring to market. Business combinations among our competitors may also increase competition and the resources available to our competitors. Certain of our raw materials, medical devices and components are single-sourced from third parties; third-party supply failures could adversely affect our ability to supply our products. Certain raw materials necessary for commercial manufacturing and formulation of our products are provided by single-source unaffiliated third-party suppliers. Also, certain medical devices and components necessary for fill, finish, and packaging of our products are provided by single-source unaffiliated third-party suppliers. Certain of these raw materials, medical devices, and components are the proprietary products of these unaffiliated third-party suppliers and, in some cases, such proprietary products are specifically cited in our drug application with the FDA so that they must be obtained from that specific sole source and could not be obtained from another supplier unless and until the FDA approved that other supplier. We would be unable to obtain these raw materials, medical devices, or components for an indeterminate period of time if these third-party single-source suppliers were to cease or interrupt production or otherwise fail to supply these materials or products to us for any reason, including due to regulatory requirements or action, due to adverse financial developments at or affecting the supplier, or due to labor shortages or disputes. This, in turn, could materially and adversely affect our ability to satisfy demand for our products, which could materially and adversely affect our operating results. Also, certain of the raw materials required in the commercial manufacturing and the formulation of our products are derived from biological sources, including mammalian tissues, bovine serum and human serum albumin, or HSA. We are investigating alternatives to certain biological sources. Raw materials may be subject to contamination and/or recall. Also, some countries in which we market our products may restrict the use of certain biologically derived substances in the manufacture of drugs. A material shortage, contamination, recall, and/or restriction of the use of certain biologically derived substances in the manufacture of our products could adversely impact or disrupt our commercial manufacturing of our products or could result in a mandated withdrawal of our products from the market. This too, in turn, could adversely affect our ability to satisfy demand for our products, which could materially and adversely affect our operating results. 47 Table of Contents Our product development efforts may not result in commercial products. We intend to continue an aggressive research and development program. Successful product development in the biotechnology industry is highly uncertain, and very few research and development projects produce a commercial product. Product candidates that appear promising in the early phases of development, such as in early human clinical trials, may fail to reach the market for a number of reasons, such as: the product candidate did not demonstrate acceptable clinical trial results even though it demonstrated positive preclinical trial results the product candidate was not effective in treating a specified condition or illness the product candidate had harmful side effects in humans or animals the necessary regulatory bodies, such as the FDA, did not approve our product candidate for an intended use the product candidate was not economical for us to manufacture and commercialize other companies or people have or may have proprietary rights to our product candidate, such as patent rights, and will not let us sell it on reasonable terms, or at all the product candidate is not cost effective in light of existing therapeutics certain of our licensors or partners may fail to effectively conduct clinical development or clinical manufacturing activities Several of our product candidates have failed or been discontinued at various stages in the product development process, including, but not limited to, Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor ( BDNF ), Megakaryocyte Growth and Development Factor ( MGDF ), and Glial Cell Lined-Derived Neurotrophic Factor ( GDNF ). For example, in 1997, we announced the failure of BDNF for the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig Disease, because the product candidate, when administered by injection, did not produce acceptable clinical results for a specific use after a phase 3 trial, even though BDNF had progressed successfully through preclinical and earlier clinical trials. In addition, in 1998, we discontinued development of MGDF, a novel platelet growth factor, at the phase 3 trial stage after several people in platelet donation trials developed low platelet counts and neutralizing antibodies. Also, in June 2004, we announced that the phase 2 study of GDNF for the treatment of advanced Parkinson disease did not meet the primary study endpoint upon completion of six months of the double-blind treatment phase of the study even though a small phase 1 pilot investigator initiated open label study over a three year period appeared to result in improvements for advanced Parkinson disease patients. Subsequently, in the fall of 2004 we discontinued clinical development of GDNF in patients with advanced Parkinson disease after several patients in the phase 2 study developed neutralizing antibodies and new preclinical data showed that GDNF caused irreversible damage to the area of the brain critical to movement control and coordination. On February 11, 2005, we confirmed our previous decision to halt clinical trials and, as a part of that decision and based on thorough scientific review, we also concluded that we will not provide GDNF to the 48 patients who participated in clinical trials that were terminated in the fall of 2004. Of course, there may be other factors that prevent us from marketing a product. We cannot guarantee we will be able to produce commercially successful products. Further, clinical trial results are frequently susceptible to varying interpretations by scientists, medical personnel, regulatory personnel, statisticians, and others, which may delay, limit, or prevent further clinical development or regulatory approvals of a product candidate. Also, the length of time that it takes for us to complete clinical trials and obtain regulatory approval for product marketing has in the past varied by product and by the intended use of a product. We expect that this will likely be the case with future product candidates and we cannot predict the length of time to complete necessary clinical trials and obtain regulatory approval. (See Our current products and products in development cannot be sold if we do not maintain regulatory approval. ) 48 Table of Contents We may be required to perform additional clinical trials or change the labeling of our products if we or others identify side effects after our products are on the market. If we or others identify side effects after any of our products are on the market, or if manufacturing problems occur, regulatory approval may be withdrawn and reformulation of our products, additional clinical trials, changes in labeling of our products, and changes to or re-approvals of our manufacturing facilities may be required, any of which could have a material adverse effect on sales of the affected products and on our business and results of operations. After any of our products are approved for commercial use, we or regulatory bodies could decide that changes to our product labeling are required. Label changes may be necessary for a number of reasons, including: the identification of actual or theoretical safety or efficacy concerns by regulatory agencies or the discovery of significant problems with a similar product that implicates an entire class of products. Any significant concerns raised about the safety or efficacy of our products could also result in the need to reformulate those products, to conduct additional clinical trials, to make changes to our manufacturing processes, or to seek re-approval of our manufacturing facilities. Significant concerns about the safety and effectiveness of a product could ultimately lead to the revocation of its marketing approval. The revision of product labeling or the regulatory actions described above could be required even if there is no clearly established connection between the product and the safety or efficacy concerns that have been raised. The revision of product labeling or the regulatory actions described above could have a material adverse effect on sales of the affected products and on our business and results of operations. (See Our current products and products in development cannot be sold if we do not maintain regulatory approval. ) Our business may be impacted by government investigations or litigation. We and certain of our subsidiaries are involved in legal proceedings relating to various patent matters, government investigations, and other legal proceedings that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of our business. Matters required to be disclosed by us are set forth in Item 3. Legal Proceedings in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 and are updated as required in subsequently filed Form 10-Qs. Litigation is inherently unpredictable, and excessive verdicts can occur. Consequently, it is possible that we could, in the future, incur judgments or enter into settlements of claims for monetary damages that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations in the period in which such amounts are incurred. The Federal government, state governments and private payers are investigating, and many have filed actions against, numerous pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, including Amgen and Immunex, alleging that the reporting of prices for pharmaceutical products has resulted in false and overstated Average Wholesale Price ( AWP ), which in turn is alleged to have improperly inflated the reimbursement paid by Medicare beneficiaries, insurers, state Medicaid programs, medical plans and other payers to health care providers who prescribed and administered those products. As of the date of this filing, a number of these actions have been brought against us and/or Immunex, now a wholly owned subsidiary of ours. Additionally, a number of states have pending investigations regarding our Medicaid drug pricing practices and the U.S. Departments of Justice and Health and Human Services have requested that Immunex produce documents relating to pricing issues. Further, certain state government entity plaintiffs in some of these AWP cases are also alleging that companies, including ours, are not reporting their best price to the states under the Medicaid program. These cases and investigations are described in Item 3. Legal Proceedings Average Wholesale Price Litigation in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004, and are updated as required in subsequent Form 10-Qs. Other states and agencies could initiate investigations of our pricing practices. A decision adverse to our interests on these actions and/or investigations could result in substantial economic damages and could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations in the period in which such amounts are incurred. We may be required to defend lawsuits or pay damages for product liability claims. Product liability is a major risk in testing and marketing biotechnology and pharmaceutical products. We may face substantial product liability exposure in human clinical trials and for products that we sell after regulatory approval. Product liability claims, regardless of their merits, could be costly and divert manage- 49 Table of Contents ment attention, and adversely affect our reputation and the demand for our products. Amgen and Immunex have been named as defendants in product liability actions for certain company products. Our operating results may fluctuate, and this fluctuation could cause financial results to be below expectations. Our operating results may fluctuate from period to period for a number of reasons. In budgeting our operating expenses for the foreseeable future, we assume that revenues will continue to grow; however, some of our operating expenses are fixed in the short term. Because of this, even a relatively small revenue shortfall may cause a period results to be below our expectations or projections. A revenue shortfall could arise from any number of factors, some of which we cannot control. For example, we may face: changes in the government or private payers reimbursement policies for our products inability to maintain regulatory approval of marketed products changes in our product pricing strategies lower than expected demand for our products inability to provide adequate supply of our products changes in wholesaler buying patterns increased competition from new or existing products fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates Of course, there may be other factors that affect our revenues in any given period. Similarly if investors or the investment community are uncertain about our financial performance for a given period, our stock price could also be adversely impacted. We have grown rapidly, and if we fail to adequately manage that growth our business could be adversely impacted. We have had an aggressive growth plan that has included substantial and increasing investments in research and development, sales and marketing, and facilities. We plan to continue to grow and our plan has a number of risks, some of which we cannot control. For example: we need to generate higher revenues to cover a higher level of operating expenses, and our ability to do so may depend on factors that we do not control we will need to assimilate new staff members we will need to manage complexities associated with a larger and faster growing organization we will need to accurately anticipate demand for the products we manufacture and maintain adequate manufacturing capacity, and our ability to do so may depend on factors that we do not control we will need to start up and operate a number of new manufacturing facilities, which may result in temporary inefficiencies and higher cost of goods Of course, there may be other risks and we cannot guarantee that we will be able to successfully manage these or other risks. Our stock price is volatile, which could adversely affect your investment. Our stock price, like that of other biotechnology companies, is highly volatile. For example, in the fifty-two weeks prior to December 31, 2004, the trading price of our common stock has ranged from a high of $66.88 per share to a low of $52.00 per share. Our stock price may be affected by a number of factors, such as: changes in reimbursement policies or medical practices adverse developments regarding the safety or efficacy of our products 50 Table of Contents clinical trial results actual or anticipated product supply constraints product development announcements by us or our competitors regulatory matters announcements in the scientific and research community intellectual property and legal matters broader economic, industry and market trends unrelated to our performance In addition, if our revenues, earnings or other financial results in any period fail to meet the investment community expectations, there could be an immediate adverse impact on our stock price. Our corporate compliance program cannot guarantee that we are in compliance with all potentially applicable federal and state regulations. The development, manufacturing, distribution, pricing, sales, marketing, and reimbursement of our products, together with our general operations, is subject to extensive federal and state regulation. (See Our current products and products in development cannot be sold if we do not maintain regulatory approval. and We may be required to perform additional clinical trials or change the labeling of our products if we or others identify side effects after our products are on the market. ) While we have developed and instituted a corporate compliance program based on current best practices, we cannot assure you that we or our employees are or will be in compliance with all potentially applicable federal and state regulations and/or laws. If we fail to comply with any of these regulations and/or laws a range of actions could result, including, but not limited to, the termination of clinical trials, the failure to approve a product candidate, restrictions on our products or manufacturing processes, including withdrawal of our products from the market, significant fines, exclusion from government healthcare programs, or other sanctions or litigation. Our marketing of ENBREL will be dependent in part upon Wyeth. Under a co-promotion agreement, we and Wyeth market and sell ENBREL in the United States and Canada. A management committee comprised of an equal number of representatives from us and Wyeth is responsible for overseeing the marketing and sales of ENBREL : including strategic planning, the approval of an annual marketing plan, product pricing, and the establishment of a brand team. The brand team, with equal representation from us and Wyeth, will prepare and implement the annual marketing plan, which includes a minimum level of financial and sales personnel commitment from each party, and is responsible for all sales activities. If Wyeth fails to market ENBREL effectively or if we and Wyeth fail to coordinate our efforts effectively, our sales of ENBREL may be adversely affected. Guidelines and recommendations published by various organizations can reduce the use of our products. Government agencies promulgate regulations and guidelines directly applicable to us and to our products. However, professional societies, practice management groups, private health/science foundations, and organizations involved in various diseases from time to time may also publish guidelines or recommendations to the health care and patient communities. Recommendations of government agencies or these other groups/organizations may relate to such matters as usage, dosage, route of administration, and use of related therapies. Organizations like these have in the past made recommendations about our products. Recommendations or guidelines that are followed by patients and health care providers could result in decreased use of our products. In addition, the perception by the investment community or stockholders that recommendations or guidelines will result in decreased use of our products could adversely affect prevailing market prices for our common stock. 51 Table of Contents Continual manufacturing process improvement efforts may result in the carrying value of certain existing manufacturing facilities or other assets becoming impaired. In connection with our ongoing process improvement activities associated with products we manufacture, we continually invest in our various manufacturing practices and related processes with the objective of increasing production yields and success rates to gain increased cost efficiencies and capacity utilization. Depending on the timing and outcomes of these efforts and our other estimates and assumptions regarding future product sales, the carrying value of certain manufacturing facilities or other assets may not be fully recoverable and could result in the recognition of an impairment in the carrying value at the time that such effects are identified. The potential recognition of impairment in the carrying value, if any, could have a material and adverse affect on our results of operations. We may not realize all of the anticipated benefits of our merger with Tularik. On August 13, 2004, we merged with Tularik Inc. The success of our merger with Tularik will depend, in part, on our ability to retain Tularik staff and to realize the anticipated synergies, cost savings, and growth opportunities from integrating the businesses of Tularik with the businesses of Amgen. Our success in realizing these benefits and the timing of this realization depend upon the successful integration of the operations and personnel of Tularik. The integration of two independent companies is a complex, costly, and time-consuming process. The difficulties of combining the operations of the companies include, among others: retaining key staff members consolidating research and development operations consolidating corporate and administrative infrastructures preserving ours and Tularik research and development, and other important relationships minimizing the diversion of management attention from ongoing business concerns coordinating geographically separate organizations In addition, even if we are able to integrate Tularik operations successfully, this integration may not result in the realization of the full benefits of the synergies, cost savings, or sales and growth opportunities that we expect or that these benefits will be achieved within the anticipated time frame. For example, as of the date of this filing, we have discontinued a number of Tularik clinical development programs and may discontinue other or all such programs. Further, the elimination of significant duplicative costs may not be possible or may take longer than anticipated and the benefits from the merger may be offset by costs incurred in integrating the companies. We cannot assure you that the integration of Tularik with us will result in the realization of the full benefits anticipated by us to result from the merger. Our failure to achieve these benefits could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. 
