CIK: 318154
Company Name: AMGEN INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-03-01


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Forward looking statements This report and other documents we file with the SEC contain forward looking statements that are based on current expectations, estimates, forecasts and projections about us, our future performance, our business or others on our behalf, our beliefs and our management assumptions. In addition, we, or others on our behalf, may make forward looking statements in press releases or written statements, or in our communications and discussions with investors and analysts in the normal course of business through meetings, webcasts, phone calls and conference calls. Words such as expect, anticipate, outlook, could, target, project, intend, plan, believe, seek, estimate, should, may, assume, continue, variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. We describe our respective risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could affect the outcome or results of operations in Item 1A. Risk Factors . We have based our forward looking statements on our management beliefs and assumptions based on information available to our management at the time the statements are made. We caution you that actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed, implied or forecast by our forward looking statements. Reference is made in particular to forward looking statements regarding product sales, regulatory activities, clinical trial results, reimbursement, expenses, earnings per share ( EPS ), liquidity and capital resources and trends. Except as required under the federal securities laws and the rules and regulations of the SEC, we do not have any intention or obligation to update publicly any forward looking statements after the distribution of this report, whether as a result of new information, future events, changes in assumptions or otherwise. Overview The following management discussion and analysis ( MD&A ) is intended to assist the reader in understanding Amgen business. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Our results of operations discussed in MD&A are presented in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ). We are the largest independent biotechnology medicines company. We discover, develop, manufacture and market medicines for grievous illnesses. We concentrate on innovative novel medicines based on advances in cellular and molecular biology. Our mission is to serve patients. We operate in one business segment human therapeutics. Therefore, our results of operations are discussed on a consolidated basis. We operate in a highly regulated industry and various U.S. and foreign regulatory bodies have substantial authority over how we conduct our business. Government authorities in the United States and in other countries regulate the manufacturing and marketing of our products and our ongoing R&D activities. The regulatory environment is evolving and there is increased scrutiny on drug safety and increased authority being granted to regulatory bodies, in particular the FDA, to assist in ensuring the safety of therapeutic products, which may lead to fewer products being approved by the FDA or other regulatory bodies, delays in receiving approvals or additional safety-related requirements or restrictions on the use of our products, including expanded safety labeling, required risk management activities, including a REMS, and/or additional or more extensive clinical trials as part of PMCs, PMRs or a pharmacovigilance program. This is increasingly true of new therapies with novel mechanisms of action. While these therapies may offer important benefits and/or better treatment alternatives, they may also involve a relatively new or higher level of scientific complexity and, therefore, generate increased safety concerns. Most patients receiving our principal products for approved indications are covered by either government or private payer healthcare programs, which are placing greater emphasis on cost containment, including requiring that the economic value of products be clearly demonstrated. Governments may regulate access to, prices or reimbursement levels of our products to control costs or to affect levels of use of our products and private insurers may be influenced by government reimbursement methodologies. Worldwide use of our products may be affected by these cost containment pressures and cost shifting from governments and private insurers to healthcare 65 Table of Contents providers or patients in response to ongoing initiatives to reduce or reallocate healthcare expenditures. Therefore, sales of our principal products have and will continue to be affected by the availability and extent of reimbursement from third-party payers, including government and private insurance plans, and administration of those programs. Additionally, ongoing healthcare reform efforts may also have a significant impact on our business. For example healthcare reform, focused on expanding healthcare coverage to millions of uninsured Americans and reducing the rate of increase in the costs of healthcare, remains a priority for President Obama, U.S. Congress and a number of states. Developments in this area have been highly dynamic and difficult to predict. As recently as February 23, 2010, President Obama released a new proposal for healthcare reform which includes a combination of provisions from both the Senate and House of Representatives bills passed in late 2009. Certain healthcare reform proposals being considered, which may or may not be adopted into law, could: restrict the coverage and reimbursement of our products by Medicare, Medicaid and other government programs reduce the number of years of data exclusivity for innovative biological products potentially leading to earlier biosimilar competition and/or require additional healthcare reform costs be borne by pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies At this time, we cannot predict which or whether any reform measures will be adopted into law. We primarily earn revenues and income and generate cash from sales of human therapeutic products in the areas of supportive cancer care, nephrology and inflammation. Our principal products include Aranesp , EPOGEN , Neulasta , NEUPOGEN and ENBREL all of which are sold in the United States. ENBREL is marketed under a co-promotion agreement with Pfizer in the United States and Canada. Our international product sales consist principally of European sales of Aranesp , Neulasta and NEUPOGEN . For additional information about our products, their approved indications and where they are marketed, see Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates . Our product sales are subject to certain influences throughout the year, including wholesaler and customer buying patterns, both of which fluctuate around holidays, and contract-driven customer buying. These factors can periodically result in higher U.S. wholesaler distributor inventory levels in the United States, and therefore higher product sales. We did not experience as large of an increase in wholesaler inventory levels in the fourth quarter of 2009 as in the prior year. Worldwide product sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 were $14.4 billion, representing a decrease of 2% compared to 2008. U.S. product sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 were $11.1 billion compared to $11.5 billion in 2008, representing a decrease of 3%. The decrease in U.S. product sales was largely attributable to a 24% decline in Aranesp sales primarily reflecting the negative impact of a product safety-related label change that occurred in August 2008. Combined sales of our other products in the United States in 2009 increased 1% compared to 2008 as increased EPOGEN sales in 2009 largely offset the decline in ENBREL sales. This decrease in ENBREL sales primarily reflects the unfavorable change in wholesaler inventories resulting from an approximate $100 million wholesaler inventory build in 2008 related to the shift of ENBREL to a wholesaler distribution model. International product sales were relatively unchanged at $3.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2009. International product sales for 2009 were unfavorably impacted by foreign currency exchange rate changes of $213 million. Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes, international product sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 increased 6%. This increase in international product sales is primarily due to the launches of Vectibix , Mimpara and Nplate into our existing international markets and the expansion of Neulasta and NEUPOGEN into new international territories. Although changes in foreign currency rates result in increases or decreases in our reported international product sales, the benefit or detriment that such movements have on our international product sales are partially offset by corresponding increases or decreases in our international operating expenses and our related foreign currency hedging activities. Our hedging activities seek to offset the impact, both positive and negative, that foreign currency exchange rate changes may have on our net income by hedging our net foreign currency exposure, primarily with respect to the Euro. 66 Table of Contents Our operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2009 declined approximately $650 million, or 7%, over 2008 of which approximately one-half of this reduction was attributable to lower legal settlements and restructuring and related costs. In addition, cost of sales declined in 2009 principally due to improved operating efficiencies and lower sales volume, partially offset by a less favorable product mix. Our R&D expenses in 2009 also declined primarily due to lower clinical trial costs due to the completion of certain late-stage registrational studies for denosumab and Vectibix . These decreases in our operating expenses were partially offset by a slight increase in our SG&A expenses primarily due to increased promotional expenses, including spending for activities in advance of our anticipated launch of Prolia . This reduction in operating expenses also reflects, in part, our continuing efforts to maintain control over discretionary expenditures. For the year ended December 31, 2009, our net income was $4.6 billion, or $4.51 per share on a diluted basis, reflecting increases of 14% and 20%, respectively, compared to 2008. The growth in our net income principally reflects our reduced operating expenses, discussed above, and a reduction in our provision for income taxes primarily due to favorable income tax settlements of approximately $220 million and increased manufacturing and profits in Puerto Rico, which are taxed under an incentive grant. Our 2009 EPS also benefited from a reduction in our weighted average shares used to compute diluted EPS resulting from our stock repurchase program, including 59 million shares repurchased in 2009 at a total cost of $3.2 billion. Our financial condition remains strong. At December 31, 2009, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities aggregated $13.4 billion, our total debt outstanding was $10.6 billion and our stockholders equity aggregated $22.7 billion. In addition, our cash flow from operations for the year ended December 31, 2009 aggregated $6.3 billion, representing a 6% increase over the prior year. Capital expenditures for 2009 were approximately $530 million, which represents a decrease from $672 million in 2008 due to improved productivity and efficiency in our capital program. We believe that existing funds, cash generated from operations and existing sources of and access to financing are adequate to satisfy our working capital, capital expenditure and debt service requirements for the foreseeable future. Of our total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balance as of December 31, 2009, $12.1 billion was generated from operations in foreign tax jurisdictions and is intended for use in our foreign operations. If these funds were repatriated for use in our U.S. operations, we would be required to pay additional U.S. federal and state income taxes at the applicable marginal tax rates. Looking forward, we believe that our business will continue to face various regulatory, reimbursement and competitive challenges. In particular, our ESA products, Aranesp and EPOGEN , will continue to be impacted by regulatory developments, such as the REMS, which has been recently approved by the FDA, and recent or potential future product label changes, including any that may result from the advisory committee meeting proposed by the FDA to be held in 2010 to re-evaluate the use of ESAs in CKD. In the United States, we rely in large part on the reimbursement of our products through government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid. Reimbursement challenges may result from the MEDCAC meeting scheduled for March 24, 2010 to examine currently available evidence on the use of ESAs to manage anemia in patients who have CKD and the provisions of the CMS proposed rule to implement a bundling prospective payment system for ESRD. In addition, the outcome of the proposed healthcare reform in the United States is very much uncertain at this time. Further, certain of our products will continue to face increasing competitive pressure, including our marketed products in the United States, in particular ENBREL as well as from biosimilar and other products in Europe which compete with Aranesp , Neulasta and NEUPOGEN . We also have various opportunities to grow our business in the future, primarily due to our late-stage product candidate, denosumab. We continue to work with the FDA regarding our BLA for Prolia . On February 19, 2010, we announced that the FDA has evaluated the content of our Complete Response submission for Prolia in the treatment of PMO, which we submitted on January 25, 2010, and classified it as a Class 2 resubmission. With the Class 2 designation, the FDA set a corresponding PDUFA action date of July 25, 2010. Additionally, in December 2009, the CHMP announced a positive opinion for the marketing authorization for Prolia for the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women at increased risk of fracture and for the treatment of bone loss associated with hormone ablation in men with prostate cancer at increased risk of fractures. Furthermore, we announced positive study results from three phase 3 denosumab trials in the treatment of bone metastases that will form the basis of the clinical evidence package for denosumab in advanced cancer, which will be submitted to regulatory authorities later 67 Table of Contents in 2010. We also expect the results in 2010 of an additional phase 3 study to evaluate denosumab in patients with non-metastatic prostate cancer to prevent bone metastases. In addition, international expansion into emerging markets will also be an important opportunity for growth. Results of Operations Product sales For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, worldwide product sales and total product sales by geographic region were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2009 Change 2008 Change 2007 Aranesp $ 2,652 (15 )% $ 3,137 (13 )% $ 3,614 EPOGEN 2,569 5 % 2,456 (1 )% 2,489 Neulasta /NEUPOGEN 4,643 0 % 4,659 9 % 4,277 ENBREL 3,493 (3 )% 3,598 11 % 3,230 Sensipar 651 9 % 597 29 % 463 Other 343 43 % 240 1 % 238 Total product sales $ 14,351 (2 )% $ 14,687 3 % $ 14,311 Total U.S. $ 11,135 (3 )% $ 11,460 0 % $ 11,443 Total International 3,216 0 % 3,227 13 % 2,868 Total product sales $ 14,351 (2 )% $ 14,687 3 % $ 14,311 Product sales are influenced by a number of factors, some of which may impact sales of certain of our existing products more significantly than others, including: demand, third-party reimbursement availability and policies, government programs, regulatory developments or guidelines, clinical trial outcomes, clinical practice, contracting and pricing strategies, wholesaler and end-user inventory management practices, patient population growth, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, new product launches and indications, expansion into new countries, competitive products, product supply and acquisitions. In addition, general economic conditions may effect, or in some cases amplify, certain of these factors with a corresponding impact on our product sales. (See Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates for a discussion of our principal products and their approved indications.) Aranesp For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, total Aranesp sales by geographic region were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2009 Change 2008 Change 2007 Aranesp U.S. $ 1,251 (24 )% $ 1,651 (23 )% $ 2,154 Aranesp International 1,401 (6 )% 1,486 2 % 1,460 Total Aranesp $ 2,652 (15 )% $ 3,137 (13 )% $ 3,614 U.S. Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 decreased 24%. U.S. sales of Aranesp in 2008 benefited from certain changes in accounting estimates related to product sales return reserves. Excluding the positive impact of these changes in accounting estimates, U.S. sales of Aranesp decreased approximately 21% compared to the year ended December 31, 2008. This decrease was principally driven by a decline in demand reflecting the negative impact, primarily in the supportive cancer care setting, of a product safety-related label change which occurred in August 2008 and a low single digit decrease in the average net sales price. In addition, the decline in sales also reflects both a decline in the segment and a slight loss of segment share. 68 Table of Contents International Aranesp sales for year ended December 31, 2009 decreased 6%, due to the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. For the year ended December 31, 2009, excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of approximately $85 million, international Aranesp sales remained unchanged. The decrease in U.S. Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 reflects the negative impact on demand, primarily in the supportive cancer care setting, of physician conformance to regulatory and reimbursement developments which principally occurred in the second half of 2007, additional product label changes which occurred in 2008, and to a lesser extent, loss of segment share. The decline in demand was partially offset by an increase in the average net sales price. In addition, U.S. sales of Aranesp for the year ended December 31, 2008 benefited from a slight change in an accounting estimate related to product sales return reserves. The regulatory and reimbursement developments negatively impacting sales, included (i) the loss of Aranesp for use in the treatment AoC following the reported results of our AoC phase 3 study in February 2007, (ii) various ESA product safety-related label changes in the United States during 2008 and 2007 and (iii) the CMS NCD issued in July 2007, which significantly restricted Medicare reimbursement for use of Aranesp in chemotherapy induced anemia ( CIA ) and which we believe has also negatively impacted Aranesp use in CIA for patients covered by private insurance plans. The increase in international Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 was due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, which positively impacted sales growth by approximately $104 million. Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes, international Aranesp sales decreased 5%. This decrease reflects dosing conservatism in the oncology segment and pricing pressures across all ESAs in Europe, which resulted in an overall decrease in the ESA market. In addition to other factors mentioned in the Product sales section above, future Aranesp sales will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: regulatory developments, including: the REMS for our ESAs, which has been recently approved by the FDA, or other risk management activities undertaken by us or required by the FDA or other regulatory authorities; the ESA product label changes reflecting certain results of our TREAT study ( TREAT label changes ); the proposed FDA advisory committee meeting in 2010 to re-evaluate the use of ESAs to treat anemia in patients with CKD; future product label changes, including those we are currently discussing with regulatory authorities; reimbursement developments, including those resulting from: the CMS MEDCAC meeting in March 2010 to examine currently available evidence on the use of ESAs to manage anemia in patients who have CKD; government and/or third-party payer reaction to regulatory developments, including the REMS for our ESAs, the TREAT label changes and future product label changes; changes in reimbursement rates or changes in the basis for reimbursement by the federal and state governments , including Medicare and Medicaid; cost containment pressures by third-party payers, including governments and private insurance plans; our ability to maintain worldwide segment share and differentiate Aranesp from current and potential future competitive therapies or products, including J&J Epoetin alfa product marketed in the United States and certain other locations outside of the United States and other competitors products outside of the United States, including biosimilar products that have been launched; proposed healthcare reform in the United States; 69 Table of Contents adverse events or results from clinical trials, including sub-analyses, studies or meta-analyses performed by us, including our pharmacovigilance clinical trials, or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators), which have and could further impact product safety labeling, negatively impact healthcare provider prescribing behavior, use of our product, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our product; our contracting and related pricing strategies; severity and duration of the current global economic downturn; development of new protocols, tests and/or treatments for cancer and/or new chemotherapy treatments or alternatives to chemotherapy that may have reduced and may continue to reduce the use of chemotherapy in some patients; patient population growth; and expansion into new international territories. Certain of the above factors could have a material adverse impact on future sales of Aranesp . See Item 1. Business Key Developments, Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates and Item 1A. Risk Factors herein for further discussion of certain of the above factors that could impact our future product sales. EPOGEN For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, total EPOGEN sales were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2009 Change 2008 Change 2007 EPOGEN U.S. $ 2,569 5 % $ 2,456 (1 )% $ 2,489 EPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 increased 5%, primarily due to an increase in demand. The increase in demand was principally due to patient population growth, increased dose utilization and an increase in the average net sales price. The 1% decrease in EPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 was primarily due to a decrease in demand, reflecting a decline in the average net sales price. The increase in demand resulting from patient population growth was offset by a decline in dose/utilization in certain settings. The decline in dose/utilization was related to various ESA product safety-related label changes during 2008 and 2007 and the CMS revision to its EMP, which became effective January 1, 2008. We believe that the EMP implementation significantly impacted physician behavior resulting in declines in dosing trends, as particularly noted in the quarter of implementation. However, this dose decline subsequently moderated throughout 2008. In addition to other factors mentioned in the Product sales section above, future EPOGEN sales will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: reimbursement developments, including those resulting from: changes in reimbursement rates or changes in the basis for reimbursement by the federal and state governments, including Medicare and Medicaid, such as the CMS proposed rule to implement the bundled prospective payment system, which becomes effective in 2011, for dialysis services, drugs and biologicals furnished for treatment of ESRD that are currently billed separately; the federal government reaction to regulatory developments, including the REMS for our ESAs, which has been recently approved by the FDA, and future product label changes; the CMS MEDCAC meeting in March 2010 to examine currently available evidence on the use of ESAs to manage anemia in patients who have CKD; cost containment pressures from the federal and state governments on healthcare providers; 70 Table of Contents regulatory developments, including those resulting from: the REMS for our ESAs or other risk management activities undertaken by us or required by the FDA or other regulatory authorities; the proposed FDA advisory committee meeting in 2010 to re-evaluate the use of ESAs in CKD; future product label changes; changes in dose fluctuations as healthcare providers continue to refine their treatment practices to maintain patient Hb levels in the 10 to 12 g/dL range; proposed healthcare reform in the United States; severity and duration of the current global economic downturn; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our products, including changes in medical guidelines and legislative actions; adverse events or results from clinical trials, including sub-analyses, studies or meta-analyses performed by us, including our pharmacovigilance clinical trials, or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators), which have and could further impact product safety labeling, negatively impact healthcare provider prescribing behavior, use of our product, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; our contracting and related pricing strategies; changes in dose utilization; development of new modalities or therapies to treat anemia associated with CRF; and patient population growth. Certain of the above factors could have a material adverse impact on future sales of EPOGEN . See Item 1. Business Key Developments, Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates and Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of certain of the above factors that could impact our future product sales. Neulasta /NEUPOGEN For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, total Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales by geographic region were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2009 Change 2008 Change 2007 Neulasta U.S. $ 2,527 1 % $ 2,505 7 % $ 2,351 NEUPOGEN U.S. 901 1 % 896 4 % 861 U.S. Neulasta /NEUPOGEN Total 3,428 1 % 3,401 6 % 3,212 Neulasta International 828 2 % 813 25 % 649 NEUPOGEN International 387 (13 )% 445 7 % 416 International Neulasta /NEUPOGEN Total 1,215 (3 )% 1,258 18 % 1,065 Total Neulasta /NEUPOGEN $ 4,643 (0 )% $ 4,659 9 % $ 4,277 U.S. sales of Neulasta /NEUPOGEN for the year ended December 31, 2009 increased 1%, primarily due to a low single digit increase in demand partially offset by unfavorable changes in wholesaler inventories. The increase in demand was principally due to an increase in the average net sales price. International Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 decreased 3%, due to the unfavorable impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by an increase in demand. For the year ended December 31, 2009, excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes of approximately $94 million, 71 Table of Contents international Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales increased 4%. The increase in demand was primarily due to the continued conversion from NEUPOGEN to Neulasta and expansion into new international territories. The increase in U.S. Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 primarily reflects an increase in demand for Neulasta driven by an increase in the average net sales price partially offset by a slight decline in units sold. The increase in international Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 reflects increased demand principally driven by continued conversion from NEUPOGEN to Neulasta as well as changes in foreign currency exchange rates, which positively impacted the growth in combined international sales by $86 million. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes, international Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales increased 10% compared to 2007. In addition to other factors mentioned in the Product sales section above, future Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: development of new protocols, tests and/or treatments for cancer and/or new chemotherapy treatments or alternatives to chemotherapy that may have reduced and may continue to reduce the use of chemotherapy in some patients; competitive products, including biosimilar products that have been or may be approved and launched in the EU (see Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates for additional discussion); the availability, extent and access to reimbursement by government and third-party payers; proposed healthcare reform in the United States; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our products; cost containment pressures from governments and private insurers on healthcare providers; penetration of existing segments; adverse events or results from clinical trials, including sub-analyses, studies or meta-analyses performed by us or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators), which could impact product safety labeling and may negatively impact healthcare provider prescribing behavior, use of our products, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; severity and duration of the current global economic downturn; our contracting and related pricing strategies; expansion into new international territories; and patient population growth. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of certain of the above factors that could impact our future product sales. ENBREL For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, total ENBREL sales by geographic region were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2009 Change 2008 Change 2007 ENBREL U.S. $ 3,283 (3 )% $ 3,389 11 % $ 3,052 ENBREL Canada 210 0 % 209 17 % 178 Total ENBREL $ 3,493 (3 )% $ 3,598 11 % $ 3,230 ENBREL sales for the year ended December 31, 2009 declined 3%, which primarily reflects an unfavorable change in wholesaler inventories resulting from an approximate $100 million wholesaler inventory build in 2008 72 Table of Contents related to a shift of ENBREL to a wholesaler distribution model, partially offset by an increase in demand. The increase in demand was driven by a mid-single digit increase in the average net sales price partially offset by a decline in units sold due to share declines as a result of competitive activity. ENBREL continues to maintain a leading position in both the rheumatology and dermatology segments. ENBREL sales growth for the year ended December 31, 2008 reflects higher demand principally due to increases in the average net sales price. ENBREL sales were also favorably impacted by approximately $100 million due to a change in our distribution model for ENBREL. Previously, ENBREL was shipped directly to pharmacies. However, beginning in the three months ended March 31, 2008, we commenced using a wholesaler distributor model, similar to our other marketed products. Also, ENBREL sales growth for the year ended December 31, 2008 was affected by share declines in the rheumatology and dermatology segments in the United States compared to the prior year due to increased competitive activity. However, sales growth continued in both rheumatology and dermatology. In addition to other factors mentioned in the Product sales section above, future ENBREL sales will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: the effects of competing products or therapies, including new competitive products coming to market, such as Centocor Ortho Biotech Simponi (golimumab) and Stelara (ustekinumab) and UCB/Nektar Therapeutics Cimzia (PEGylated anti-TNF alpha) (see Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates ) and, in part, our ability to differentiate ENBREL based on a combination of its safety profile and efficacy; proposed healthcare reform in the United States; severity and duration of the current global economic downturn; the availability, extent and access to reimbursement by government and third-party payers; future product label changes; risk management activities, including the proposed modification to our REMS, undertaken by us or required by the FDA or other regulatory authorities; growth in the rheumatology and dermatology segments; adverse events or results from clinical trials, including sub-analyses, studies or meta-analyses performed by us or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators), which could impact product safety labeling and may negatively impact healthcare provider prescribing behavior, use of our product, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our product; cost containment pressures from governments and private insurers on healthcare providers; our contracting and related pricing strategies; and patient population growth. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of certain of the above factors that could impact our future product sales. 73 Table of Contents Selected operating expenses The following table summarizes our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 (dollar amounts in millions): 2009 Change 2008 Change 2007 Operating expenses: Cost of sales (excludes amortization of certain acquired intangible assets) $ 2,091 (9)% $ 2,296 (10)% $ 2,548 % of product sales 15% 16% 18% Research and development $ 2,864 (5)% $ 3,030 (7)% $ 3,266 % of product sales 20% 21% 23% Selling, general and administrative $ 3,820 1% $ 3,789 13% $ 3,361 % of product sales 27% 26% 23% Amortization of certain acquired intangible assets $ 294 0% $ 294 (1)% $ 298 Write-off of acquired in-process research and development $ 0% $ (100)% $ 590 Other charges $ 67 (82)% $ 380 (48)% $ 728 Cost of sales Cost of sales, which excludes the amortization of certain acquired intangible assets, ( Cost of sales ) decreased 9% for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to 2008. The decrease was primarily driven by lower excess capacity charges, lower royalty expenses and lower sales volume, partially offset by less favorable product mix and higher fill and finish costs resulting from lower utilization at our manufacturing facility in Puerto Rico. The decrease in Cost of sales was also driven by lower excess inventory write-offs, primarily due to the $84 million write-off of inventory in 2008 resulting from a strategic decision to change manufacturing processes. Cost of sales decreased 10% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 2007. The decrease was primarily driven by lower restructuring charges incurred in 2008, as discussed below. In addition, the decline in Cost of sales was due to lower inventory write-offs and lower cost ENBREL, partially offset by higher sales volume and excess capacity charges. Cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 included $1 million, $6 million and $150 million, respectively, of restructuring and related charges. The restructuring charges incurred in the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily related to accelerated depreciation resulting from the decision to accelerate closure of one of our ENBREL commercial bulk manufacturing operations in connection with the rationalization of our worldwide network of manufacturing facilities. See Note 9, Restructuring to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Research and development R&D costs are expensed as incurred and primarily include salaries, benefits and other staff-related costs; facilities and overhead costs; clinical trial and related clinical manufacturing costs; contract services and other outside costs; information systems costs and amortization of acquired technology used in R&D with alternative future uses. R&D expenses include costs incurred under R&D arrangements with our corporate partners, such as activities performed on behalf of KA, and costs and cost recoveries associated with collaborative R&D and in-licensing arrangements, including upfront fees and milestones paid to collaboration partners in connection with technologies that have no alternative future use. Net payment or reimbursement of R&D costs for R&D collaborations is recognized when the obligations are incurred or as we become entitled to the cost recovery. R&D expenses decreased 5% for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to 2008. This decline was primarily attributable to lower clinical trial costs of $128 million, including those associated with our denosumab and Vectibix registrational studies, our marketed products and the delay of the phase 3 motesanib NSCLC trial, and $14 million lower staff-related costs. Additionally, we incurred higher licensing fees, in 2009, related to the 74 Table of Contents $60 million expense associated with the Array BioPharma Inc. agreement and the $50 million expense resulting from the payment to Cytokinetics, partially offset by the $100 million expense in 2008 resulting from the upfront payment associated with the Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co. Ltd. ( Kyowa Hakko ) collaboration. R&D expenses decreased 7% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 2007, which was principally due to $102 million of lower staff-related costs and discretionary expenses; $133 million of lower clinical trial costs; $100 million of cost recoveries derived from our licensing agreements, primarily with Daiichi Sankyo and Takeda and a $16 million decline in restructuring-related costs, as discussed below, partially offset by a $100 million expense in the year ended December 31, 2008 for the upfront payment under our licensing agreement with Kyowa Hakko. Our clinical trial costs were lower for the year ended December 31, 2008 primarily due to the completion of enrollment of our large denosumab clinical trials and the related significant costs associated with site initiation and patient enrollment no longer being incurred, partially offset by increased clinical costs for our emerging pipeline. R&D expenses for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 included $6 million, $3 million and $19 million, respectively, of restructuring and related charges. The restructuring charges incurred in the year ended December 31, 2007 primarily related to $38 million in charges related to asset impairments offset by a $19 million benefit associated with the reversal of previously accrued expenses for bonuses and stock-based compensation awards, which were forfeited as a result of the employees termination. See Note 9, Restructuring to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Selling, general and administrative Selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expenses are primarily comprised of salaries, benefits and other staff-related costs associated with sales and marketing, finance, legal and other administrative personnel; facilities and overhead costs; outside marketing, advertising and legal expenses and other general and administrative costs. SG&A expenses include costs and cost recoveries associated with certain collaborative arrangements. Net payment or reimbursement of SG&A costs for collaborations is recognized when the obligations are incurred or as we become entitled to the cost recovery. In connection with a co-promotion agreement, we and Pfizer market and sell ENBREL in the United States and Canada and Pfizer is paid a share of the related profits, as defined. The share of ENBREL profits owed to Pfizer is included in SG&A expenses. SG&A expenses increased 1% for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to 2008, primarily due to higher product promotional expenses of $207 million, including increased spending for activities in anticipation of the launch of Prolia . This increase was substantially offset by lower litigation expenses of $38 million, lower expenses associated with the Pfizer profit share of $32 million, expense recoveries associated with our GSK collaboration agreement for Prolia in PMO in Europe, Australia, New Zealand and Mexico of $29 million, lower staff-related costs of $28 million, lower global enterprise resource planning ( ERP ) system related expenses of $28 million and lower restructuring and related costs of $8 million. For the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, the expense associated with the Pfizer profit share was $1,163 million and $1,195 million, respectively. SG&A expense increased 13% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 2007, in part due to the impact of our restructuring plan which contributed $161 million to the increase in expenses, as discussed below. The increase was also due to higher expense associated with the Pfizer profit share of $211 million, product promotional spending of $39 million and staff-related costs of $94 million, partially offset by lower litigation expense of $50 million and lower severance costs of $21 million related to our acquisition of the remaining 51% ownership interest in Domp . For the year ended December 31, 2007, the expense associated with the Pfizer profit share, excluding recoveries recorded as part of our restructuring, as discussed below, was $984 million. For the year ended December 31, 2009, we recorded $29 million for certain cost saving initiatives. For the year ended December 31, 2008, we recorded $37 million for certain restructuring charges, which primarily included $17 million in asset impairments, $12 million in loss accruals for leases principally related to certain facilities that will not be used in our business and $9 million in implementation costs associated with certain restructuring initiatives. For the year ended December 31, 2007, we recorded $114 million in cost recoveries for 75 Table of Contents certain restructuring charges, principally with respect to accelerated depreciation, in connection with our co-promotion agreement with Pfizer and $11 million of benefit associated with the reversal of previously accrued expenses for bonuses and stock-based compensation awards, which were forfeited as a result of the employees termination. See Note 9, Restructuring to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Amortization of certain acquired intangible assets Amortization of certain acquired intangible assets relates to products technology rights acquired in connection with the Immunex acquisition. For the year ended December 31, 2007, amortization expense also included $3 million related to the impairment of a non-ENBREL related intangible asset previously acquired in the Immunex acquisition. Write-off of acquired in-process research and development In accordance with the accounting standards for business combinations, prior to January 1, 2009, the fair value of acquired IPR&D projects, which have no alternative future use and which have not reached technological feasibility at the date of acquisition, were immediately expensed. In 2007, we wrote-off $270 million and $320 million of acquired IPR&D related to the acquisitions of Alantos and Ilypsa, respectively. The Alantos IPR&D amount is related to an orally-administered treatment for type II diabetes that, at the date of acquisition, was in phase 2a clinical trials. The Ilypsa IPR&D amount is related to a phosphate binder that, at the date of acquisition, was in phase 2 clinical trials for the treatment of hyperphosphatemia in CKD patients on hemodialysis. We used the income method to determine the estimated fair values of acquired IPR&D, which uses a discounted cash flow model and applies a probability weighting based on estimates of successful product development and commercialization to estimated future net cash flows resulting from projected revenues and related costs. These success rates take into account the stages of completion and the risks surrounding successful development and commercialization of the underlying product candidates. These cash flows were then discounted to present value using a discount rate of 10%. The estimated after-tax cash flows were probability weighted at success rates of 38% for the Alantos product candidate and 77% for the Ilypsa product candidate. The incremental R&D expenses assumed to be incurred to obtain necessary regulatory approval for the Alantos and Ilypsa product candidates are immaterial. The above assumptions were used solely for the purposes of estimating fair values of these product candidates as of the date of their acquisition. However, we cannot provide assurance that the underlying assumptions used to forecast the cash flows or the timely and successful completion of development and commercialization will materialize, as estimated. The major risks and uncertainties associated with the timely and successful completion of development and commercialization of these product candidates are our ability to confirm their safety and efficacy based on data from clinical trials, our ability to obtain necessary regulatory approvals and our ability to successfully complete these tasks within budgeted costs. We are not able to market a human therapeutic without obtaining regulatory approvals, and such approvals require completing clinical trials that demonstrate a product candidate is safe and effective. Consequently, the eventual realized value of the acquired IPR&D may vary from its estimated value at the date of acquisition. We are continuing to develop the product candidate acquired in the Alantos acquisition. We have reviewed data from recently-completed phase 1 and 2 clinical trials for AMG 223, the product candidate acquired in the Ilypsa acquisition. The results were consistent with what is likely required for registration of a phosphate-binding therapy. However, in the context of our overall development portfolio, the Company will be reviewing other options for the commercialization of this investigational product. In addition, in 2006, we wrote-off acquired IPR&D related to the acquisition of Abgenix. The IPR&D amount was primarily related to the rights which we did not own pursuant to our agreement with Abgenix to jointly develop and commercialize panitumumab and related to a royalty that we would have owed to Abgenix with respect to future sales of denosumab as a result of using certain of Abgenix patented technologies in the development of this product candidate (see Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates ). The elimination of the royalty on potential future sales of denosumab did not result in us incurring 76 Table of Contents any incremental R&D expenses. Panitumumab was Abgenix fully human monoclonal antibody which, at acquisition, was in phase 2/3 clinical trials for the treatment of certain types of cancer. The incremental R&D expenses assumed to be incurred to obtain necessary regulatory approvals for the various indications of panitumumab were estimated at the time of acquisition at approximately $300 million and would be incurred through 2011 and there have been no significant changes in these estimates. At the date of acquisition, we intended to develop panitumumab for treatment of various types of cancer. In 2006, panitumumab received FDA approval for the treatment of mCRC after disease progression on, or following, fluoropyrimidine-, oxaliplatin- and irinotecan- containing chemotherapy regimens and is marketed under the trademark Vectibix . In December 2007, the European Commission granted a conditional marketing authorization for Vectibix as monotherapy for the treatment of patients with EGFr expressing mCRC with non-mutated (wild-type) KRAS genes after failure of standard chemotherapy regimens. This conditional approval is reviewed annually by the CHMP, and in December 2008 we agreed as a condition of the renewal of approval to conduct an additional clinical trial in the existing approved indication. The conditional approval was granted again in December 2009. We are continuing to develop or are evaluating plans to develop Vectibix in all of the remaining indications we had intended at the date of acquisition. However, since the acquisition, there have been several events that have affected the development plans for Vectibix and because of these developments, our expected time to obtain regulatory approvals for the remaining indications has been delayed and the expected cost to obtain necessary approvals has increased compared to our original expectations. See Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates and Item 1. Business Research and Development and Selected Product Candidates for developments related to Vectibix and denosumab. Other charges As discussed in Note 9, Restructuring to the Consolidated Financial Statements, on August 15, 2007, we announced a plan to restructure our worldwide operations in order to improve our cost structure while continuing to make significant R&D investments and build the framework for our future growth. Subsequently, we identified certain additional initiatives designed to further assist in improving our cost structure. As a result of these restructuring and related charges, we recorded in Other charges in 2009, 2008 and 2007 expenses for staff separation costs of $30 million, $7 million and $209 million, respectively, asset impairments of $36 million and $366 million in 2008 and 2007, respectively, and charges of $4 million, $49 million and $119 million, respectively, primarily related to the loss accruals for leases for certain facilities that will not be used in our business. Also, in 2009, the Company recorded in Other charges loss accruals for settlements of certain legal proceedings aggregating $33 million. Also, in 2008, the Company recorded in Other charges loss accruals for settlements of certain commercial legal proceedings aggregating $288 million, principally related to the settlement of the Ortho Biotech antitrust suit. In addition, in 2007, the Company recorded a $34 million loss accrual for an ongoing commercial legal proceeding. Interest expense, net For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, interest expense, net was $578 million, $551 million and $496 million, respectively. Included in interest expense, net for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, is the impact of non-cash interest expense of $250 million, $235 million and $168 million, respectively, resulting from the adoption of the new accounting standard that changed the method of accounting for our convertible debt. (See Note 2, Change in method of accounting for convertible debt instruments to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.) Interest and other income, net Interest and other income, net decreased 22% for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to 2008. This decline is primarily due to lower interest income of $45 million, principally due to lower portfolio investment returns; lower net gains on sales of investments of $28 million; and higher losses on certain leased facilities that will no longer be used in our operations of $31 million; partially offset by higher foreign currency exchange 77 Table of Contents net gains of $27 million. Interest and other income, net increased 14% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 2007. This increase is primarily due to higher net gains on sales of investments of $79 million; higher interest income of $20 million, principally due to higher portfolio investment returns; partially offset by higher foreign currency exchange net losses of $34 million. Income taxes Our effective tax rate was 11.5%, 19.2% and 18.9% for 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Our effective tax rate for 2009 decreased over 2008 primarily due to: (i) the favorable resolution of certain prior years matters with tax authorities, (ii) higher profits and manufacturing in Puerto Rico, which are taxed under an incentive grant, and (iii) a tax benefit from adjustments to previously established deferred taxes arising from changes in California tax law enacted in 2009 and effective for subsequent periods. The resolution of prior years tax matters recognized in the year ended December 31, 2009 reduced the effective tax rate by 4.2%. Our effective tax rate for 2008 remained relatively unchanged from 2007. Although the 2007 effective tax rate benefited from the favorable resolution of certain income tax examinations, this benefit was substantially offset by the write-off of nondeductible acquired IPR&D costs, resulting in a comparable effective tax rate between the two years. As permitted under U.S. GAAP, we do not provide for U.S. income taxes on undistributed earnings of our foreign operations that are intended to be invested indefinitely outside of the United States. (See Summary of Critical Accounting Policies Income taxes and Note 5, Income taxes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.) Recent accounting pronouncements In June 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued a new accounting standard which amends guidance regarding consolidation of variable interest entities to address the elimination of the concept of a qualifying special purpose entity. This standard also replaces the quantitative-based risks and rewards calculation for determining which enterprise has a controlling financial interest in a variable interest entity with an approach focused on identifying which enterprise has the power to direct the activities of the variable interest entity and the obligation to absorb losses of the entity or the right to receive benefits from the entity. Additionally, this standard requires any enterprise that holds a variable interest in a variable interest entity to make ongoing assessments of whether it has a controlling financial interest in the variable interest entity and to provide enhanced disclosures that will provide users of financial statements with more transparent information about an enterprise involvement in the variable interest entity. This standard is effective for us beginning January 1, 2010. The adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In October 2009, the FASB issued a new accounting standard which amends guidance on accounting for revenue arrangements involving the delivery of more than one element of goods and/or services. This standard addresses the unit of accounting for arrangements involving multiple deliverables and removes the previous separation criteria that objective and reliable evidence of fair value of any undelivered item must exist for the delivered item to be considered a separate unit of accounting. This standard also addresses how the arrangement consideration should be allocated to each deliverable. Finally, this standard expands disclosures related to multiple element revenue arrangements. This standard is effective for us beginning January 1, 2011. The adoption of this standard is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 78 Table of Contents Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table summarizes selected financial data. The amounts reflect the adoption of a new accounting standard which changed the method of accounting for our convertible debt (see Note 2, Change in method of accounting for convertible debt instruments to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our adoption of this new accounting standard, effective January 1, 2009) (in millions): December 31, 2009 2008 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 13,442 $ 9,552 Total assets 39,629 36,427 Current debt 1,000 Non-current debt 10,601 8,352 Stockholders equity 22,667 20,885 We believe that existing funds, cash generated from operations and existing sources of and access to financing are adequate to satisfy our working capital, capital expenditure and debt service requirements for the foreseeable future. In addition, we plan to opportunistically pursue our stock repurchase program and other business initiatives, including acquisitions and licensing activities. We anticipate that our liquidity needs can be met through a variety of sources, including: cash provided by operating activities, sale of marketable securities, borrowings through commercial paper and/or our syndicated credit facility and access to other debt markets and equity markets. (See Item 1A. Risk Factors Current economic conditions may magnify certain risks that affect our business. ) Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities Of the total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities at December 31, 2009, approximately $12.1 billion was generated from operations in foreign tax jurisdictions and is intended for use in our foreign operations. If these funds were repatriated for use in our U.S. operations, we would be required to pay additional U.S. federal and state income taxes at the applicable marginal tax rates. The primary objectives for our marketable security investment portfolio are liquidity and safety of principal. Investments are made with the objective of achieving the highest rate of return, consistent with these two objectives. Our investment policy limits investments to certain types of debt and money market instruments issued by institutions primarily with investment grade credit ratings and places restrictions on maturities and concentration by type and issuer. 79 Table of Contents Financing arrangements The following table reflects the carrying value of our long-term borrowings under our various financing arrangements and the amounts reflect, where applicable, the adoption of the new accounting standard that changed the method of accounting for our convertible debt (dollar amounts in millions): December 31, 2009 2008 0.125% convertible notes due 2011 (2011 Convertible Notes) $ 2,342 $ 2,206 0.375% convertible notes due 2013 (2013 Convertible Notes) 2,088 1,970 5.85% notes due 2017 (2017 Notes) 1,099 1,099 4.00% notes due 2009 (2009 Notes) 1,000 4.85% notes due 2014 (2014 Notes) 1,000 1,000 5.70% notes due 2019 (2019 Notes) 998 6.40% notes due 2039 (2039 Notes) 995 6.375% notes due 2037 (2037 Notes) 899 899 6.15% notes due 2018 (2018 Notes) 499 499 6.90% notes due 2038 (2038 Notes) 499 498 Zero-coupon modified convertible notes due in 2032 (2032 Modified Convertible Notes) 82 81 8.125% notes due 2097 (Other) 100 100 Total borrowings 10,601 9,352 Less current portion 1,000 Total non-current debt $ 10,601 $ 8,352 In November 2009, $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of notes with a fixed interest rate of 4.00% (the 2009 Notes ) became due and were repaid. In January 2009, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2019 (the 2019 Notes ) and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2039 (the 2039 Notes ) in a registered offering. The 2019 Notes and the 2039 Notes pay interest at fixed annual rates of 5.70% and 6.40%, respectively. The 2019 Notes and the 2039 Notes may be redeemed at any time at our option, in whole or in part, at 100% of the principal amount of the notes being redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, and a make-whole amount, as defined. Upon the occurrence of a change in control triggering event, as defined, we may be required to purchase for cash all or a portion of the 2019 Notes and the 2039 Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest. Debt issuance costs totaled approximately $13 million and are being amortized over the lives of the notes. In May 2008, we issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2018 (the 2018 Notes ) and $500 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2038 (the 2038 Notes ) in a registered offering. The 2018 Notes and 2038 Notes pay interest at fixed annual rates of 6.15% and 6.90%, respectively. The 2018 Notes and 2038 Notes may be redeemed at any time at our option, in whole or in part, at 100% of the principal amount of the notes being redeemed plus accrued interest and a make-whole amount, as defined. In the event of a change in control triggering event, as defined, we may be required to purchase for cash all or a portion of the 2018 Notes and 2038 Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest. Debt issuance costs totaled approximately $6 million and are being amortized over the life of the notes. Upon the receipt of the proceeds from the issuance of the 2018 Notes and 2038 Notes discussed above, in June 2008 we exercised our right to call and repaid $1.0 billion of the 2008 Floating Rate Notes which were scheduled to mature in November 2008. In November 2008, the remaining $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of the 2008 Floating Rate Notes became due and were repaid. As of December 31, 2009, we had $7.6 billion of additional notes outstanding. The notes consisted of (i) $2.3 billion of convertible notes that bear interest at a fixed rate of 0.125% and mature in February 2011 ( 2011 Convertible Notes ), (ii) $2.1 billion of convertible notes that bear interest at a fixed rate of 0.375% and mature in February 2013 ( 2013 Convertible Notes ), (iii) $1.1 billion of notes that bear interest at a fixed rate of 80 Table of Contents 5.85% and mature in 2017 ( 2017 Notes ), (iv) $1.0 billion of notes that bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.85% and mature in 2014 ( 2014 Notes ), (v) $899 million of notes that bear interest at a fixed rate of 6.375% and mature in 2037 ( 2037 Notes ), (vi) $100 million of other long-term debt securities that bear interest at a fixed rate of 8.125% and mature in 2097 and (vii) zero-coupon convertible notes due in 2032 with an accreted value of $82 million and having an aggregate face amount of $105 million and yield to maturity of 1.125%. See Note 16, Financing Arrangements to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our Convertible Notes. To achieve a desired mix of fixed and floating interest rate debt, we enter into interest rate swap agreements that effectively convert a fixed rate interest coupon to a LIBOR-based floating rate coupon over the life of the respective note. These interest rate swap agreements qualify and are designated as fair value hedges. As of December 31, 2009, we had interest rate swap agreements for our 2014 Notes and 2018 Notes, with an aggregate face value of $1.5 billion. As of December 31, 2008, we had interest rate swap agreements for our 2009 Notes, 2014 Notes, 2018 Notes and other notes, with an aggregate face value of $2.6 billion. As of December 31, 2009, we have a commercial paper program that allows us to issue up to $2.3 billion of unsecured commercial paper to fund our working capital needs. At December 31, 2009, no amounts were outstanding under our commercial paper program. As of December 31, 2009, we have a $2.3 billion syndicated, unsecured, revolving credit facility which matures in November 2012 and is available for general corporate purposes or as a liquidity backstop to our commercial paper program. Annual commitment fees for this facility are 0.045% based on our current credit rating. As of December 31, 2009, no amounts were outstanding under this facility. We have filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC, which allows us to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities; common stock; preferred stock; warrants to purchase debt securities, common stock, preferred stock or depository shares; rights to purchase common stock or preferred stock; securities purchase contracts; securities purchase units and depository shares. Under this registration statement, all of the securities available for issuance may be offered from time to time with terms to be determined at the time of issuance. As of December 31, 2009, we have $400 million remaining under a shelf registration statement that was established in 1997. In connection with this shelf registration, we established a $400 million medium-term note program. All of the $400 million of debt securities available for issuance may be offered from time to time under our medium-term note program with terms to be determined at the time of issuance. As of December 31, 2009, no securities were outstanding under the $400 million medium-term note program. Certain of our financing arrangements contain non-financial covenants and we were in compliance with all applicable covenants as of December 31, 2009. None of our financing arrangements contain any financial covenants. Our outstanding convertible notes and other outstanding long-term debt are rated A+ with a stable outlook by Standard & Poor s, A3 with a stable outlook by Moody Investors Service, Inc. and A with a stable outlook by Fitch, Inc. Cash flows The following table summarizes our cash flow activity (in millions): 2009 2008 2007 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 6,336 $ 5,988 $ 5,401 Net cash used in investing activities (3,202 ) (3,165 ) (1,992 ) Net cash used in financing activities (2,024 ) (3,073 ) (2,668 ) Operating Cash provided by operating activities has been and is expected to continue to be our primary recurring source of funds. Cash provided by operating activities increased in 2009 primarily due to higher net income of $553 million and a higher dividend payment from KA of $102 million partially offset by the prior year receipt of 81 Table of Contents $300 million for an upfront milestone payment related to our licensing agreement with Takeda; and the negative impact of the timing and amounts of receipts from customers and payments to vendors and others. Cash provided by operating activities increased in 2008 primarily as a result of improvement in operating income. Investing Net purchases of marketable securities were $2.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2009 compared to net purchases of $2.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008 and net purchases of $52 million for the year ended December 31, 2007. Capital expenditures totaled $530 million in 2009, $672 million in 2008 and $1.3 billion in 2007. Capital expenditures in 2009 were primarily associated with manufacturing capacity expansions in Puerto Rico and other site developments. Capital expenditures in 2008 were primarily associated with manufacturing capacity expansions in Puerto Rico, Fremont and other site developments and investment in our global ERP system and other information systems projects. Capital expenditures in 2007 were primarily associated with manufacturing capacity and site expansions in Puerto Rico and other locations and investment in our global ERP system. We currently estimate 2010 spending on capital projects and equipment to be approximately $600 million. On January 4, 2008, we completed our acquisition of Domp and pursuant to the merger agreement, we paid $56 million in cash, net of cash acquired and transaction costs of $2 million. On July 18, 2007, we completed our acquisition of Ilypsa and pursuant to the merger agreement, we paid $398 million in cash, net of cash acquired and transaction costs of $2 million. On July 16, 2007, we completed our acquisition of Alantos and pursuant to the merger agreement, we paid $299 million in cash, net of cash acquired and transaction costs of $1 million. Financing In December 2009, the Board of Directors authorized us to repurchase up to an additional $5.0 billion of common stock adding to the $5.0 billion previously authorized in July 2007. As of December 31, 2009, we had $6.0 billion available for stock repurchases as authorized by our Board of Directors. The manner of purchases, the amount we spend and the number of shares repurchased will vary based on a variety of factors, including the stock price, blackout periods in which we are restricted from repurchasing shares, and our credit rating and may include private block purchases as well as market transactions. A summary of our repurchase activity under our stock repurchase programs is as follows (in millions): 2009 2008 2007 Shares Dollars Shares Dollars Shares Dollars First quarter 37.5 $ 1,997 $ 8.8 $ 537 Second quarter 32.7 1,549 (1) 73.9 (2) 4,463 Third quarter 19 (1) 2.5 (2) Fourth quarter 21.7 1,211 12.6 700 1.8 100 Total 59.2 $ 3,208 45.3 $ 2,268 87.0 $ 5,100 (1) The total cost of shares repurchased during the three months ended June 30, 2008 excludes approximately $19 million paid in July 2008 in connection with the final settlement of an ASR program entered into in May 2008. (2) The total number of shares repurchased during the three months ended June 30, 2007 excludes 2.5 million shares received in July 2007 in connection with the final settlement of an ASR entered into in May 2007. As discussed above, in January 2009, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2019 and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2039 resulting in net proceeds received of $2.0 billion. In November 2009, we repaid $1.0 billion of 4.00% notes that matured. As discussed above, in May 2008, we issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2018 and $500 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2038 resulting in net proceeds received of $991 82 Table of Contents million. In June 2008, upon receipt of the proceeds from the issuance of these notes, we exercised our right to call and repaid $1.0 billion of floating rate notes scheduled to mature in November 2008 and in November 2008, we repaid the remaining $1.0 billion of floating rate notes that matured. In May 2007, we issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2008 Floating Rate Notes, $1.1 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.85% notes due in 2017 and $900 million aggregate principal amount of 6.375% notes due in 2037, resulting in net proceeds of $4.0 billion. A total of $3.2 billion of the net proceeds raised from the issuance of these notes were used to repurchase shares of our common stock under an ASR entered into in May 2007. On March 2, 2007, as a result of holders of substantially all of our outstanding 2032 Modified Convertible Notes exercising their March 1, 2007 put option, we repurchased $2.3 billion aggregate principal amount or the majority of the then outstanding convertible notes at their then-accreted value for $1.7 billion in cash. In addition $135 million of other debt securities matured and were repaid in 2007. We receive cash from the exercise of employee stock options. Employee stock option exercises provided $171 million, $155 million and $277 million of cash during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options will vary from period to period based upon, among other factors, fluctuations in the market value of our stock relative to the exercise price of such options. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are material or reasonably likely to be material to our consolidated financial position or consolidated results of operations. Contractual Obligations Contractual obligations represent future cash commitments and liabilities under agreements with third parties, and exclude contingent liabilities for which we cannot reasonably predict future payment. Additionally, the expected timing of payment of the obligations presented below is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the timing of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon terms or amounts for some obligations. The following table represents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2009, aggregated by type (in millions): Contractual obligations Payments due by period Total Less than 1 year 2-3 years 4-5 years More than 5 years Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 17,736 $ 323 $ 3,276 $ 4,225 $ 9,912 Operating lease obligations 1,017 136 231 184 466 Purchase obligations (2) 3,715 939 793 278 1,705 Total contractual obligations $ 22,468 $ 1,398 $ 4,300 $ 4,687 $ 12,083 (1) The long-term debt obligation amounts include future interest payments. Future interest payments are included on the 2011 Convertible Notes at a fixed rate of 0.125%, the 2013 Convertible Notes at a fixed rate of 0.375%, the 2017 Notes at a fixed rate of 5.85%, the 2014 Notes at a fixed rate of 4.85%, the 2019 Notes at a fixed rate of 5.70%, the 2039 Notes at a fixed rate of 6.40%, the 2037 Notes at a fixed rate of 6.375%, the 2018 Notes at a fixed rate of 6.15%, the 2038 Notes at a fixed rate of 6.90% and the other notes at a fixed rate of 8.125%. To achieve a desired mix of fixed and floating interest rate debt, we enter into interest rate swap agreements. These interest rate swap agreements effectively convert a fixed rate interest coupon to a LIBOR-based floating rate coupon over the life of the respective note. We used an interest rate forward curve at December 31, 2009 to compute the net amounts to be included in the table above for future interest payments on our variable rate interest rate swaps. 83 Table of Contents (2) Purchase obligations primarily relate to (i) our long-term supply agreements with third party manufacturers, which are based on firm commitments for the purchase of production capacity; (ii) R&D commitments (including those related to clinical trials) for new and existing products; (iii) capital expenditures; (iv) open purchase orders for the acquisition of goods and services in the ordinary course of business and (v) our agreement with International Business Machines Corporation ( IBM ), which we entered into on October 22, 2008, for certain information systems infrastructure services. The term of the agreement is five years with three one-year renewals, at our option, for a total of up to eight years. The cost to us for the initial five-year term, is estimated to be $505 million, included in the table above is $363 million for the remaining obligation. The estimated aggregate additional cost of the three one-year renewal options not included in the table above is approximately $219 million. Our obligation to pay certain of these amounts may be reduced based on certain future events. Long-term liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits ( UTBs ) (net of federal tax benefits on state taxes) and related accrued interest and penalty totaling approximately $1.1 billion at December 31, 2009 are not included in the table above because, due to their nature, there is a high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows and other events that extinguish these liabilities. As of December 31, 2009, we do not have any liabilities for UTBs classified as current liabilities. In addition to the above table, we are contractually obligated to make potential future success-based development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments in conjunction with collaborative agreements we have entered into with third-parties. These payments are contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events and, given the nature of these events, it is unclear when, if ever, we may be required to pay such amounts. As payment of these amounts is not considered probable, these contingent payments have not been included in the table above or recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Further, the timing of any future payment is not reasonable estimable. Individually, future payment of any amounts under these arrangements is not expected to be material in any one reporting period. As of December 31, 2009, the maximum amount that may be payable in the future under all such arrangement is approximately $1.8 billion. Summary of Critical Accounting Policies The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and the notes to the financial statements. Some of those judgments can be subjective and complex, and therefore, actual results could differ materially from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Product sales, sales deductions and returns Revenues from sales of our products are recognized when the products are shipped and title and risk of loss have passed. Product sales are recorded net of accruals for estimated rebates, wholesaler chargebacks, cash discounts and other deductions (collectively, sales deductions ) and returns, which are established at the time of sale. 84 Table of Contents We analyze the adequacy of our sales deductions accruals each quarter. Amounts accrued for sales deductions are adjusted when trends or significant events indicate that adjustment is appropriate. Accruals are also adjusted to reflect actual results. The following table summarizes amounts recorded in Accrued liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets regarding sales deductions (in millions): Rebates Chargebacks Cash discounts Other deductions Total Balance as of January 1, 2007 $ 788 $ 73 $ 36 $ 182 $ 1,079 Amounts charged against product sales 2,156 1,649 337 357 4,499 Payments (2,189 ) (1,652 ) (331 ) (342 ) (4,514 ) Balance as of December 31, 2007 755 70 42 197 1,064 Amounts charged against product sales 1,813 1,635 324 466 4,238 Payments (2,064 ) (1,621 ) (323 ) (418 ) (4,426 ) Balance as of December 31, 2008 504 84 43 245 876 Amounts charged against product sales 1,497 2,424 312 406 4,639 Payments (1,482 ) (2,380 ) (328 ) (355 ) (4,545 ) Balance as of December 31, 2009 $ 519 $ 128 $ 27 $ 296 $ 970 For the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, total sales deductions were 24%, 22% and 24% of gross product sales. Included in these amounts are immaterial adjustments related to prior year sales based on changes in estimates. Such amounts represent less than 2% of the aggregate sales deductions charged against product sales for each of the three years ended December 31, 2009. In late 2008 we began shifting our discount structure as a component of broader contracting revisions to be more heavily weighted toward fixed prices to healthcare providers (reflected as chargebacks in the table above) instead of rebates, resulting in a corresponding reduction in rebates and an increase in chargebacks, as noted in the table above. In the United States, we utilize wholesalers as the principal means of distributing our products to healthcare providers, such as physicians or their clinics, dialysis centers, hospitals and pharmacies. Products we sell in the EU are principally distributed to hospitals and/or wholesalers depending upon the distribution practice in each country for which the product is sold. We monitor the inventory levels of our products at our wholesale distributors using data from our wholesalers and other third-parties and we believe that wholesaler inventories have been maintained at appropriate levels (generally two to three weeks) given end-user demand. Accordingly, historical fluctuations in wholesaler inventory levels have not significantly impacted our method of estimating sales deductions and returns. Accruals for sales deductions are primarily based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales. These estimates take into consideration current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, internal and external historical data and forecasted customer buying patterns. Sales deductions are substantially product-specific and, therefore, for any given year, can be impacted by the mix of products sold. Rebates earned by healthcare providers in the United States may include performance-based offers, such as attaining contractually-specified segment share or other performance-based measures. As a result, the calculation of the accrual for these rebates is complicated by the need to estimate customer buying patterns and the resulting applicable contractual rebate rate(s) to be earned over a contractual period. These rebates totaled $1.5 billion, $1.8 billion and $2.2 billion for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. We believe that the methodology we use to accrue for rebates is reasonable and appropriate given current facts and circumstances. However, actual results may differ. Based on our recent experience, changes in annual estimates related to prior annual periods have been less than 3.5% of the estimated rebate amounts charged against product sales for such periods. These changes in annual estimates substantially relate to sales made in the immediately preceding annual period. A 3.5% change in our rebate estimate attributable to rebates recognized in 2009 would have had an impact of approximately $52 million on our 2009 product sales and a corresponding impact on our financial condition and liquidity. 85 Table of Contents Wholesaler chargebacks relate to our contractual agreements to sell products to healthcare providers in the United States at fixed prices that are lower than the prices we charge wholesalers. When the healthcare providers purchase our products through wholesalers at these reduced prices, the wholesaler charges us for the difference between the prices they pay us and the prices they sold the products to the healthcare providers. The provision for chargebacks is based on the expected sales by our wholesaler customers to healthcare providers. These chargebacks from wholesalers totaled $2.4 billion, $1.6 billion and $1.6 billion for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Accruals for wholesaler chargebacks are less difficult to estimate than rebates and closely approximate actual results since chargeback amounts are fixed at the date of purchase by the healthcare provider and we settle these deductions generally within a few weeks of incurring the liability. Product returns Returns are estimated through comparison of historical return data to their related sales on a production lot basis. Historical rates of return are determined for each product and are adjusted for known or expected changes in the marketplace specific to each product, when appropriate. Historically, sales return provisions have been insignificant, amounting to less than 1% of gross product sales. Furthermore, changes in estimates for prior year sales return provisions have historically also been insignificant. Inventories produced in preparation for product launches The Company capitalizes inventories produced in preparation for product launches when the related product candidates are considered to have a high probability of regulatory approval and the related costs are expected to be recoverable through the commercialization of the product. In connection with the decision to capitalize such inventory, we evaluate among other factors any identified risks or concerns with respect to the product candidate safety and efficacy, the status of related discussions with regulatory authorities and the outlook for commercial success, including the existence of current or anticipated competitive products and any reimbursement concerns. In addition, we evaluate any risks associated with the manufacturing of the product candidate as well as considering the remaining shelf life of the inventory in relation to the expected launch date. Upon capitalization, we continue to monitor any changes in these factors. In the event of any significant negative developments, we may be required to impair previously capitalized costs. At December 31, 2009, we had capitalized approximately $258 million of inventory costs related to our late-stage product candidate, Prolia . In the United States, Prolia is currently being reviewed by the FDA for use in the treatment of PMO in women. On February 19, 2010, we announced that the FDA has evaluated the content of our Complete Response submission for Prolia in the treatment of PMO, which we submitted on January 25, 2010, and classified it as a Class 2 resubmission. With the Class 2 designation, the FDA set a corresponding PDUFA action date of July 25, 2010. In addition in December 2009, the CHMP announced a positive opinion for the marketing authorization of Prolia for the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women at increased risk of fractures, and for the treatment of bone loss associated with hormone ablation in men with prostate cancer at increased risk of fractures. If approved by the European Commission, we would receive marketing authorization for Prolia in all EU Member States. The timing of actual launch dates would vary by country based on reimbursement authority approval of pricing which could follow the EMA approval by many months. Income taxes The Company provides for income taxes based on pretax income, applicable tax rates and tax planning opportunities available in the various jurisdictions in which it operates. We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements on a particular tax position are measured based on the largest benefit that has greater than a 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. The amount of UTBs is adjusted as appropriate for changes in facts and circumstances, such as significant amendments to existing tax law, new regulations or interpretations by the taxing authorities, new information obtained during a tax examination, or 86 Table of Contents resolution of an examination. We believe that our estimates for uncertain tax positions are appropriate and sufficient to pay assessments that may result from examinations of our tax returns. We recognize both accrued interest and penalties, where appropriate, related to UTBs in income tax expense. Certain items are included in the Company tax return at different times than they are reflected in the financial statements. Such timing differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets are generally items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in the tax return in future years but for which the Company has already recorded the tax benefit in the financial statements. The Company establishes valuation allowances against its deferred tax assets when the amount of expected future taxable income is not likely to support the use of the deduction or credit. Deferred tax liabilities are either: (i) a tax expense recognized in the financial statements for which payment has been deferred; or (ii) an expense for which the Company has already taken a deduction on the tax return, but has not yet recognized the expense in the financial statements. Our effective tax rate reflects the impact of undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes have been provided because such earnings are intended to be invested indefinitely outside the United States based on our projected cash flow, working capital and long-term investment requirements of our U.S. and foreign operations. If future events, including material changes in estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements necessitate that certain assets associated with these earnings be repatriated to the United States, an additional tax provision and related liability would be required at the applicable U.S. and state marginal income tax rates which could materially impact our future effective tax rate. Our operations are subject to the tax laws, regulations and administrative practices of the United States, U.S. state jurisdictions and other countries in which we do business. Significant changes in these rules could have a material adverse effect on the results of operations. For example, substantial reform of U.S. tax law regarding tax on certain foreign profits could result in an increase in our effective tax rate, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial results. Contingencies In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in various legal proceedings such as intellectual property disputes, contractual disputes, governmental investigations and class action suits. Certain of these proceedings are discussed in Note 20, Contingencies and commitments to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We record accruals for such contingencies to the extent we conclude their occurrence is both probable and estimable. We consider all relevant factors when making assessments regarding these contingencies. While it is not possible to accurately predict or determine the eventual outcome of these items, one or more of these items currently pending could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 
