CIK: 318154
Company Name: AMGEN INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-27


Item 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Forward looking statements This report and other documents we file with the SEC contain forward looking statements that are based on current expectations, estimates, forecasts and projections about us, our future performance, our business or others on our behalf, our beliefs and our management assumptions. In addition, we, or others on our behalf, may make forward looking statements in press releases or written statements, or in our communications and discussions with investors and analysts in the normal course of business through meetings, webcasts, phone calls and conference calls. Words such as expect, anticipate, outlook, could, target, project, intend, plan, believe, seek, estimate, should, may, assume, continue, variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. We describe our respective risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could affect the outcome or results of operations in Item 1A. Risk Factors . We have based our forward looking statements on our management beliefs and assumptions based on information available to our management at the time the statements are made. We caution you that actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed, implied or forecast by our forward looking statements. Reference is made in particular to forward looking statements regarding product sales, reimbursement, expenses, earnings per share ( EPS ), liquidity and capital resources and trends. Except as required under the federal securities laws and the rules and regulations of the SEC, we do not have any intention or obligation to update publicly any forward looking statements after the distribution of this report, whether as a result of new information, future events, changes in assumptions or otherwise. Overview The following management discussion and analysis ( MD&A ) is intended to assist the reader in understanding the business of Amgen. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We are a global biotechnology company that discovers, develops, manufactures and markets human therapeutics based on advances in cellular and molecular biology. Our mission is to serve patients. As a science-based, patient-focused organization, we discover and develop innovative therapies to treat grievous illness. We operate in one business segment human therapeutics. Therefore, our results of operations are discussed on a consolidated basis. We primarily earn revenues and income and generate cash from sales of human therapeutic products in the areas of supportive cancer care, nephrology and inflammation. Our principal products include Aranesp , EPOGEN , Neulasta /NEUPOGEN and ENBREL all of which are sold in the United States. ENBREL is marketed under a co-promotion agreement with Wyeth in the United States and Canada. Our international product sales consist principally of European sales of Aranesp and Neulasta /NEUPOGEN . For additional information about our principal products, their approved indications and where they are marketed, see Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates . We operate in a highly regulated industry and various U.S. and foreign regulatory bodies have substantial authority over how we conduct our business in those countries. Government authorities in the United States and in other countries regulate the manufacturing and marketing of our products and our ongoing R&D activities. (See Government Regulation. ) For example, prior to obtaining regulatory approval to market a product, we must conduct extensive clinical studies designed to establish the safety and effectiveness of the product candidate for use in humans in the indications sought. Furthermore, in order to maintain regulatory approval to market a product, we may be required to conduct further clinical trials and to provide additional information on safety and effectiveness. The regulatory environment is evolving and there is increased scrutiny on drug safety and increased authority being granted to regulatory bodies, in particular the FDA, to assist in ensuring the safety of therapeutic products, which may lead to fewer products being approved by the FDA or other regulatory bodies or 70 Table of Contents additional safety-related requirements. Safety signals, trends, adverse events or results from clinical trials, studies or meta-analyses performed by us or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators) or from the marketed use of our products may expand safety labeling, restrict the use for our approved products or may result in additional regulatory requirements, such as requiring risk management activities, including a REMS, and/or additional or more extensive clinical trials as part of PMCs or a pharmacovigilance program. (See Item 1. Business Key Developments and Item 1. Business Postmarketing Safety Activities . ) Most patients receiving our products are covered by either government and/or private payor healthcare programs. The reimbursement environment is evolving with greater emphasis on cost containment. For example, we believe that the new U.S. presidential administration, together with Congress, will shape U.S. healthcare policy in the coming months and years, and we expect that healthcare reform efforts could include long-term changes to coverage and reimbursement that may have a significant impact on our business. Furthermore, due to the increasing expectations and demands of healthcare payors, we believe that we and others in our industry will be under increased pressure to further demonstrate the efficacy and economic value of our products. Therefore, sales of our products are and will continue to be affected by the availability and extent of reimbursement from third-party payors, including government and private insurance plans and administration of those programs. Governments may regulate access to, prices or reimbursement levels of our products to control costs or to affect levels of use of our products and private insurers may be influenced by government reimbursement methodologies. Worldwide use of our products may be affected by these cost containment pressures and cost shifting from governments and private insurers to healthcare providers or patients in response to ongoing initiatives to reduce or reallocate healthcare expenditures. Further, safety signals, trends, adverse events or results from clinical trials, studies or meta-analyses or from the marketed use of our products may negatively impact worldwide reimbursement for our products. For additional information on reimbursement and its impact on our business, see Item 1. Business Reimbursement . For the year ended December 31, 2008, our total revenues were $15.0 billion and net income was $4.2 billion, or $3.90 per share on a diluted basis. In addition to the negative impact of the regulatory and reimbursement developments on sales of our ESA products, as discussed below, our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2008 were negatively impacted by charges of $288 million for legal settlements and $148 million in connection with our previously announced restructuring plan. As of December 31, 2008, cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were $9.6 billion, of which approximately $8.8 billion was generated from operations in foreign tax jurisdictions and is intended for use in our foreign operations. If these funds were repatriated for use in the United States, we would be required to pay additional U.S. and state income taxes at the applicable marginal tax rates. Our total debt outstanding was $10.2 billion as of December 31, 2008, of which $1.0 billion is due in November 2009. Our cash flow from operations was $6.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008. Our worldwide product sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 were $14.7 billion representing an increase of $376 million, or 3%, over product sales for the year ended December 31, 2007. This increase reflects growth primarily in ENBREL and Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales significantly offset by a decline in U.S. Aranesp sales. Product sales in the United States for the year ended December 31, 2008 totaled $11.5 billion and were relatively unchanged from 2007 as the decline in Aranesp sales, in particular in the supportive cancer care setting, was offset by the overall growth in our other products. The decline in sales of Aranesp reflects a decrease in demand resulting from various regulatory and reimbursement developments which principally occurred in the second half of 2007, additional product label changes in 2008 and, to a lesser extent, loss of segment share as discussed below. International product sales totaled $3.2 billion, reflecting an increase of 13% over 2007. International product sales comprised 22% of total product sales in 2008 compared to 20% in 2007 and consisted principally of European sales of Aranesp and Neulasta /NEUPOGEN . Growth in international product sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 was principally driven by favorable foreign currency exchange rate changes, which totaled $213 million for the year, and sales of Neulasta /NEUPOGEN . Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes for the year ended December 31, 2008, worldwide product sales increased 1% and international product sales increased 5%. 71 Table of Contents Beginning in late 2008 and continuing into 2009, foreign currency rates have also been experiencing extreme volatility. Changes in foreign currency rates result in increases or decreases in our reported international product sales. However, the benefit or detriment of any resulting increases or decreases that movements in foreign currency exchange rates have on our international product sales are largely offset by corresponding increases or decreases in our international operating expenses and as a result of our related foreign currency hedging activities. Our hedging activities seek to offset the impact, both positive and negative, that foreign currency exchange rate changes may have on our net income by hedging our net foreign currency exposure, primarily with respect to the Euro. As discussed in more detail in Item 1. Business Key Developments, certain of our products, principally our marketed ESA products, have experienced a number of regulatory and reimbursement challenges, including safety-related revisions to product labels and the loss of or significant restrictions on reimbursement. The developments with respect to our marketed ESA products have had a material adverse impact on Aranesp sales, in particular, in the U.S. supportive cancer care setting. Furthermore, our ESA products will continue to face future challenges. For example, in response to the FDA request, we have submitted a proposed REMS for the class of ESA products. We believe that a REMS program for our ESA products could have a material adverse impact on the future sales of Aranesp , especially in the U.S. supportive cancer care setting. Additionally, future Aranesp sales could also be materially adversely impacted by further changes in reimbursement, including as a result of future regulatory developments. In addition, certain of our marketed products are also under increased competitive pressures, including from biosimilar and other products in Europe, which compete or are expected to compete with Aranesp , Neulasta and NEUPOGEN , as well as our marketed products in the United States, including ENBREL. In addition, capital and credit markets have been experiencing extreme volatility and disruption, particularly during the latter part of 2008 and the beginning of 2009. We are working to manage our business effectively despite the unprecedented conditions in the financial markets both in the United States and around the world. To date, these macro economic challenges have not affected us to a large degree. The extent and/or the duration of any potential adverse economic impact that such financial disruption may have on our third-party payors, including governments and private insurance plans, wholesale distributors, customers, service providers and suppliers is unclear. However, it may result in reduced demand for our products. (See Item 1A. Risk Factors The volatility of the current financial markets and the general economic slowdown may magnify certain risks that affect our business. ) As a result of the challenges facing certain of our products and, in particular, the regulatory and reimbursement developments involving our marketed ESA products that began in 2007 and their resulting impact on our operations, on August 15, 2007, we announced a plan to restructure our worldwide operations in order to improve our cost structure while continuing to make significant R&D investments and build the framework for our future growth. Key components of our restructuring plan initially included: (i) worldwide staff reductions aggregating approximately 2,500 positions, (ii) rationalization of our worldwide network of manufacturing facilities in order to gain cost efficiencies while continuing to meet future commercial and clinical demand for our products and product candidates and, to a lesser degree, changes to certain R&D capital projects and (iii) abandoning leases primarily for certain R&D facilities that will not be used in our operations. Through December 31, 2008, we have completed substantially all of the actions initially included in our restructuring plan, including the divestiture of certain less significant marketed products discussed below. During 2008, we identified certain additional initiatives designed to further assist in improving our cost structure, including outsourcing certain non-core business functions, most notably certain of our information systems infrastructure services, as well as abandoning leases for certain additional facilities that will no longer be used in our operations. The estimated cost of these additional initiatives is $95 million to $135 million. As a result of these additional initiatives and certain minor changes in the expected costs for the actions initially included in our restructuring plan, the total charges currently expected to be incurred in connection with our restructuring plan, including related implementation costs, has been increased to $950 million to $985 million, as compared to our prior estimate of $775 million to $825 million as of December 31, 2007. Through December 31, 2008 we have incurred $887 million of these costs and estimate that all remaining amounts will be incurred through 2009. Such cost estimates and amounts incurred are net of amounts recovered from our ENBREL co-promotion partner, Wyeth. 72 Table of Contents In September 2008, we entered into an agreement with Biovitrum whereby they acquired from us the marketed biologic therapeutic products Kepivance (palifermin) and Stemgen (ancestim), and also obtained from us a worldwide exclusive license to Kineret (anakinra) for its current approved indication. In connection with the disposal of these less significant marketed products, we incurred a $10 million loss. For the year ended December 31, 2008, worldwide product sales for these marketed products were approximately $70 million. There are many factors that affect us and our industry in general, including, among others, those relating to increased complexity and cost of R&D due, in part, to greater scrutiny of clinical trials with respect to safety which may lead to fewer treatments being approved by the FDA or other regulatory bodies and/or safety-related label changes for approved products; increasingly intense competition for marketed products and product candidates; reimbursement changes; healthcare provider prescribing behavior, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; complex and expanding regulatory requirements; and intellectual property protection. (See Item 1. Business and Item 1A. Risk Factors for further information on these economic and industry-wide factors and their impact and potential impact on our business.) Results of Operations Product sales For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, worldwide product sales and total product sales by geographic region were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2008 Change 2007 Change 2006 Aranesp $ 3,137 (13 )% $ 3,614 (12 )% $ 4,121 EPOGEN 2,456 (1 )% 2,489 (1 )% 2,511 Neulasta /NEUPOGEN 4,659 9 % 4,277 9 % 3,923 ENBREL 3,598 11 % 3,230 12 % 2,879 Sensipar 597 29 % 463 44 % 321 Other 240 1 % 238 131 % 103 Total product sales $ 14,687 3 % $ 14,311 3 % $ 13,858 Total U.S. $ 11,460 0 % $ 11,443 0 % $ 11,397 Total International 3,227 13 % 2,868 17 % 2,461 Total product sales $ 14,687 3 % $ 14,311 3 % $ 13,858 Product sales are influenced by a number of factors, including demand, third-party reimbursement availability and policies, government programs, regulatory developments or guidelines, clinical trial outcomes, clinical practice, contracting and pricing strategies, wholesaler and end-user inventory management practices, patient population growth, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, general economic conditions, new product launches and indications, competitive products, product supply and acquisitions. (See Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates for a discussion of our principal products and their approved indications.) Total product sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 increased 3%. This increase reflects growth primarily in ENBREL and Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales significantly offset by a decline in U.S. Aranesp sales. Product sales in the United States for the year ended December 31, 2008 totaled $11.5 billion and were relatively unchanged from 2007 as the decline in Aranesp sales was offset by the overall growth in other products. International product sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 totaled $3.2 billion reflecting an increase of 13% over 2007. International product sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 reflect favorable foreign currency exchange rate changes of $213 million. Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes for the year ended December 31, 2008, total product sales increased 1% and international product sales increased 5%. 73 Table of Contents Aranesp For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, total Aranesp sales by geographic region were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2008 Change 2007 Change 2006 Aranesp U.S. $ 1,651 (23 )% $ 2,154 (23 )% $ 2,790 Aranesp International 1,486 2 % 1,460 10 % 1,331 Total Aranesp $ 3,137 (13 )% $ 3,614 (12 )% $ 4,121 The decrease in U.S. Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 reflects the negative impact on demand, primarily in the supportive cancer care setting, of physician conformance to regulatory and reimbursement developments which principally occurred in the second half of 2007, additional product label changes which occurred in 2008, and to a lesser extent, loss of segment share. The decline in demand was partially offset by an increase in the average net sales price. In addition, U.S. sales of Aranesp for the year ended December 31, 2008 benefited from a slight change in an accounting estimate related to product sales return reserves. The regulatory and reimbursement developments negatively impacting sales, discussed in more detail in Item 1. Business Key Developments , include (i) the loss of Aranesp for use in the treatment of AoC in 2007 (ii) the March 9, 2007, November 8, 2007, March 7, 2008 and August 6, 2008 product safety-related label changes in the United States, and (iii) the CMS Decision Memorandum issued in July 2007, which significantly restricted Medicare reimbursement for use of Aranesp in CIA and which we believe has also negatively impacted Aranesp use in CIA for patients covered by private insurance plans. The increase in international Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 is due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, which positively impacted sales growth by approximately $104 million. Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes, international Aranesp sales decreased 5%. This decrease reflects dosing conservatism in the oncology segment and pricing pressures across all ESAs in Europe, which has resulted in an overall decrease in the ESA market. Through December 31, 2008, biosimilars and other recently introduced marketed products in Europe have not had a significant impact on total international Aranesp segment share. The decrease in U.S. Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 was principally driven by a decline in demand. This decline primarily reflects physician conformance to label and reimbursement changes that occurred throughout 2007, primarily in the supportive cancer care setting, which are discussed in more detail in Item 1. Business Key Developments, and, to a lesser extent, loss of segment share. The increase in international Aranesp sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 was primarily driven by favorable foreign currency exchange rate changes of $100 million. Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes, international Aranesp sales increased 2%. International sales were negatively impacted in Europe by dosing conservatism in the oncology segment and pricing pressures across all ESAs. In addition to the factors mentioned in the Product sales section above, future worldwide Aranesp sales will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: regulatory developments, including those resulting from: the proposed REMS for the class of ESAs, which we have submitted to the FDA, or other risk management activities undertaken by us or required by the FDA or other regulatory authorities; product labeling changes occurring in October 2008 in Europe for the class of ESAs, including Aranesp , by the European Commission and the potential for further changes; future product label changes; reimbursement developments, including those resulting from: government and/or third-party payor reaction to regulatory developments, including the proposed REMS, which we have submitted to the FDA, and recent or future product label changes; 74 Table of Contents current or future cost containment pressures by third-party payors, including governments and private insurance plans; adverse events or results from clinical trials or studies or meta-analyses performed by us, including our pharmacovigilance clinical trials, or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators), such as those referred to in Item 1. Business Key Developments , which have and could further impact product safety labeling, negatively impact healthcare provider prescribing behavior, use of our product, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our product; our ability to maintain worldwide segment share and differentiate Aranesp from current and potential future competitive products, including J&J Epoetin alfa product marketed in the United States and certain other locations outside of the United States and other competitors products outside of the United States, including biosimilar products that have been or are expected to be launched in the future; our current and future contracting and related pricing strategies; patient population growth; and development of new treatments for cancer and future chemotherapy treatments. For example, targeted therapies and other treatments that are less myelosuppressive may require less Aranesp . Certain of the above factors could have a material adverse impact on future sales of Aranesp . See Item 1. Business Key Developments and Item 1A. Risk Factors herein for further discussion of certain of the above factors that could impact our future product sales. EPOGEN For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, total EPOGEN sales were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2008 Change 2007 Change 2006 EPOGEN U.S. $ 2,456 (1 )% $ 2,489 (1 )% $ 2,511 The 1% decrease in EPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 was primarily due to a decrease in demand, reflecting a decline in the average net sales price. The increase in demand resulting from patient population growth was offset by a decline in dose/utilization in certain settings. The decline in dose/utilization is related to the ESA label changes and the CMS revision to its EMP, which became effective January 1, 2008, as discussed in more detail in Item 1. Business Key Developments. We believe that the EMP implementation significantly impacted physician behavior resulting in declines in dosing trends, as particularly noted in the quarter of implementation. However, this dose decline subsequently moderated throughout 2008. The decline in EPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 reflects a decrease in demand due to a decline in dose/utilization, partially offset by patient population growth. The decline in dose/utilization was due to physician behavior in making treatment and dosing decisions in response to regulatory and reimbursement developments that occurred throughout 2007, including anticipation of the implementation of the CMS revision to its EMP, as discussed in more detail in Item 1. Business Key Developments. The decline in sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 was partially offset by favorable changes in wholesaler inventory and spillover. Spillover is a result of the Company contractual relationship with J&J (see Note 1, Summary of significant accounting policies Product sales to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion). In addition to the factors mentioned in the Product sales section above, future EPOGEN sales will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: reimbursement developments, including those resulting from: changes in healthcare providers prescribing behavior resulting in dose fluctuations due to the CMS revisions to its EMP, which became effective January 1, 2008; 75 Table of Contents the federal government reaction to regulatory developments, including recent or future product label changes; changes in reimbursement rates or changes in the basis for reimbursement by the federal and state governments, including Medicare and Medicaid; cost containment pressures from the federal and state governments on healthcare providers; regulatory developments, including those resulting from: future product label changes; risk management activities, including a REMS, undertaken by us or required by the FDA; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our products, including changes in medical guidelines and legislative actions; adverse events or results from clinical trials or studies or meta-analyses performed by us, including our pharmacovigilance clinical trials, or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators), such as those referred to in Item 1. Business Key Developments , which have and could further impact product safety labeling, negatively impact healthcare provider prescribing behavior, use of our product, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; our current and future contracting and related pricing strategies; changes in future patient population growth or dose/utilization; and development of new modalities to treat anemia associated with CRF. See Item 1. Business Key Developments and Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of certain of the above factors that could impact our future product sales. Neulasta /NEUPOGEN For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, total Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales by geographic region were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2008 Change 2007 Change 2006 Neulasta U.S. $ 2,505 7 % $ 2,351 6 % $ 2,217 NEUPOGEN U.S. 896 4 % 861 4 % 830 U.S. Neulasta /NEUPOGEN Total 3,401 6 % 3,212 5 % 3,047 Neulasta International 813 25 % 649 32 % 493 NEUPOGEN International 445 7 % 416 9 % 383 International Neulasta /NEUPOGEN Total 1,258 18 % 1,065 22 % 876 Total Worldwide Neulasta /NEUPOGEN $ 4,659 9 % $ 4,277 9 % $ 3,923 The increase in U.S. Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 primarily reflects an increase in demand for Neulasta driven by an increase in the average net sales price partially offset by a slight decline in units sold. The increase in international Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 reflects increased demand driven by continued conversion from NEUPOGEN to Neulasta as well as changes in foreign currency exchange rates, which positively impacted the growth in combined international sales by $86 million. Excluding the favorable impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes, international Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales increased 10% versus the prior year. The increase in U.S. Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 was driven by demand for Neulasta primarily due to segment growth and, to a lesser degree, favorable changes in wholesaler inventory levels. The increase in international Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales for the year ended December 31, 76 Table of Contents 2007 was driven by the continued conversion to Neulasta from NEUPOGEN and changes in foreign exchange, which positively impacted the growth in combined international sales by $74 million. Excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange rate changes, combined international Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales increased 13%. In addition to the factors mentioned in the Product sales section above, future worldwide Neulasta /NEUPOGEN sales will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: penetration of existing segments; competitive products or therapies, including biosimilar products that have been or may be approved and launched in the EU (see Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates for additional discussion); the availability, extent and access to reimbursement by government and third-party payors; adverse events or results from clinical trials or studies or meta-analyses performed by us or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators), which could impact product safety labeling and may negatively impact healthcare provider prescribing behavior, use of our products, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our products; cost containment pressures from governments and private insurers on healthcare providers; our current and future contracting and related pricing strategies; patient population growth; and development of new treatments for cancer and future chemotherapy treatments. For example, targeted therapies and other treatments that are less myelosuppressive, and changes in chemotherapy usage patterns, may require less Neulasta /NEUPOGEN . See Item 1. Business Key Developments and Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of certain of the above factors that could impact our future product sales. ENBREL For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, total ENBREL sales by geographic region were as follows (dollar amounts in millions): 2008 Change 2007 Change 2006 ENBREL U.S. $ 3,389 11 % $ 3,052 12 % $ 2,736 ENBREL International 209 17 % 178 24 % 143 Total ENBREL $ 3,598 11 % $ 3,230 12 % $ 2,879 ENBREL sales growth for the year ended December 31, 2008 reflects higher demand principally due to increases in average net sales price. ENBREL sales were also favorably impacted by approximately $100 million due to a change in our distribution model for ENBREL. Previously, ENBREL was shipped directly to pharmacies. However, beginning in the three months ended March 31, 2008, we commenced using a wholesaler distributor model, similar to our other marketed products. Also, ENBREL sales growth for the year ended December 31, 2008 was affected by share declines in the rheumatology and dermatology segments in the United States compared to the prior year due to increased competitive activity. However, sales growth continued in both rheumatology and dermatology, and ENBREL continues to maintain a leading position in both segments. ENBREL sales growth for the year ended December 31, 2007 was driven by demand due to increases in both patients and average net sales price. While ENBREL continued to maintain a leading position in both rheumatology and dermatology, the sales growth during the year ended December 31, 2007 was affected by slight share declines in the United States in both segments compared to the prior year due to increased competitive activity. 77 Table of Contents In addition to the factors mentioned in the Product sales section above, future worldwide ENBREL sales will be dependent, in part, on such factors as: the effects of competing products or therapies, including new competitive products coming to market, such as J&J CNTO 1275 (ustekinumab) and CNTO 148 (golimumab) (see Item 1. Business Marketed Products and Selected Product Candidates ) and, in part, our ability to differentiate ENBREL based on its safety profile and efficacy; recent or future product label changes; risk management activities, including a REMS, undertaken by us or required by the FDA or other regulatory authorities; growth in the rheumatology and dermatology segments; the availability, extent and access to reimbursement by government and third-party payors; adverse events or results from clinical trials or studies or meta-analyses performed by us or by others (including our licensees or independent investigators), which could impact product safety labeling and may negatively impact healthcare provider prescribing behavior, use of our product, regulatory or private healthcare organization medical guidelines and reimbursement practices; governmental or private organization regulations or guidelines relating to the use of our product; cost containment pressures from governments and private insurers on healthcare providers; current and future contracting and related pricing strategies; patient population growth; and penetration of existing segments. See Item 1. Business Key Developments and Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of certain of the above factors that could impact our future product sales. Selected operating expenses The following table summarizes our product sales and operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 (dollar amounts in millions): 2008 Change 2007 Change 2006 Product sales $ 14,687 3% $ 14,311 3% $ 13,858 Operating expenses: Cost of sales (excludes amortization of acquired intangible assets) $ 2,296 (10)% $ 2,548 22% $ 2,095 % of product sales 16% 18% 15% Research and development $ 3,030 (7)% $ 3,266 (3)% $ 3,366 % of product sales 21% 23% 24% Selling, general and administrative $ 3,789 13% $ 3,361 0% $ 3,366 % of product sales 26% 23% 24% Amortization of acquired intangible assets $ 294 $ 298 $ 370 Write-off of acquired in-process research and development $ $ 590 $ 1,231 Other charges $ 380 $ 728 $ Cost of sales Cost of sales, which excludes the amortization of acquired intangible assets, decreased 10% for the year ended December 31, 2008. The decrease was primarily driven by lower restructuring charges incurred in 2008, as 78 Table of Contents discussed below. In addition, the decline in cost of sales was due to lower inventory write-offs and lower cost ENBREL, partially offset by higher sales volume and excess capacity charges. Cost of sales increased 22% for the year ended December 31, 2007, primarily driven by restructuring charges, as discussed below, product mix due to higher sales of ENBREL, excess capacity charges and the write-off of excess inventory related to certain new product presentations and due to changing regulatory and reimbursement environments. Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2008 included $6 million of restructuring charges. Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2007 included $150 million of restructuring charges, primarily related to accelerated depreciation resulting from the decision to accelerate closure of one of our ENBREL commercial bulk manufacturing operations in connection with the rationalization of our worldwide network of manufacturing facilities. See Note 2, Restructuring to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Research and development R&D costs are expensed as incurred and primarily include salaries, benefits and other staff-related costs; facilities and overhead costs; clinical trial and related clinical manufacturing costs; contract services and other outside costs; information systems costs and amortization of acquired technology used in R&D with alternative future uses. R&D expenses include costs incurred under R&D arrangements with our corporate partners, such as activities performed on behalf of KA, and costs associated with collaborative R&D and in-licensing arrangements, including upfront fees and milestones paid to collaboration partners in connection with technologies that have no alternative future use. Net payment or reimbursement of R&D costs for R&D collaborations are recognized as the obligation has been incurred or as we become entitled to the cost recovery. R&D expenses decreased 7% for the year ended December 31, 2008, which was principally due to $102 million of lower staff-related costs and discretionary expenses; $133 million of lower clinical trial costs; $100 million of cost recoveries derived from our licensing agreements, primarily with Daiichi Sankyo and Takeda and a $16 million decline in restructuring-related costs, as discussed below, partially offset by a $100 million expense in the year ended December 31, 2008 for the upfront payment under our licensing agreement with Kyowa Hakko. Our clinical trial costs were lower for the year ended December 31, 2008 primarily due to the completion of enrollment of our large denosumab clinical trials and the related significant costs associated with site initiation and patient enrollment no longer being incurred, partially offset by increased clinical costs for our emerging pipeline. R&D expenses decreased 3% for the year ended December 31, 2007, which was primarily attributable to reductions in in-licensing expenses of approximately $95 million primarily due to our agreement with Cytokinetics entered into in 2006 and a $50 million benefit in 2007 from our licensing agreement with Daiichi Sankyo. These decreases in R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2007 were partially offset by $19 million of restructuring costs, as discussed below. For the year ended December 31, 2008, restructuring-related R&D costs totaled $3 million. R&D expense for the year ended December 31, 2007 include $19 million of restructuring costs, primarily comprised of $38 million in charges related to asset impairments offset by a $19 million benefit associated with the reversal of previously accrued expenses for bonuses and stock-based compensation awards, which were forfeited as a result of the employees termination. Selling, general and administrative Selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expenses are primarily comprised of salaries, benefits and other staff-related costs associated with sales and marketing, finance, legal and other administrative personnel; facilities and overhead costs; outside marketing, advertising and legal expenses and other general and administrative costs. In connection with a co-promotion agreement, we and Wyeth market and sell ENBREL in the United States and Canada and Wyeth is paid a share of the related profits, as defined. The share of ENBREL profits owed to Wyeth is included in SG&A expenses. 79 Table of Contents SG&A expense increased 13% for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to 2007, in part due to the impact of our restructuring plan which contributed $161 million to the increase in expenses, as discussed below. The increase was also due to higher expense associated with the Wyeth profit share of $211 million, product promotional spending of $39 million and staff-related costs of $94 million, partially offset by lower litigation expense of $50 million. For the years ended December 31, 2008 and 2007, the expense associated with the Wyeth profit share, excluding recoveries recorded as part of our restructuring, as discussed below, was $1,195 million and $984 million, respectively. SG&A remained relatively unchanged for the year ended December 31, 2007. During the year ended December 31, 2007, outside legal costs increased $53 million and outside marketing costs increased approximately $59 million. The increase in outside marketing is primarily due to an increase in the expense associated with the Wyeth profit share, partially offset by reductions in promotion and advertising on marketed products. These increases were offset by approximately $125 million in expense recoveries associated with our restructuring, as discussed below. For the year ended December 31, 2006, the expense associated with the Wyeth profit share was $837 million. See Note 2, Restructuring to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. For the year ended December 31, 2008, we recorded $37 million for certain restructuring charges, which primarily included $17 million in asset impairments, $12 million in loss accruals for leases principally related to certain facilities that will not be used in our business and $9 million in implementation costs associated with certain restructuring initiatives. For the year ended December 31, 2007, we recorded $114 million in cost recoveries for certain restructuring charges, principally with respect to accelerated depreciation, in connection with our co-promotion agreement with Wyeth and $11 million of benefit associated with the reversal of previously accrued expenses for bonuses and stock-based compensation awards, which were forfeited as a result of the employees termination. See Note 2, Restructuring to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Amortization of acquired intangible assets Amortization of acquired intangible assets relates to products technology rights acquired in connection with the Immunex acquisition. For the years ended December 31, 2007 and 2006, amortization expense also included $3 million and $49 million, respectively, related to the impairment of a non-ENBREL related intangible asset previously acquired in the Immunex acquisition. Write-off of acquired in-process research and development For acquisitions prior to January 1, 2009, the fair value of acquired IPR&D projects, which have no alternative future use and which have not reached technological feasibility at the date of acquisition, were immediately expensed (see Recent accounting pronouncements below). In 2007, we wrote-off $270 million and $320 million of acquired IPR&D related to the acquisitions of Alantos and Ilypsa, respectively. The Alantos IPR&D amount is related to an orally administered treatment for type II diabetes that, at the date of acquisition, was in phase 2a clinical trials. The Ilypsa IPR&D amount is related to a phosphate binder that, at the date of acquisition, was in phase 2 clinical trials for the treatment of hyperphosphatemia in CKD patients on hemodialysis. In 2006, we wrote-off $1.1 billion and $130 million of acquired IPR&D related to the acquisitions of Abgenix and Avidia, respectively. The Abgenix IPR&D amount is primarily comprised of approximately $770 million related to the rights which we did not own pursuant to our agreement with Abgenix to jointly develop and commercialize panitumumab and approximately $330 million related to a royalty that we would have owed to Abgenix with respect to future sales of denosumab as a result of using certain of Abgenix patented technologies in the development of this product candidate. Panitumumab was Abgenix fully human monoclonal antibody which, at acquisition, was in phase 2/3 clinical trials for the treatment of certain types of cancer. Denosumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody that is a key mediator of osteoclast formation, function and survival and was in phase 2/3 clinical trials for various types of bone diseases at the time of the Abgenix acquisition. There were no individually significant IPR&D projects acquired and written off in the acquisition of Avidia. 80 Table of Contents We used the income method to determine the estimated fair values of acquired IPR&D, which uses a discounted cash flow model and applies a probability weighting based on estimates of successful product development and commercialization to estimated future net cash flows resulting from projected revenues and related costs. These success rates take into account the stages of completion and the risks surrounding successful development and commercialization of the underlying product candidates. These cash flows were then discounted to present value using a discount rate of 10%. The estimated after-tax cash flows were probability weighted at success rates of 38% for the Alantos product candidate, 77% for the Ilypsa product candidate, and 43% to 85% for the Abgenix product candidates. The incremental R&D expenses assumed to be incurred to obtain necessary regulatory approval for the Alantos and Ilypsa product candidates are immaterial. The incremental R&D expenses assumed to be incurred to obtain necessary regulatory approvals for the various indications of panitumumab were estimated at the time of acquisition at approximately $300 million and would be incurred through 2011. The elimination of the royalty on potential future sales of denosumab did not result in us incurring any incremental R&D expenses. The above assumptions were used solely for the purposes of estimating fair values of these product candidates as of the date of their acquisition. However, we cannot provide assurance that the underlying assumptions used to forecast the cash flows or the timely and successful completion of development and commercialization will materialize, as estimated. The major risks and uncertainties associated with the timely and successful completion of development and commercialization of these product candidates are our ability to confirm their safety and efficacy based on data from clinical trials, our ability to obtain necessary regulatory approvals and our ability to successfully complete these tasks within budgeted costs. We are not able to market a human therapeutic without obtaining regulatory approvals, and such approvals require completing clinical trials that demonstrate a product candidate is safe and effective. Consequently, the eventual realized value of the acquired IPR&D may vary from its estimated value at the date of acquisition. At the date of acquisition, we intended to develop panitumumab for treatment of various types of cancer. Panitumumab received FDA approval in late September 2006 for the treatment of mCRC after disease progression on, or following, fluoropyrimidine-, oxaliplatin- and irinotecan- containing chemotherapy regimens and is marketed under the trademark Vectibix . In December 2007, the European Commission granted a conditional marketing authorization for Vectibix as monotherapy for the treatment of patients with EGFr expressing mCRC with non-mutated (wild-type) KRAS genes after failure of standard chemotherapy regimens. This conditional approval is reviewed annually by the CHMP, and in December 2008 we agreed as a condition of the renewal of approval to conduct an additional clinical trial in the existing approved indication. We are continuing to develop or are evaluating plans to develop Vectibix in all of the remaining indications we had intended at the date of acquisition. However, since the acquisition, there have been several events that have affected the development plans for Vectibix , such as the results of our PACCE trial and KRAS biomarker analysis. Because of these developments, our expected time to obtain regulatory approvals for the remaining indications has been delayed compared to our original expectations. Our development efforts with respect to denosumab are continuing. In December 2008, we submitted a BLA to the FDA for denosumab for the treatment and prevention of PMO in women and bone loss in patients undergoing hormone ablation for either prostate or breast cancer. On February 18, 2009, the FDA accepted our BLA and informed us that it will target an FDA action within ten months of the BLA submission date. Additionally, in January 2009, we submitted an application to the EMEA for the approval of denosumab for treatment of PMO in women and treatment of bone loss associated with hormone ablation therapy in patients with breast and prostate cancer. In addition, we are continuing to develop the product candidate acquired in the Alantos acquisition. We have reviewed data from recently-completed phase 1 and 2 clinical trials for AMG 223, the product candidate acquired in the Ilypsa acquisition. The results were consistent with what is likely required for registration of a phosphate-binding therapy. However, in the context of our overall development portfolio, the Company will be reviewing other options for the commercialization of this investigational product. Other charges As discussed in Note 2, Restructuring to the Consolidated Financial Statements, on August 15, 2007, we announced a plan to restructure our worldwide operations in order to improve our cost structure while continuing 81 Table of Contents to make significant R&D investments and build the framework for our future growth. As a result of this restructuring plan, we recorded in Other charges in 2008 and 2007 expenses for staff separation costs of $7 million and $209 million, respectively, asset impairments of $36 million and $366 million, respectively, and charges of $49 million and $119 million, respectively, primarily related to the loss accruals for leases for certain facilities that will not be used in our business. Also, in 2008, the Company recorded in Other charges loss accruals for settlements of certain commercial legal proceedings aggregating $288 million, principally related to the settlement of the Ortho Biotech antitrust suit. In addition, in 2007, the Company recorded a $34 million loss accrual for an ongoing commercial legal proceeding. Income taxes Our effective tax rate was 20.1%, 20.1% and 26.6% for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Our effective tax rate for 2008 remained relatively unchanged from 2007. Although the 2007 effective tax rate benefited from the favorable resolution of certain income tax examinations, this benefit was substantially offset by the write-off of nondeductible acquired IPR&D costs, resulting in a comparable effective tax rate between the two years. Our effective tax rate for 2007 decreased over 2006 primarily due to the lesser amount of the write-off of nondeductible acquired IPR&D costs in 2007 than in 2006 and the greater tax benefit from the favorable resolutions of our prior years income tax examinations in 2007 than in 2006. As permitted in Accounting Principles Board Opinion ( APB ) No. 23, Accounting for Income Taxes Special Areas , we do not provide for U.S. income taxes on undistributed earnings of our foreign operations that are intended to be invested indefinitely outside of the United States. (See Note 5, Income taxes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.) Recent accounting pronouncements In May 2008, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued FASB Staff Position ( FSP ) No. APB 14-1, Accounting for Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash upon Conversion (Including Partial Cash Settlement) ( FSP APB 14-1 ) that changes the method of accounting for convertible debt securities that require or permit settlement in cash either in whole or in part upon conversion, including our convertible debt securities (see Note 6, Financing arrangements to the Consolidated Financial Statements). We will adopt FSP APB 14-1, effective January 1, 2009, and retrospectively apply this change in accounting to all prior periods presented for which we had applicable outstanding convertible debt, as required by this new standard. Under this new method of accounting, the debt and equity components of our convertible debt securities will be bifurcated and accounted for separately in a manner that will result in recognizing interest expense on these securities at effective rates reflective of what we would have incurred had we issued nonconvertible debt with otherwise similar terms. The equity component of our convertible debt securities will be included in Stockholders equity on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and, accordingly, the initial carrying values of these debt securities will be reduced. Our net income for financial reporting purposes will be reduced by recognizing the accretion of the reduced carrying values of our convertible debt securities to their face amounts as additional non-cash interest expense. The adoption of FSP APB 14-1 will result in a reduction in the carrying value of our convertible debt by approximately $824 million as of December 31, 2008 and will increase interest expense, net by approximately $234 million, $168 million and $197 million, for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. This new standard will also materially increase interest expense in future periods that our convertible debt is outstanding, but will have no impact on past or future cash flows. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141(R), Business Combinations ( SFAS 141(R) ) and SFAS No. 160, Accounting and Reporting of Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements an amendment of ARB No. 51 ( SFAS 160 ). These standards will significantly change the accounting and reporting for business combination transactions and noncontrolling (minority) interests in consolidated financial statements, including capitalizing the fair value of acquired IPR&D at the acquisition date and subsequently testing these assets for impairment. These new standards will be applied prospectively for business combinations 82 Table of Contents that occur on or after January 1, 2009, except that presentation and disclosure requirements of SFAS 160 regarding noncontrolling interests will be applied retrospectively. In June 2008, the FASB ratified EITF Issue No. 07-5, Determining Whether an Instrument (or Embedded Feature) Is Indexed to an Entity Own Stock ( EITF 07-5 ). Equity-linked instruments (or embedded features) that otherwise meet the definition of a derivative as outlined in SFAS No. 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities , are not accounted for as derivatives if certain criteria are met, one of which is that the instrument (or embedded feature) must be indexed to the entity own stock. EITF 07-5 provides guidance on how to determine if equity-linked instruments (or embedded features) such as warrants to purchase our stock, our convertible notes and convertible note hedges are considered indexed to our stock. We will adopt EITF 07-5, effective January 1, 2009, and apply its provisions to outstanding instruments as of that date. The adoption of EITF 07-5 will not have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In December 2007, the FASB ratified EITF No. 07-1, Accounting for Collaborative Agreements ( EITF 07-1 ). EITF 07-1 provides guidance regarding financial statement presentation and disclosure of collaborative arrangements, as defined, which includes certain arrangements the Company has entered into regarding development and commercialization of products and product candidates. EITF 07-1 is effective for the Company as of January 1, 2009, and its adoption will not have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources The following table summarizes selected financial data (in millions): December 31, 2008 2007 Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 9,552 $ 7,151 Total assets 36,443 34,639 Current debt 1,000 2,000 Non-current debt 9,176 9,177 Stockholders equity 20,386 17,869 We believe that existing funds, including those generated from our $2.0 billion debt offering in January 2009, cash generated from operations and existing sources of and access to financing are adequate to satisfy our working capital, capital expenditure and debt service requirements for the foreseeable future. In addition, we plan to opportunistically pursue our stock repurchase programs and other business initiatives, including acquisitions and licensing activities. Our liquidity needs can be met through a variety of sources, including: cash provided by operating activities, sale of marketable securities, borrowings through commercial paper and/or our syndicated credit facility and other debt markets and equity markets. (See Item 1A. Risk Factors Current levels of market volatility are unprecedented and adverse capital and credit market conditions may affect our ability to access cost-effective sources of funding and our investment in marketable securities may be subject to market, interest and credit risk that could reduce their value. ) Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities Of the total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities at December 31, 2008, approximately $8.8 billion was generated from operations in foreign tax jurisdictions and is intended for use in our foreign operations. If these funds were repatriated for use in the United States, we would be required to pay additional U.S. and state income taxes at the applicable marginal tax rates. The primary objectives for our marketable security investment portfolio are liquidity and safety of principal. Investments are made with the objective of achieving the highest rate of return, consistent with these two objectives. Our investment policy limits investments to certain types of debt and money market instruments issued by institutions primarily with investment grade credit ratings and places restrictions on maturities and concentration by type and issuer. 83 Table of Contents Financing arrangements The following table reflects the carrying value of our long-term borrowings under our various financing arrangements as of December 31, 2008 and 2007 (in millions): 2008 2007 0.125% convertible notes due 2011 (2011 Convertible Notes) $ 2,500 $ 2,500 0.375% convertible notes due 2013 (2013 Convertible Notes) 2,500 2,500 Floating rate notes due 2008 (2008 Floating Rate Notes) 2,000 5.85% notes due 2017 (2017 Notes) 1,099 1,099 4.85% notes due 2014 (2014 Notes) 1,000 1,000 4.00% notes due 2009 (2009 Notes) 1,000 999 6.375% notes due 2037 (2037 Notes) 899 899 6.15% notes due 2018 (2018 Notes) 499 6.90% notes due 2038 (2038 Notes) 498 Zero coupon 30 year modified convertible notes due in 2032 (2032 Modified Convertible Notes) 81 80 Other 100 100 Total borrowings 10,176 11,177 Less current portion 1,000 2,000 Total non-current debt $ 9,176 $ 9,177 In May 2008, we issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2018 (the 2018 Notes ) and $500 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2038 (the 2038 Notes ) in a registered offering. The 2018 Notes and 2038 Notes pay interest at fixed annual rates of 6.15% and 6.90%, respectively. The 2018 Notes and 2038 Notes may be redeemed at any time at our option, in whole or in part, at 100% of the principal amount of the notes being redeemed plus accrued interest and a make-whole amount, as defined. In the event of a change in control triggering event, as defined, we may be required to purchase for cash all or a portion of the 2018 Notes and 2038 Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest. Debt issuance costs totaled approximately $6 million and are being amortized over the life of the notes. In May 2007, we issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of floating rate notes due in November 2008 (the 2008 Floating Rate Notes ), $1.1 billion aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2017 (the 2017 Notes ) and $900 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2037 (the 2037 Notes ). The annual interest rate on our 2008 Floating Rate Notes was equal to LIBOR plus 0.08%, which was reset quarterly. The 2017 Notes and 2037 Notes pay interest at fixed annual rates of 5.85% and 6.375%, respectively. The 2017 Notes and 2037 Notes may be redeemed at any time at our option, in whole or in part, at 100% of the principal amount of the notes being redeemed plus accrued interest and a make-whole amount, as defined. In the event of a change in control triggering event, as defined, we may be required to purchase for cash all or a portion of the 2017 Notes and 2037 Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest. A total of $3.2 billion of the net proceeds raised from the issuance of these notes were used to repurchase shares of our common stock under an ASR entered into in May 2007. Upon the receipt of the proceeds from the issuance of the 2018 Notes and 2038 Notes discussed above, in June 2008 we exercised our right to call and retired $1.0 billion of the 2008 Floating Rate Notes which were scheduled to mature in November 2008. The remaining $1.0 billion of the 2008 Floating Rate Notes matured and were retired in November 2008. In February 2006, we issued $2.5 billion principal amount of convertible notes due in 2011 (the 2011 Convertible Notes ) and $2.5 billion principal amount of convertible notes due in 2013 (the 2013 Convertible Notes ). The 2011 Convertible Notes and the 2013 Convertible Notes were issued at par and pay interest at a rate of 0.125% and 0.375%, respectively. The 2011 Convertible Notes and 2013 Convertible Notes may be converted based on an initial conversion rate of 12.5247 shares and 12.5814 shares, respectively, per $1,000 principal amount of notes (which represents an initial conversion price of approximately $79.84 and $79.48 per share, respectively). The 2011 Convertible Notes and 2013 Convertible Notes may only be converted (i) during any 84 Table of Contents calendar quarter if the closing price of our common stock exceeds 130% of the respective conversion price per share during a defined period at the end of the previous quarter, (ii) if we make specified distributions to holders of our common stock or specified corporate transactions occur or (iii) one month prior to the respective maturity date. Upon conversion, a holder would receive (i) cash equal to the lesser of the principal amount of the note or the conversion value, as defined, and (ii) to the extent the conversion value exceeds the principal amount of the note, shares of our common stock, cash or a combination of common stock and cash, at our option (the excess conversion value ). In addition, upon a change in control, as defined, the holders may require us to purchase for cash all or a portion of their notes for 100% of the principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest. See Recent accounting pronouncements above. In connection with the issuance of the 2011 Convertible Notes and 2013 Convertible Notes, a total of $3.0 billion of our common stock was repurchased under our stock repurchase program. Also, concurrent with the issuance of these convertible notes, we purchased convertible note hedges. The convertible note hedges allow us to receive shares of our common stock and/or cash from the counterparties to the transactions equal to the amounts of common stock and/or cash related to the excess conversion value that we would issue and/or pay to the holders of the 2011 Convertible Notes and 2013 Convertible Notes upon conversion. These transactions will terminate at the earlier of the maturity dates of the related notes or the first day none of the related notes remain outstanding due to conversion or otherwise. The cost of the convertible note hedges, which aggregated approximately $1.5 billion, was recorded as a reduction of equity. The net proceeds from the issuance of the 2011 Convertible Notes and 2013 Convertible Notes, the repurchase of our common stock and the purchase of the convertible note hedges was $439 million. Also, concurrent with the issuance of the 2011 Convertible Notes and 2013 Convertible Notes, we sold warrants to acquire shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $107.90 per share. Pursuant to these transactions, warrants for approximately 31.3 million shares of our common stock may be settled in May 2011 and warrants for approximately 31.5 million shares of our common stock may be settled in May 2013 (the settlement dates ). If the average price of our common stock during a defined period ending on or about the respective settlement dates exceeds the exercise price of the warrants, the warrants will be net settled, at our option, in cash or shares of our common stock. Proceeds received from the issuance of the warrants totaled approximately $774 million. As of December 31, 2008, we had $2.2 billion of additional notes outstanding. The notes consisted of (i) $1.0 billion of notes that bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.00% and mature in November of 2009 ( 2009 Notes ), (ii) $1.0 billion of notes that bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.85% and mature in 2014 ( 2014 Notes ), (iii) $100 million of long-term debt securities that bear interest at a fixed rate of 8.125% and mature in 2097 ( Century Notes ) and (iv) zero coupon convertible notes due in 2032 with an accreted value of $81 million and having an aggregate face amount of $105 million and yield to maturity of 1.125%. See Recent accounting pronouncements above. To achieve a desired mix of fixed and floating interest rate debt, we enter into interest rate swap agreements that effectively convert a fixed rate interest coupon to a LIBOR-based floating rate coupon over the life of the respective note. These interest rate swap agreements qualify and are designated as fair value hedges. As of December 31, 2008, we had interest rate swap agreements for our 2009 Notes, 2014 Notes, 2018 Notes and Century Notes, with an aggregate face value of $2.6 billion. As of December 31, 2007, we had interest rate swap agreements for our 2009 Notes, 2014 Notes and Century Notes, with an aggregate face value of $2.1 billion. In addition to the outstanding debt noted above, in January 2009, we issued $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2019 (the 2019 Notes ) and $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2039 (the 2039 Notes ) in a registered offering. The 2019 Notes and 2039 Notes pay interest at fixed annual rates of 5.70% and 6.40%, respectively. The 2019 Notes and 2039 Notes may be redeemed at any time at our option, in whole or in part, at 100% of the principal amount of the notes being redeemed plus accrued interest and a make-whole amount, as defined. In the event of a change in control triggering event, as defined, we may be required to purchase for cash all or a portion of the 2019 Notes and 2039 Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the notes plus accrued interest. Debt issuance costs totaled approximately $12 million and are being amortized over the life of the notes. 85 Table of Contents On April 17, 2008, we filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC, which replaced our previous $1.0 billion shelf registration statement and allows us to issue an unspecified amount of debt securities; common stock; preferred stock; warrants to purchase debt securities, common stock, preferred stock or depository shares; rights to purchase common stock or preferred stock; securities purchase contracts; securities purchase units and depository shares. Under this registration statement, all of the securities available for issuance may be offered from time to time with terms to be determined at the time of issuance. In May 2008, we increased our commercial paper program by $1.3 billion, which provides for unsecured, short-term borrowings of up to an aggregate of $2.5 billion. We also have a $2.5 billion syndicated unsecured revolving credit facility which matures in November 2012 and is available for general corporate purposes, or as a liquidity backstop to our commercial paper program; however, $178 million of such commitment was provided by a subsidiary of Lehman. Lehman declared bankruptcy on September 15, 2008, and the subsidiary participant in our credit facility subsequently declared bankruptcy on October 5, 2008. As a result, we would not anticipate the ability to access this specific commitment provided by Lehman in the future. No amounts were outstanding under the commercial paper program or credit facility as of December 31, 2008. As of December 31, 2008, we have $400 million remaining under a shelf registration statement that was established in 1997. In connection with this shelf registration, we established a $400 million medium-term note program. All of the $400 million of debt securities available for issuance may be offered from time to time under our medium-term note program with terms to be determined at the time of issuance. As of December 31, 2008, no securities were outstanding under the $400 million medium-term note program. Certain of our financing arrangements contain non-financial covenants and we were in compliance with all applicable covenants as of December 31, 2008. None of our financing arrangements contain any financial covenants. Our outstanding convertible notes and other outstanding long-term debt are rated A+ with a stable outlook by Standard & Poor s, A3 with a stable outlook by Moody Investors Service, Inc. and A with a stable outlook by Fitch, Inc. Cash flows The following table summarizes our cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 (in millions): 2008 2007 2006 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 5,988 $ 5,401 $ 5,389 Net cash used in investing activities (3,165 ) (1,992 ) (5,131 ) Net cash used in financing activities (3,073 ) (2,668 ) (815 ) Operating Cash provided by operating activities has been and is expected to continue to be our primary recurring source of funds. Cash provided by operating activities increased in 2008 primarily as a result of improvement in operating income. Cash provided by operating activities remained relatively unchanged in 2007 as higher cash receipts from customers were substantially offset by the timing of payments in the ordinary course of business. Investing Net purchases of marketable securities were $2.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to net purchases of $52 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 and net purchases of $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2006. Capital expenditures totaled $672 million in 2008 and were significantly lower compared to $1.3 billion in 2007 and $1.2 billion in 2006 as we reassessed our capital spending needs. Capital expenditures in 2008 were primarily associated with manufacturing capacity expansions in Puerto Rico, Fremont and other site developments and 86 Table of Contents investment in our global ERP system and other information systems projects. Capital expenditures in 2007 were primarily associated with manufacturing capacity and site expansions in Puerto Rico and other locations and investment in our global ERP system. Capital expenditures in 2006 were primarily associated with manufacturing capacity and site expansions in Ireland, Puerto Rico and other locations and costs associated with implementing our ERP system. We currently estimate 2009 spending on capital projects and equipment to be approximately $700 million. On January 4, 2008, we completed our acquisition of Domp and pursuant to the merger agreement, we paid $56 million in cash, net of cash acquired and transaction costs of $2 million. On July 18, 2007, we completed our acquisition of Ilypsa and pursuant to the merger agreement, we paid $398 million in cash, net of cash acquired and transaction costs of $2 million. On July 16, 2007, we completed our acquisition of Alantos and pursuant to the merger agreement, we paid $299 million in cash, net of cash acquired and transaction costs of $1 million. On October 24, 2006, we completed our acquisition of Avidia and paid $275 million in cash, net of cash acquired and our existing equity stake in Avidia. In addition, we may be subject to pay additional amounts upon the achievement of certain future events. On April 1, 2006, we completed our acquisition of Abgenix and paid $2.1 billion in cash to the shareholders of Abgenix to acquire all outstanding shares. In addition, we acquired $252 million in cash, and subsequent to the completion of the acquisition, we paid off $653 million of debt assumed in this transaction. Financing In July 2007, the Board of Directors authorized us to repurchase up to $5.0 billion of common stock. As of December 31, 2008, we had $4.2 billion available for stock repurchases as authorized by our Board of Directors. The manner of purchases, the amount we spend and the number of shares repurchased will vary based on a variety of factors, including the stock price, blackout periods in which we are restricted from repurchasing shares, and our credit rating and may include private block purchases as well as market transactions. A summary of our repurchase activity under our stock repurchase programs for the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006 is as follows (in millions): 2008 2007 2006 Shares Dollars Shares Dollars Shares Dollars First quarter $ 8.8 $ 537 46.6 $ 3,374 Second quarter 32.7 1,549 (1) 73.9 (2) 4,463 13.0 876 Third quarter 19 (1) 2.5 (2) 7.3 505 Fourth quarter 12.6 700 1.8 100 3.3 245 Total 45.3 $ 2,268 87.0 $ 5,100 70.2 $ 5,000 (1) The total cost of shares repurchased during the three months ended June 30, 2008 excludes approximately $19 million paid in July 2008 in connection with the final settlement of an ASR entered into in May 2008. (2) The total number of shares repurchased during the three months ended June 30, 2007 excludes 2.5 million shares received in July 2007 in connection with the final settlement of an ASR entered into in May 2007. As discussed above, in May 2008, we issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2018 and $500 million aggregate principal amount of notes due in 2038 resulting in net proceeds received of $991 million. In June 2008, upon receipt of the proceeds from the issuance of these notes, we exercised our right to call and retired $1.0 billion of floating rate notes scheduled to mature in November 2008 and in November 2008, we retired the remaining $1.0 billion of floating rate notes that matured. 87 Table of Contents In May 2007, we issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 2008 Floating Rate Notes, $1.1 billion aggregate principal amount of 5.85% notes due in 2017 and $900 million aggregate principal amount of 6.375% notes due in 2037, resulting in net proceeds of $4.0 billion. A total of $3.2 billion of the net proceeds raised from the issuance of these notes were used to repurchase shares of our common stock under an ASR entered into in May 2007. On March 2, 2007, as a result of holders of substantially all of our outstanding 2032 Modified Convertible Notes exercising their March 1, 2007 put option, we repurchased $2.3 billion aggregate principal amount, or the majority of the then outstanding convertible notes at their then-accreted value for $1.7 billion in cash. In addition $135 million of other debt securities matured and were repaid in 2007. In February 2006, we issued $5.0 billion of convertible notes, of which $2.5 billion pay interest at 0.125% and are due in 2011 and $2.5 billion pay interest at 0.375% and are due in 2013. In connection with the issuance of these convertible notes, a total of $3.0 billion of our common stock was repurchased under our stock repurchase program. Also, concurrent with the issuance of these convertible notes, we purchased convertible note hedges at a cost of approximately $1.5 billion. The net proceeds received from the issuance of the 2011 and 2013 Convertible Notes, the repurchase of common stock and the purchase of the convertible note hedges was $439 million. Also, concurrent with the issuance of the convertible notes, we sold 62.8 million warrants to acquire shares of our common stock for proceeds of $774 million, 31.3 million of which may be settled in May 2011 and 31.5 million of which may be settled in May 2013. We receive cash from the exercise of employee stock options. Employee stock option exercises provided $155 million, $277 million and $528 million of cash during the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. Proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options will vary from period to period based upon, among other factors, fluctuations in the market value of our stock relative to the exercise price of such options. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are material or reasonably likely to be material to our consolidated financial position or consolidated results of operations. Contractual Obligations Contractual obligations represent future cash commitments and liabilities under agreements with third parties, and exclude contingent liabilities for which we cannot reasonably predict future payment. Additionally, the expected timing of payment of the obligations presented below is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the timing of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon terms or amounts for some obligations. The following table represents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2008, aggregated by type (in millions): Payments Due by Period Contractual Obligations Total Less than 1 Year 2-3 Years 4-5 Years More than 5 Years Long-term debt obligations (1) $ 14,277 $ 1,236 $ 2,914 $ 3,022 $ 7,105 Operating lease obligations 1,064 126 222 186 530 Purchase obligations (2) 2,959 850 1,012 409 688 Unrecognized tax benefits (3) 120 120 Total contractual obligations $ 18,420 $ 2,332 $ 4,148 $ 3,617 $ 8,323 (1) The long-term debt obligation amounts include future interest payments. Future interest payments are included on the 2009 Notes at a fixed rate of 4.00%, the 2011 Convertible Notes at a fixed rate of 0.125%, the 2013 Convertible Notes at a fixed rate of 0.375%, the 2014 Notes at a fixed rate of 4.85%, the 2017 Notes at a fixed rate of 5.85%, the 2018 Notes at a fixed rate of 6.15%, the 2037 Notes at a fixed rate of 6.375%, the 88 Table of Contents 2038 Notes at a fixed rate of 6.90% and the Century Notes at a fixed rate of 8.125%. To achieve a desired mix of fixed and floating interest rate debt, we enter into interest rate swap agreements. These interest rate swap agreements effectively convert a fixed rate interest coupon to a LIBOR-based floating rate coupon over the life of the respective note. We used an interest rate forward curve at December 31, 2008 to compute the net amounts to be included in the table above for future interest payments on our variable rate interest rate swaps. (2) Purchase obligations primarily relate to (i) our long-term supply agreement with BI Pharma for the manufacture of commercial quantities of ENBREL, which are based on firm commitments for the purchase of production capacity for ENBREL and reflect certain estimates such as production run success rates and bulk drug yields achieved; (ii) R&D commitments (including those related to clinical trials) for new and existing products; (iii) capital expenditures; (iv) open purchase orders for the acquisition of goods and services in the ordinary course of business and (v) our agreement with International Business Machines Corporation ( IBM ), which we entered into on October 22, 2008, for certain information systems infrastructure services. The term of the agreement is five years with three one-year renewals, at our option, for a total of up to eight years. The cost to us for the initial five-year term, included in the table above, is estimated to be $505 million. The estimated aggregate additional cost of the three one-year renewal options not included in the table above is approximately $254 million. Our obligation to pay certain of these amounts may be reduced based on certain future events. (3) In addition to the current liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits ( UTBs ) included in the table above, long-term liabilities for UTBs (net of federal tax benefits on state taxes) and related accrued interest totaling approximately $915 million at December 31, 2008 are not included in the table above because, due to their nature, there is a high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows and other events that extinguish these liabilities. On February 4, 2009, we entered into an agreement for certain integrated facilities management services. The contract has an initial term of five years and automatically renews annually thereafter at the Company option. The cost to the Company for the initial five-year term is estimated to be approximately $500 million. The contractual obligations under this contract are not included in the table above given the timing of entering into the agreement. In addition to the above table, we have committed to make potential future milestone payments to third-parties as part of in-licensing and product development programs all of which are contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events. Such events could include, but are not limited to, development milestones, regulatory approvals and product sales. Because the achievement of these milestones is neither probable nor reasonably estimable, such contingencies have not been included in the table above or recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Individually, these arrangements are not material in any one reporting period. However, if the achievement of the milestones covered by these arrangements would happen to be reached in the same reporting period, the resulting payment obligation would be approximately $1.3 billion. Summary of Critical Accounting Policies The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ( GAAP ) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and the notes to the financial statements. Some of those judgments can be subjective and complex, and therefore, actual results could differ materially from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Product sales, sales incentives and returns Sales of our products are recognized when shipped and title and risk of loss have passed. Product sales are recorded net of accruals for estimated rebates, wholesaler chargebacks, discounts and other incentives (collectively sales incentives ) and returns. 89 Table of Contents In the United States, we utilize wholesalers as the principal means of distributing our products to healthcare providers, such as physicians or their clinics, dialysis centers, hospitals and pharmacies. Products we sell outside the United States are principally distributed to hospitals and/or wholesalers depending upon the distribution practice in each country for which the product has been launched. We monitor the inventory levels of our products at our wholesale distributors using third-party data and we believe that wholesaler inventories have been maintained at appropriate levels (generally two to three weeks) given end-user demand. Accordingly, historical fluctuations in wholesaler inventory levels have not significantly impacted our method of estimating sales incentives and returns. Accruals for sales incentives are recorded in the same period that the related sales are recorded and are recognized as a reduction in product sales. Sales incentive accruals are based on estimates of the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales. These estimates take into consideration current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, internal and external historical data and forecasted customer buying patterns. Sales incentives are product-specific and, therefore, for any given year, can be impacted by the mix of products sold. For the years ended December 31, 2008, 2007 and 2006, reductions in product sales relating to sales incentives were comprised of the following (dollar amounts in millions): 2008 2007 2006 Rebates $ 1,813 $ 2,156 $ 2,164 Wholesaler chargebacks 1,635 1,649 1,636 Discounts and other incentives 790 694 653 Total sales incentives $ 4,238 $ 4,499 $ 4,453 Percent of gross product sales 22% 24% 24% Rebates earned by healthcare providers, such as physicians or their clinics, dialysis centers and hospitals in the United States may include performance-based offers, such as attaining contractually-specified segment share or other performance-based measures. As a result, the calculation of the accrual for these rebates is complicated by the need to estimate customer buying patterns and the resulting applicable contractual rebate rate(s) to be earned over a contractual period. These rebates totaled $1.8 billion in 2008, $2.2 billion in 2007 and $2.2 billion in 2006. We believe that the methodology we use to accrue for rebates is reasonable and appropriate given current facts and circumstances. However, actual results may differ. Based on our recent experience, changes in annual estimates related to prior annual periods have been less than 3.5% of the estimated rebate amounts charged against product sales for such periods. These changes in annual estimates substantially relate to sales made in the immediately preceding annual period. A 3.5% change in our rebate estimate attributable to rebates recognized in 2008 would have had an impact of approximately $63 million on our 2008 product sales and a corresponding impact on our financial condition and liquidity. Wholesaler chargebacks are another type of arrangement included in sales incentives that relate to our contractual agreements to sell products to healthcare providers in the United States at fixed prices that are lower than the prices we charge wholesalers. When the healthcare providers purchase our products through wholesalers at these reduced prices, the wholesaler charges us for the difference between the prices they pay us and the prices they sold the products to the healthcare providers. These chargebacks from wholesalers totaled $1.6 billion for each of the three years ended December 31, 2008. Accruals for wholesaler chargebacks are less difficult to estimate than rebates and closely approximate actual results since chargeback amounts are fixed at the date of purchase by the healthcare provider and we settle these deductions generally within a few weeks of incurring the liability. 90 Table of Contents Amounts accrued for sales incentives are adjusted when trends or significant events indicate that adjustment is appropriate. Accruals are also adjusted to reflect actual results. However, such adjustments to date have not been material to our results of operations or financial position. The following table summarizes amounts recorded in accrued liabilities regarding sales incentives (in millions): Balance at Beginning of Period Amounts Charged Against Product Sales (1) Payments Balance at End of Period Year ended: December 31, 2008 $ 1,064 $ 4,238 $ 4,426 $ 876 December 31, 2007 $ 1,079 $ 4,499 $ 4,514 $ 1,064 (1) Includes immaterial amounts related to prior year product sales based on changes in estimates. Such amounts represented less than 2% of incentive amounts charged against product sales for 2008 and 2007. Accruals for estimated sales returns are recorded in the same period that the related product sales are recorded and are recognized as reductions in product sales. Returns are estimated through comparison of historical return data to their related sales on a production lot basis. Historical rates of return are determined for each product and are adjusted for known or expected changes in the marketplace specific to each product, when appropriate. Historically, sales return provisions have been insignificant, amounting to less than 1% of gross product sales. Furthermore, changes in estimates for prior year sales return provisions have historically also been insignificant. Deferred income taxes Our effective tax rate reflects the impact of undistributed foreign earnings for which no U.S. taxes have been provided because such earnings are intended to be invested indefinitely outside the United States based on our projected cash flow, working capital and long-term investment requirements of our U.S. and foreign operations. If future events, including material changes in estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements necessitate that certain assets associated with these earnings be repatriated to the United States, an additional tax provision and related liability would be required at the applicable U.S. and state marginal income tax rates which could materially impact our future effective tax rate. Contingencies In the ordinary course of business, we are involved in various legal proceedings such as intellectual property disputes, contractual disputes, governmental investigations and class action suits. Certain of these proceedings are discussed in Note 10, Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We record accruals for such contingencies to the extent we conclude their occurrence is both probable and estimable. We consider all relevant factors when making assessments regarding these contingencies. In addition, our income tax returns are routinely audited by the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) and various state and foreign tax authorities. Significant disputes may arise with these tax authorities involving issues of the timing and amount of deductions and allocations of income among various tax jurisdictions because of differing interpretations of tax laws and regulations. While it is not possible to accurately predict or determine the eventual outcome of these items, one or more of these items currently pending could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Valuation of acquired intangible assets We have acquired and continue to acquire intangible assets primarily by acquiring biotechnology companies. These intangible assets primarily consist of technology associated with human therapeutic products and in-process product candidates as well as goodwill arising in business combinations. Discounted cash flow 91 Table of Contents models are typically used in these valuations, and these models require the use of significant estimates and assumptions including but not limited to: determining the timing and expected costs to complete the in-process projects, projecting regulatory approvals, estimating future cash flows from product sales resulting from completed products and in-process projects and developing appropriate discount rates and probability rates by project. We believe the fair values assigned to the intangible assets acquired are based upon reasonable estimates and assumptions given available facts and circumstances as of the acquisition dates. Fair value measurement of financial instruments The Company adopted the provisions of the FASB Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 157, Fair Value Measurements ( SFAS 157 ), effective January 1, 2008, for its financial assets and liabilities. Under this standard, fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability (i.e., the exit price ) in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In determining the fair value of its financial assets and liabilities, the Company uses various valuation approaches. SFAS 157 establishes a hierarchy for inputs used in measuring fair value that maximizes the use of observable inputs and minimizes the use of unobservable inputs by requiring that observable inputs be used when available. Observable inputs are inputs that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability based on market data obtained from sources independent of the Company. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect the Company assumptions about the inputs that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability and are developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. The availability of observable inputs can vary among the various types of financial assets and liabilities. To the extent that the valuation is based on models or inputs that are less observable or unobservable in the market, the determination of fair value requires more judgment. Whenever the estimated fair value of any of our available-for-sale securities is less than their related cost, we perform an impairment analysis in accordance with the FASB SFAS No. 115, Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities , and related guidance issued by the FASB and the SEC, in order to determine the classification of the impairment as temporary or other-than-temporary . A temporary impairment results in an unrealized loss being recorded in the other comprehensive income component of stockholders equity. Such an unrealized loss does not affect net income for the applicable accounting period. However, an other-than-temporary impairment charge is recorded as a realized loss in the consolidated statement of income and reduces net income for the applicable accounting period. The primary factors we consider to differentiate our impairments between temporary and other-than-temporary impairments include the length of the time and the extent to which the market value has been less than cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer and our intent and ability to retain our investment in the issuer for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in market value. As of December 31, 2008, the Company available-for-sale securities were comprised of U.S. Treasury securities, obligations of U.S. government agencies, FDIC guaranteed bank debt, corporate debt securities, mortgage and asset backed securities, other short-term interest bearing securities, including money market funds, and publicly traded equity investments. U.S. Treasury securities, money market funds and publicly traded equity investments are valued using quoted market prices with no valuation adjustments applied. Obligations of U.S. government agencies, FDIC guaranteed bank debt, corporate debt securities, mortgage and asset backed securities and other short-term interest bearing securities are valued using quoted market prices of recent transactions or are benchmarked to transactions of very similar securities. 92 Table of Contents Our derivatives assets and liabilities include interest rate swaps and foreign currency forward and option contracts. The fair values of these derivatives are determined using models based on market observable inputs, including interest rate curves and both forward and spot prices for foreign currencies. We believe that the values assigned to our available-for-sale securities and derivative instruments as of December 31, 2008 and 2007 are fairly stated in accordance with GAAP and are based upon reasonable estimates and assumptions. In addition, we believe that the cost basis for our available-for-sale securities as of December 31, 2008 and 2007 was recoverable in all material respects. In 2008, the U.S. economy continued to be adversely affected by tightening in the credit markets and volatility in capital markets. Interest rates on U.S. treasury instruments declined considerably during this crisis while other interest rates fluctuated in excess of historical norms. In addition, the U.S. dollar strengthened dramatically over the second half of the year against most other currencies during a period of extremely high levels of currency volatility. Continuing distress in the economic environment could ultimately result in other-than-temporary impairments of the carrying values of our available-for-sale securities and/or a material adverse impact on the carrying values of our financial instruments. 
