CIK: 47217
Company Name: HEWLETT PACKARD CO
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-12-18


ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. OVERVIEW We are a leading global provider of products, technologies, software, solutions and services to individual consumers, small- and medium-sized businesses ("SMBs"), and large enterprises, including in the public and education sectors. Our offerings span: personal computing and other access devices; imaging and printing-related products and services; enterprise information technology infrastructure, including enterprise storage and server technology, and software that optimizes business technology investments; and multi-vendor customer services, including technology support and maintenance, consulting and integration and outsourcing services. We have seven business segments: Enterprise Storage and Servers ("ESS"), HP Services ("HPS"), HP Software, the Personal Systems Group ("PSG"), the Imaging and Printing Group ("IPG"), HP Financial Services ("HPFS"), and Corporate Investments. ESS, HPS and HP Software are structured beneath a broader Technology Solutions Group ("TSG"). While TSG is not an operating segment, we sometimes provide financial data aggregating the segments within TSG in order to provide a supplementary view of our business. The operating framework in which we manage our businesses and guide our strategies is based on the disciplined management of three business levers: targeted growth, operational efficiency and capital strategy. Although we have made progress towards our goals in recent periods, there are still many areas in which we believe that we can improve. To implement this operating framework, we are focused on the following initiatives: We are engaged in a process of examining every function and every business in the company in order to optimize efficiency and reduce cost; We are in the process of consolidating 85 data centers worldwide into six state-of-the-art centers in three U.S. cities and consolidating several hundred real estate locations worldwide to fewer core sites in order to reduce our IT spending and real estate costs; We are reinvesting a portion of the cost savings from these initiatives by expanding our sales force and aligning our resources in order to build our market share in emerging markets while expanding our coverage to drive growth in mature markets; We are developing training programs for our sales forces designed to enhance our ability to provide solutions to our customers and build customer loyalty; We are building and expanding our services organization to support our technology businesses and provide comprehensive solutions to our customers; We are developing a global delivery structure to take advantage of regions where advanced technical expertise is available at lower costs; 35 We are expanding our ethics and compliance programs and enhancing our corporate governance to ensure that all of our actions are consistent with HP's values; and We are repurchasing shares of our common stock under an ongoing program to manage the dilution created by shares issued under employee stock plans as well as to repurchase shares opportunistically. We continue to grow our business organically and through strategic acquisitions. During fiscal 2007, we acquired ten companies, among which the two largest were Mercury Interactive Corporation ("Mercury") and Opsware Inc., and we expect to continue to make strategic acquisitions periodically in the future. In February 2007, we announced our decision to modify our U.S. defined benefit pension plan for the remaining number of U.S. employees still accruing benefits under the program. Effective January 1, 2008, these employees will cease accruing pension benefits and will, instead, receive an increased 401(k) match to 6 percent from 4 percent of eligible earnings. The final pension benefit amount will be calculated based on pay and service through December 31, 2007. In addition, future eligibility for the Pre-2003 HP Retiree Medical Program was limited to those employees who were within five years of satisfying the program's eligibility criteria on June 30, 2007. These actions reduced our U.S. defined benefit and post-retirement plan obligations, and, as a result, we recorded a one-time curtailment gain of $542 million in fiscal 2007. In conjunction with this announcement, we provided eligible affected employees with the opportunity to participate in a 2007 U.S. Enhanced Early Retirement program (the "2007 EER") and recorded a restructuring charge of $354 million during fiscal 2007. A total of 3,080 employees participated in the 2007 EER, including 595 persons who had been included in previous restructuring programs or who voluntarily left the company since November 30, 2006. All employees who participated in the 2007 EER left the company by May 31, 2007. For more information, see Notes 8 and 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. In terms of how our execution has translated into financial performance, the following provides an overview of our key fiscal 2007 financial metrics: TSG HP Consolidated ESS HPS HP Software Total PSG IPG HPFS In millions, except per share amounts Net revenue $ 104,286 $ 18,769 $ 16,646 $ 2,325 $ 37,740 $ 36,409 $ 28,465 $ 2,336 Year-over-year net revenue % increase 13.8 % 8.4 % 6.6 % 78.7 % 10.3 % 24.8 % 6.3 % 12.4 % Earnings from operations $ 8,719 $ 1,980 $ 1,829 $ 347 $ 4,156 $ 1,939 $ 4,315 $ 155 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 8.4 % 10.5 % 11.0 % 14.9 % 11.0 % 5.3 % 15.2 % 6.6 % Net earnings $ 7,264 Net earnings per share Basic $ 2.76 Diluted $ 2.68 Cash and cash equivalents at October 31, 2007 totaled $11.3 billion, a decrease of $5.1 billion from the October 31, 2006 balance of $16.4 billion. The decrease for fiscal 2007 was related primarily to $10.9 billion paid to repurchase our common stock, $6.8 billion of net cash paid for business acquisitions and $2.5 billion net investments in property, plant and equipment, all of which were 36 partially offset by $9.6 billion in cash provided from operations, $3.1 billion in proceeds from the issuance of our common stock under employee stock plans and a $2.6 billion net increase in our debt and commercial paper. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. The discussion of results of operations at the consolidated level is followed by a more detailed discussion of results of operations by segment. For a further discussion of factors that could impact operating results, see the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A, which is incorporated herein by reference. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES General The Consolidated Financial Statements of HP are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of HP's Board of Directors. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Revenue Recognition We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and, while the majority of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain multiple elements or non-standard terms and conditions. As a result, significant contract interpretation is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple element arrangement should be treated as separate units of accounting for revenue recognition purposes, and, if so, how the price should be allocated among the elements and when to recognize revenue for each element. We recognize revenue for delivered elements only when the delivered elements have standalone value, fair values of undelivered elements are known, uncertainties regarding customer acceptance are resolved and there are no customer-negotiated refund or return rights affecting the revenue recognized for delivered elements. Changes in the allocation of the sales price 37 between elements might impact the timing of revenue recognition but would not change the total revenue recognized on the contract. We recognize revenue as work progresses on certain fixed-price contracts, such as consulting arrangements. Using a proportional performance method, we estimate the total expected labor costs in order to determine the amount of revenue earned to date. We follow this basis because reasonably dependable estimates of the labor costs applicable to various stages of a contract can be made. Total contract profit is subject to revisions throughout the life of the contract. We record changes in revenue as a result of revisions to cost estimates to income in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. We record estimated reductions to revenue for customer and distributor programs and incentive offerings, including price protection, promotions, other volume-based incentives and expected returns. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered. Additionally, certain incentive programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience, the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Restructuring We have engaged, and may continue to engage, in restructuring actions, which require management to utilize significant estimates related to expenses for severance and other employee separation costs, realizable values of assets made redundant or obsolete, lease cancellation and other exit costs. If the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of the restructuring charges could be materially impacted. For a full description of our restructuring actions, refer to our discussions of restructuring in the Results of Operations section and Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Stock-Based Compensation Expense Effective November 1, 2005, we adopted the fair value recognition provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ("SFAS") No. 123 (revised 2004), "Share-Based Payment" ("SFAS 123R"), using the modified prospective transition method, and therefore have not restated prior periods' results. Under this method, we recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payment awards granted after November 1, 2005 and granted prior to but not yet vested as of November 1, 2005, in accordance with SFAS 123R. Under the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS 123R, we recognize stock-based compensation expense net of an estimated forfeiture rate and recognize compensation cost for only those shares expected to vest on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. Prior to SFAS 123R adoption, we accounted for share-based payment awards under Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, "Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees" ("APB 25") and, accordingly, generally recognized compensation expense only when we granted options with a discounted exercise price. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards require subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the share-based payment awards and stock price volatility. Management determined that implied volatility calculated based on actively traded options on HP common stock is a better indicator of expected volatility and future stock price trends than historical volatility. Therefore, expected volatility in fiscal years 2007, 2006 and 2005 was based on a market-based implied volatility. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of 38 share-based payment awards represent management's best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion on stock-based compensation. Taxes on Earnings We calculate our current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in our income tax returns filed during the subsequent year. We record adjustments based on filed returns when we have identified and finalized them, which is generally in the third and fourth quarters of the subsequent year for U.S. federal and state provisions, respectively. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that we are more likely than not to realize. We have considered future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and make a corresponding charge to earnings in the period in which we make such determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the net deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the tax jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located. Our effective tax rate includes the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. taxes because we plan to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the United States. We plan foreign earnings remittance amounts based on projected cash flow needs as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we will distribute to the United States and provide the U.S. federal taxes due on these amounts. Further, as a result of certain employment actions and capital investments HP has undertaken, income from manufacturing activities in certain countries is subject to reduced tax rates, and in some cases is wholly exempt from taxes, for fiscal years through 2019. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact our effective tax rate. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and over sixty foreign countries, and we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that our tax return positions are fully supported, but tax authorities are likely to challenge certain positions, which may not be fully sustained. However, our income tax expense includes amounts intended to satisfy income tax assessments that result from these challenges. Determining the income tax expense for these potential assessments and recording the related assets and liabilities requires significant management judgments and estimates. We evaluate our income tax contingencies in accordance with SFAS No. 5, 39 "Accounting for Contingencies." We believe that our reserve for income tax liabilities, including related interest, is adequate in relation to the potential for additional tax assessments. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of audits could be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax expense and therefore could have a material impact on our tax provision, net income and cash flows. Our reserve for income tax liabilities is attributable primarily to uncertainties concerning the tax treatment of our international operations, including the allocation of income among different jurisdictions, and related interest. We review our reserves quarterly, and we may adjust such reserves because of proposed assessments by tax authorities, changes in facts and circumstances, issuance of new regulations or new case law, previously unavailable information obtained during the course of an examination, negotiations between tax authorities of different countries concerning our transfer prices, execution of Advanced Pricing Agreements, resolution with respect to individual audit issues, the resolution of entire audits, or the expiration of statutes of limitations. Material adjustments are most likely to occur in the fiscal years in which major ongoing audits, such as audits by the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS"), are closed. In addition, our tax contingency reserve includes certain amounts for potential tax assessments for pre-acquisition tax years of acquired companies which, if released, will impact the carrying value of goodwill attributable to the acquired company. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We determine our allowance for doubtful accounts using a combination of factors to ensure that we have not overstated our trade and financing receivables balances due to uncollectibility. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for all customers based on a variety of factors, including the length of time receivables are past due, trends in overall weighted-average risk rating of the total portfolio, macroeconomic conditions, significant one-time events, historical experience and the use of third-party credit risk models that generate quantitative measures of default probabilities based on market factors, and the financial condition of customers. Also, we record specific provisions for individual accounts when we become aware of a customer's inability to meet its financial obligations to us, such as in the case of bankruptcy filings or deterioration in the customer's operating results or financial position. If circumstances related to customers change, we would further adjust our estimates of the recoverability of receivables either upward or downward. The annual provision for doubtful accounts has averaged approximately 0.01% of net revenue over the last three fiscal years. Using our third-party credit risk model at October 31, 2007, a 50-basis-point deterioration in the weighted-average default probabilities of our significant customers would have resulted in an approximately $84 million increase to our trade allowance at the end of fiscal year 2007. Inventory We state our inventory at the lower of cost or market. We make adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, at the product group level for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired balances. Factors influencing these adjustments include changes in demand, rapid technological changes, product life cycle and development plans, component cost trends, product pricing, physical deterioration and quality issues. Revisions to these adjustments would be required if these factors differ from our estimates. Valuation of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Purchased Intangible Assets We review goodwill and purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be 40 recoverable in accordance with SFAS No. 142, "Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets." The provisions of SFAS No. 142 require that we perform a two-step impairment test on goodwill. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. Our reporting units are consistent with the reportable segments identified in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a weighting of income and market approaches. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on market multiples of revenue or earnings for comparable companies. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not impaired and we are not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we must perform the second step of the impairment test in order to determine the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill. If the carrying value of a reporting unit's goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then we record an impairment loss equal to the difference. SFAS No. 142 also requires that the fair value of the purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives be estimated and compared to the carrying value. We estimate the fair value of these intangible assets using an income approach. We recognize an impairment loss when the estimated fair value of the intangible asset is less than the carrying value. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit or an indefinite-lived purchased intangible asset is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, assumed royalty rates, future economic and market conditions and determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units. Our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which we performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2007, did not result in an impairment charge. The excess of fair value over carrying value for each of HP's reporting units as of August 1, 2007, the annual testing date, ranged from approximately $520 million to approximately $46 billion. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the fair value calculations on the goodwill impairment test, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair values of each reporting unit. This hypothetical 10% decrease would result in excess fair value over carrying value ranging from approximately $360 million to approximately $41 billion for each of HP's reporting units. Warranty Provision We provide for the estimated cost of product warranties at the time we recognize revenue. We evaluate our warranty obligations on a product group basis. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period of time. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, we base our estimated warranty obligation upon warranty terms, ongoing product failure rates, repair costs, product call rates, average cost per call, and current period product shipments. If actual product failure rates, repair rates, service delivery costs or post-sales support costs differ from our estimates, we would be required to make revisions to the estimated warranty liability. Warranty terms generally range from 41 90 days to three years parts and labor, depending upon the product. Over the last three fiscal years, the annual warranty provision has averaged approximately 3.4% of annual net product revenue, while actual annual warranty costs have averaged approximately 3.2% of annual net product revenue. Retirement Benefits Our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations are dependent on various assumptions. Our major assumptions relate primarily to discount rates, salary growth, long-term return on plan assets and medical cost trend rates. We base the discount rate assumption on current investment yields of high quality fixed income investments during the retirement benefits maturity period. The salary growth assumptions reflect our long-term actual experience and future and near-term outlook. Long-term return on plan assets is determined based on historical portfolio results and management's expectation of the future economic environment, as well as target asset allocations. In the beginning of fiscal 2008, we implemented a liability-driven investment strategy for the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, which will be frozen by December 31, 2007 and is currently overfunded. As part of the strategy, we have transitioned our equity allocation to predominantly fixed income assets. The expected return on the plan assets, used in calculating the net benefit cost, has been reduced from 8.3% to 6.3% for fiscal 2008 to reflect the changes in our asset allocation policy. Our medical cost trend assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends. Actual results that differ from our assumptions are accumulated and are amortized generally over the estimated future working life of the plan participants. Our major assumptions vary by plan and the weighted-average rates used are set forth in Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Each assumption has different sensitivity characteristics, and, in general, changes, if any, have moved in the same direction over the last several years. For fiscal 2007, changes in the weighted-average rates would have had the following impact on our net periodic benefit cost: A decrease of 25 basis points in the long-term rate of return would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $33 million; A decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $51 million; and An increase of 25 basis points in the future compensation rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $21 million. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS In July 2006, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued FASB Interpretation No. 48, "Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109" ("FIN 48"). FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes by prescribing the recognition threshold a tax position is required to meet before being recognized in the financial statements. It also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. FIN 48 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2006 and is required to be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2008. The cumulative effects of applying FIN 48 will be recorded as an adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the period of adoption. Additionally, in May 2007, the FASB published FASB Staff Position No. FIN 48-1, "Definition of Settlement in FASB Interpretation No. 48" ("FSP FIN 48-1"). 42 FSP FIN 48-1 is an amendment to FIN 48. It clarifies how an enterprise should determine whether a tax position is effectively settled for the purpose of recognizing previously unrecognized tax benefits. FSP FIN 48-1 is effective upon the initial adoption of FIN 48, and therefore will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2008. While we are still evaluating the impact of adoption of FIN 48 and FSP FIN 48-1 on our consolidated financial statements, we estimate that the adoption of FIN 48 and FSP FIN 48-1 will result in a net increase to retained earnings in the range of $500 million to $900 million. This estimate is subject to revision as management completes its analysis. In September 2006, the FASB issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ("SFAS") No. 157, "Fair Value Measurements" ("SFAS 157"). SFAS 157 provides guidance for using fair value to measure assets and liabilities. It also responds to investors' requests for expanded information about the extent to which companies measure assets and liabilities at fair value, the information used to measure fair value, and the effect of fair value measurements on earnings. SFAS 157 applies whenever other standards require (or permit) assets or liabilities to be measured at fair value, and does not expand the use of fair value in any new circumstances. SFAS 157 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and is required to be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. We are currently evaluating the effect that the adoption of SFAS 157 will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition and are not yet in a position to determine such effects. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 158, "Employers' Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans An Amendment of FASB No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R)" ("SFAS 158"). SFAS 158 requires that the funded status of defined benefit postretirement plans be recognized on the company's balance sheet and changes in the funded status be reflected in comprehensive income, effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2006, which we adopted during fiscal 2007. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for the effect of applying this provision on the consolidated financial statements. SFAS 158 also requires companies to measure the funded status of the plan as of the date of their fiscal year end, effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2008. We expect to adopt the measurement provisions of SFAS 158 effective October 31, 2009. In February 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, "The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Including an amendment of FASB Statement No. 115" ("SFAS 159"). SFAS 159 expands the use of fair value accounting but does not affect existing standards that require assets or liabilities to be carried at fair value. Under SFAS 159, a company may elect to use fair value to measure accounts and loans receivable, available-for-sale and held-to-maturity securities, equity method investments, accounts payable, guarantees and issued debt. Other eligible items include firm commitments for financial instruments that otherwise would not be recognized at inception and non-cash warranty obligations where a warrantor is permitted to pay a third party to provide the warranty goods or services. If the use of fair value is elected, any upfront costs and fees related to the item must be recognized in earnings and cannot be deferred, such as debt issuance costs. The fair value election is irrevocable and generally made on an instrument-by-instrument basis, even if a company has similar instruments that it elects not to measure based on fair value. At the adoption date, unrealized gains and losses on existing items for which fair value has been elected are reported as a cumulative adjustment to beginning retained earnings. Subsequent to the adoption of SFAS 159, changes in fair value are recognized in earnings. SFAS 159 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and is required to be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. We currently are determining whether fair value accounting is appropriate for any of our eligible items and cannot 43 estimate the impact, if any, that SFAS 159 will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In June 2007, the FASB also ratified EITF 07-3, "Accounting for Nonrefundable Advance Payments for Goods or Services Received for Use in Future Research and Development Activities" ("EITF 07-3"). EITF 07-3 requires that nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities be deferred and capitalized and recognized as an expense as the goods are delivered or the related services are performed. EITF 07-3 is effective, on a prospective basis, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2007 and will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. We do not expect the adoption of EITF 07-3 to have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 141 (revised 2007), "Business Combinations" ("SFAS 141R"). SFAS 141R establishes principles and requirements for how an acquirer recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and the goodwill acquired. SFAS 141R also establishes disclosure requirements to enable the evaluation of the nature and financial effects of the business combination. SFAS 141R is effective as of the beginning of an entity's fiscal year that begins after December 15, 2008, and will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We are currently evaluating the potential impact, if any, of the adoption of SFAS 141R on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 160, "Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements an amendment of Accounting Research Bulletin No. 51" ("SFAS 160"). SFAS 160 establishes accounting and reporting standards for ownership interests in subsidiaries held by parties other than the parent, the amount of consolidated net income attributable to the parent and to the noncontrolling interest, changes in a parent's ownership interest and the valuation of retained noncontrolling equity investments when a subsidiary is deconsolidated. SFAS 160 also establishes disclosure requirements that clearly identify and distinguish between the interests of the parent and the interests of the noncontrolling owners. SFAS 160 is effective as of the beginning of an entity's fiscal year that begins after December 15, 2008, and will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We are currently evaluating the potential impact, if any, of the adoption of SFAS 160 on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In addition to the SFAS 158 adoption mentioned above, we adopted the following accounting standards in fiscal 2007, none of which had a material effect on our consolidated results of operations during such period or financial condition at the end of such period: SFAS No. 154, "Accounting for Changes and Error Corrections"; Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 108, "Considering the Effects of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Misstatements in Current Year Financial Statements"; EITF 05-5, "Accounting for Early Retirement or Postemployment Programs with Specific Features (Such as Terms Specified in Altersteilzeit Early Retirement Arrangements)"; and EITF 06-9, "Reporting a Change in (or the Elimination of) a Previously Existing Difference between the Fiscal Year End of a Parent Company and That of a Consolidated Entity or between the Reporting Period of an Investor and That of an Equity Method Investee." 44 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2007 2006 (2) 2005 (2) In millions Net revenue $ 104,286 100.0 % $ 91,658 100.0 % $ 86,696 100.0 % Cost of sales (1) 78,887 75.6 % 69,427 75.7 % 66,440 76.6 % Gross profit 25,399 24.4 % 22,231 24.3 % 20,256 23.4 % Research and development 3,611 3.5 % 3,591 3.9 % 3,490 4.0 % Selling, general and administrative 12,226 11.7 % 11,266 12.3 % 11,184 13.0 % Amortization of purchased intangible assets 783 0.7 % 604 0.7 % 622 0.7 % In-process research and development charges 190 0.2 % 52 2 Restructuring charges 387 0.4 % 158 0.2 % 1,684 1.9 % Pension curtailments and pension settlements, net (517 ) (0.5 )% (199 ) (0.2 )% Earnings from operations 8,719 8.4 % 6,560 7.2 % 3,473 4.0 % Interest and other, net 444 0.4 % 606 0.6 % 83 0.1 % Gains (losses) on investments 14 25 (13 ) Earnings before taxes 9,177 8.8 % 7,191 7.8 % 3,543 4.1 % Provision for taxes 1,913 1.8 % 993 1.0 % 1,145 1.3 % Net earnings $ 7,264 7.0 % $ 6,198 6.8 % $ 2,398 2.8 % (1) Cost of products, cost of services and financing interest. (2) Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year amounts in order to conform to the current year presentation. 45 Net Revenue The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2007 2006 Percentage points Personal Systems Group 7.9 2.8 Imaging and Printing Group 1.8 1.9 Enterprise Storage and Servers 1.6 0.7 HP Software 1.1 0.3 HP Services 1.1 0.1 HP Financial Services 0.3 (0.1 ) Corporate Investments/Other Total HP 13.8 5.7 In fiscal 2007, HP net revenue increased approximately 14% from the prior year period (10% on a constant currency basis). The favorable currency impact for fiscal 2007 was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. U.S. net revenue was $34.8 billion for fiscal 2007, an increase of 8% from the prior year, while international net revenue increased 17% to $69.5 billion. PSG had double-digit net revenue growth across all regions as a result of overall unit volume increases of 28%. The unit volume increases resulted from strong growth in notebooks with significant improvements in emerging markets. The impact of these increases was partially offset by declines in average selling prices ("ASPs") in commercial and consumer clients of 5% and 1%, respectively. IPG net revenue growth in fiscal 2007 was due mainly to increased unit volumes of printer supplies resulting from the continued expansion of printer hardware placements and the strong performance of supplies for color-related products. ESS net revenue growth during fiscal 2007 was the result primarily of strong blade revenue and unit growth in our industry standard servers business, increased option attach rates in our ProLiant server line, continued strong performance in mid-range EVA products, growth in commercial storage area networks and revenue increases from our Integrity servers. The ESS growth was partially moderated by the revenue declines in our tape business, high-end arrays and our PA-RISC and Alpha server product lines during fiscal 2007. The net revenue growth in HP Software during fiscal 2007 was due primarily to growth in our OpenView business as a result of the Mercury acquisition and increases in revenue from license and support contracts. HPS net revenue during fiscal 2007 increased due primarily to favorable currency impacts, revenue increases in outsourcing services driven by existing accounts growth and new business, and revenue increases in consulting and integration associated with acquisitions made in fiscal 2007. The HPFS net revenue increase during fiscal 2007 was due primarily to operating lease growth and higher end-of-lease activity. In fiscal 2006, HP net revenue increased approximately 6% from the prior year period (7% on a constant currency basis). The unfavorable currency impact for fiscal 2006 was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro and the yen. U.S. net revenue was $32.2 billion for fiscal 2006, an increase of 6% from the prior year, while international net revenue increased 6% to $59.4 billion. PSG net revenue increased across all regions as a result of a 15% volume increase. The volume increase resulted from strong growth in consumer and commercial markets and significant improvement in emerging markets, which was partially offset by 6% and 7% declines in ASPs in consumer and 46 commercial clients, respectively. IPG net revenue growth in fiscal 2006 was due mainly to increased shipment volumes of printer supplies resulting from the continued expansion of printer hardware placements and the strong performance of color-related products. ESS net revenue growth was the result primarily of strong unit growth in our industry standard servers business, blade revenue growth, increased option attach rates in our ProLiant server line, continued strong performance in mid-range EVA products within our Storage business and revenue increases from our Integrity servers. The ESS growth was moderated by revenue declines in our tape business and PA-RISC and Alpha Server product lines. The net revenue growth in HP Software for fiscal 2006 was due primarily to growth in our OpenView business as a result of the Peregrine acquisition and an increase in support and service contracts. HPS net revenue increased in fiscal 2006 due primarily to revenue increases in management services driven by new business and existing account growth, which were offset by declines in the technology services business resulting from competitive pricing pressures and changes in the mix of platforms being serviced. The HPFS net revenue decline in fiscal 2006 was due primarily to lower used equipment sales. Stock-Based Compensation Expense See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Gross Margin The weighted-average components of the change in gross margin as compared to prior-year periods were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2007 2006 Percentage points HP Software 0.6 0.2 HP Services 0.1 0.2 Enterprise Storage and Servers (0.1 ) 0.4 HP Financial Services (0.1 ) (0.1 ) Personal Systems Group (0.2 ) 0.1 Imaging and Printing Group (0.2 ) 0.2 Corporate Investments/Other (0.1 ) Total HP 0.1 0.9 Total company gross margin increased slightly in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The improvement in HP Software gross margin in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to a favorable change in revenue mix driven by the inclusion of revenue from Mercury licenses and support, which typically have a higher gross margin than the other offerings within the segment. HPS gross margin increased during fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 due primarily to continued focus on cost structure improvements from delivery efficiencies and cost controls. This gross margin increase was partially offset by the impact from the continued competitive pricing environment. During fiscal 2007, ESS contributed unfavorably to our total company's weighted-average change in gross margin while the ESS gross margin remained stable. This stability was due primarily to improved cost management, which was offset by an ongoing mix shift to lower-margin Integrity products within business critical systems and a continued mix shift towards industry standard servers. HPFS gross margin decline during fiscal 2007 was caused primarily by increased bad debt expenses and lower bad debt recoveries, as well as lower margins on leases and 47 used equipment sales. During fiscal 2007, PSG contributed unfavorably to our total company's weighted-average change in gross margin as a result of higher growth than the other segments. However, PSG gross margin increased primarily as a result of component cost declines and improvements in supply chain costs per unit, which were partially offset by ASP declines. During fiscal 2007, IPG gross margin decreased due primarily to unfavorable hardware margins, increased costs associated with new product introductions and a change in product mix. Total company gross margin increased in fiscal 2006 as compared to fiscal 2005. The improvement in ESS gross margin in fiscal 2006 was due primarily to a favorable unit mix, improved discount management, and lower component costs. HPS gross margin increase was driven mainly by the continued focus on cost structure improvement from delivery efficiencies and cost controls, the impact of which was partially offset by the continued competitive environment in the solutions and services business and higher fiscal 2006 bonus accruals. For IPG, gross margin increased in fiscal 2006 due primarily to improved supplies margins and a favorable portfolio mix shift from hardware to supplies, which were partially offset by unfavorable consumer hardware margins. The improvement in HP Software gross margin in fiscal 2006 was due primarily to an increase in revenue and more effective management of the support and services costs for OpenView and OpenCall. The gross margin improvement in PSG resulted primarily from reduced warranty expense and supply chain costs as a percentage of revenue and component cost declines. HPFS gross margin was impacted unfavorably in fiscal 2006 due primarily to competitor pricing pressures, a higher mix of lower margin operating lease assets and lower recoveries for bad debts, which were partially offset by lower credit losses in fiscal 2006. Operating Expenses Research and Development Total research and development ("R&D") expense increased in fiscal 2007 due primarily to additional R&D expense as a result of the Mercury acquisition in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. As a percentage of net revenue, each of our major segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in R&D expense in fiscal 2007. Total R&D expense increased in fiscal 2006 due primarily to higher bonus accruals and stock-based compensation expense, the impact of which was partially offset by expense controls and cost savings from restructuring actions. As a percentage of net revenue, each of our major segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in R&D expense in fiscal 2006. Selling, General and Administrative Total SG&A expense increased during fiscal 2007 due primarily to additional expense as a result of the acquisition of Mercury in the first quarter of fiscal 2007, unfavorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro and additional investments in our sales forces. As a percentage of net revenue, the ESS, HPS, PSG and IPG segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in SG&A expense during fiscal 2007, while HP Software experienced a year-over-year increase in SG&A expense. Total SG&A expense increased slightly during fiscal 2006 as higher bonus accruals and stock-based compensation expenses as well as increased marketing spending were offset in part by savings from expense controls and restructuring actions and favorable currency impacts due to movement of the 48 dollar against the euro and the yen. As a percentage of net revenue, each of our segments experienced a year-over-year decrease or no change in fiscal 2006. Amortization of Purchased Intangible Assets The increase in amortization expense in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006 was due primarily to amortization expense related to the acquisition of Mercury in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense related to certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions, including the Compaq Computer Corporation ("Compaq") acquisition, that had reached the end of their amortization period. The decrease in amortization expense in fiscal 2006 as compared to fiscal 2005 was due primarily to a decrease in amortization expense related to certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions including the Compaq acquisition that had reached the end of their amortization period, which decrease was partially offset by an increase in amortization expense related primarily to the acquisitions of Scitex Vision Ltd. ("Scitex"), Peregrine Systems, Inc. ("Peregrine"), and OuterBay Technologies, Inc. ("OuterBay") in fiscal year 2006. For more information on our amortization of purchased intangibles assets, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. In-Process Research and Development Charges We record in-process research and development ("IPR&D") charges in connection with acquisitions accounted for as business combinations, as more fully described in Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. In fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005 we recorded IPR&D charges of $190 million, $52 million, and $2 million, respectively, related to acquisitions during those years. The increase in IPR&D in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to our acquisition of Mercury in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. Restructuring Charges Restructuring charges for fiscal 2007 were $387 million, which included $354 million of expenses related to severance and other benefit costs associated with those employees who elected to participate in the 2007 EER and a net charge of $33 million relating to adjustments to our fiscal 2005, 2003, 2002 and 2001 restructuring programs. Restructuring charges in fiscal year 2006 were $158 million. This included a net charge of $233 million related to true-ups of severance and other related restructuring charges for all restructuring plans, a $6 million termination benefits expense and a $3 million settlement and curtailment loss from our non-U.S. pension plans related to the fiscal 2005 restructuring plan, which was approved by our Board of Directors in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. These charges were partially offset by a $46 million settlement gain from the U.S. pension plans, a $24 million curtailment gain from the U.S. retiree medical program and a $14 million adjustment to reduce our non-cash stock-based compensation expense, all related to our fiscal 2005 restructuring plan approved in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. Restructuring charges in fiscal 2005 were $1.7 billion, which included a $1.6 billion charge for the fiscal 2005 restructuring plan approved in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. The fiscal 2005 restructuring plan was designed to simplify our structure, reduce costs and place greater focus on our customers. We initially estimated that 15,300 positions would be eliminated in the fiscal 2005 restructuring plan. 49 Subsequent to the initial estimate, we reduced the number of total positions to be eliminated to 14,985. We had substantially completed eliminating these positions as of October 31, 2007. The remaining charge for fiscal 2005 of $109 million was related to severance and related costs associated with the termination of approximately 1,450 employees in connection with a restructuring plan approved by our management in the third quarter of fiscal 2005. All employees under this restructuring plan were terminated as of October 31, 2005. We paid all of the costs associated with the fiscal 2005 third quarter restructuring plan as of January 31, 2007. For more information on our restructuring charges, see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Workforce Rebalancing As part of our ongoing business operations, we incur workforce rebalancing charges for severance and related costs within certain business segments. Workforce rebalancing activities are considered part of normal operations as we continue to optimize our cost structure and are included in our business segment results. We expect to incur additional workforce rebalancing costs in the future. Pension Curtailments and Pension Settlements, Net In fiscal 2007, we recognized a net gain on pension curtailments and settlements of $517 million, relating primarily to a $542 million curtailment gain associated with a modification to our U.S. defined benefit pension plan and post-retirement benefit plan. This curtailment gain was offset partially by net settlement losses related to our other pension plan design changes. In conjunction with management's plan to restructure certain of our operations, we modified our U.S. retirement programs to align them more closely to industry practice. Effective January 1, 2006, we ceased pension accruals and eliminated eligibility for the subsidized retiree medical program for employees who did not meet defined criteria based on age and years of service. As a result, we recognized a curtailment gain of $199 million in fiscal 2005 stemming from the elimination of future benefit accruals for the affected employee group. For more information on our plan design changes, see Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Interest and Other, Net Interest and other, net decreased by $162 million in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The decrease was due primarily to higher interest expense resulting from higher average debt balances. Interest and other, net increased by $523 million in fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005. The increase in fiscal 2006 resulted primarily from higher net interest income over the prior year related to higher short-term interest rates in fiscal 2006, net gains from sales of certain real estate properties, and lower interest expense due to our lower average debt balances. The increase in fiscal 2006 also was attributable to a net $106 million of dispute settlement charge and its related interest charge recorded in fiscal 2005. In fiscal 2005, we reached a legal settlement of $141 million in our patent infringement case with Intergraph Hardware Technologies Company ("Intergraph") and recorded a charge of $116 million related to a cross-license agreement with Intergraph for products shipped in prior years. Partially offsetting this amount was a $10 million recovery from an individual related to a prior period settlement with the Government of Canada. 50 Gains (Losses) on Investments Net gains on investment in fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006 resulted primarily from gains on the sale of equity investments, which were offset in part by impairment charges on our investment portfolio. Net losses in fiscal 2005 resulted primarily from impairment charges on equity investments in our publicly-traded and privately-held investment portfolios. Partially offsetting these losses were gains attributable to the sale of investments. Provision for Taxes Our effective tax rates were 20.8%, 13.8%, and 32.3% in fiscal 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. The increase in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 was related in part to favorable income tax adjustments of $599 million recorded in fiscal 2006, which included net favorable tax adjustments of $565 million to income tax accruals as a result of the settlement of IRS examinations of our U.S. income tax returns for fiscal years 1993 to 1998. The reductions to the net income tax accruals for these years related primarily to the resolution of issues with respect to Puerto Rico manufacturing tax incentives and export tax incentives, and other issues involving our non-U.S. operations. In addition, the decrease in the overall tax rate in 2006 from fiscal 2005 was attributable in part to $697 million of income tax expense related to items unique to fiscal 2005. The tax expense was the result primarily of $792 million associated with the repatriation of $14.5 billion under the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 ("Jobs Act") and $76 million related to additional distributions received from foreign subsidiaries. These tax expenses were offset in part by tax benefits of $177 million resulting from agreements with the IRS and other governmental authorities. The Jobs Act, enacted on October 22, 2004, provided for a temporary 85% dividend received deduction on certain foreign earnings repatriated during a one-year period. The deduction resulted in an approximate 5.25% federal tax rate on the repatriated earnings. For a full reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and further explanation of our provision for taxes, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Segment Information A description of the products and services, as well as financial data, for each segment can be found in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. We have realigned segment financial data for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2006 and 2005 to reflect changes in HP's organizational structure that occurred at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2007. We describe these changes more fully in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. We have presented the business segments in this Annual Report on Form 10-K based on our management organizational structure as of October 31, 2007 and the distinct nature of various businesses. Future changes to this organizational structure may result in changes to the reportable segments disclosed. The discussions below include the results of each of our segments. Technology Solutions Group ESS, HPS and HP Software are structured beneath a broader Technology Solutions Group ("TSG"). We describe the results of the business segments of TSG in more detail below. 51 Enterprise Storage and Servers For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Net revenue $ 18,769 $ 17,308 $ 16,717 Earnings from operations $ 1,980 $ 1,446 $ 800 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 10.5 % 8.4 % 4.8 % The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2007 2006 Percentage points Industry standard servers 8.0 3.5 Storage 0.9 0.9 Business critical systems (0.5 ) (0.9 ) Total ESS 8.4 3.5 On a constant currency basis, ESS net revenue increased 5% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The favorable currency impact in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. Industry standard servers revenue grew 14% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006 as a result of strong growth in blade revenue and units, as well as increased option attach rates in the ProLiant server line. Storage net revenue increased 4% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006, with the increase driven primarily by mid-range EVA products and commercial products within the storage area networks offerings, as well as improved revenue growth in storage software. This increase was partially moderated by the revenue declines in our tape business and high-end arrays. Business critical systems net revenue decreased 3% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006. The decrease was due primarily to revenue declines in the PA-RISC product line and the planned phase out of our Alpha server product line. The declines were partially offset by strong net revenue growth in our Integrity servers, which represented 64% of the business critical systems revenue mix in fiscal 2007, up from 37% in fiscal 2006. We expect revenue mix from Integrity servers to continue to grow as customers migrate from PA-RISC and Alpha products. In fiscal 2007, ESS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 2.1 percentage points compared to fiscal 2006, due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. Gross margin remained stable in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006 due primarily to improved cost management. The improved cost management was offset by an ongoing mix shift to lower-margin integrity products within business critical systems and a continued mix shift towards industry standard servers. The decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to cost structure improvements. On a constant currency basis, ESS net revenue increased 5% in fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005. The unfavorable currency impact for fiscal 2006 was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro and the yen. The net revenue growth in industry standard servers of 6% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 was driven by strong unit growth and the growth in blade revenue as well as increased option attach rates in the ProLiant server line. Storage net revenue increased 4% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005 due to continued strong performance in mid-range EVA products within 52 the storage area networks offerings while the tape business decline moderated the overall storage growth. Business critical systems net revenue decreased 4% in fiscal 2006 compared to fiscal 2005. This decrease was due primarily to revenue declines in the PA-RISC product line and to the planned phase out of our Alpha server product line. The declines were partially offset by net revenue growth in our Integrity servers which posted strong net revenue growth, reaching 37% of the business critical systems revenue mix in fiscal 2006 up from 20% in the prior fiscal year. Revenue mix from Integrity servers continued to grow as customers migrated from PA-RISC and Alpha products. Integrity server revenue in fiscal 2006 also included revenue from Montecito-based Integrity servers that were first shipped in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006. NonStop server net revenue decreased 2% in fiscal 2006 from the prior year due primarily to the revenue decrease on the discontinued product line, which was partially offset by NonStop Integrity product revenue growth. In fiscal 2006, ESS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 3.6 percentage points compared to fiscal 2005, due primarily to an increase in gross margin combined with a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The improvement in gross margin was due primarily to a favorable unit mix, improved discount management, and lower component costs. The increase was partially offset by a continued mix shift towards industry standard servers within the segment and the ongoing mix shift to lower-margin Integrity products within business critical systems. The decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2006 was due primarily to efficient expense management. HP Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Net revenue $ 16,646 $ 15,617 $ 15,536 Earnings from operations $ 1,829 $ 1,507 $ 1,151 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 11.0 % 9.6 % 7.4 % The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2007 2006 Percentage points Technology services 2.1 (1.6 ) Outsourcing services (1) 2.8 1.8 Consulting and integration 1.7 0.3 Total HPS 6.6 0.5 (1) Reflects the name change from managed services to outsourcing services effective in fiscal 2007. On a constant currency basis, HPS net revenue increased 3% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. In fiscal 2007, the favorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. Net revenue in technology services increased 4% in fiscal 2007 from the prior year due primarily to favorable currency impacts, growth in the IT solution support services and extended warranty revenue, the impact of which was partially offset by competitive pricing pressures and revenue erosion from installed base contracts. Net revenue in outsourcing services increased 10% in fiscal 2007 from the prior year. The increase was driven mainly by favorable currency impacts, existing account growth and 53 new business, which were partially offset by installed base revenue erosion and pricing pressures. Net revenue in consulting and integration increased 9% in fiscal 2007 from the prior year due mainly to acquisitions made in fiscal 2007 and favorable currency impacts. HPS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2007 increased by 1.4 percentage points. The operating margin increase was the result of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin increase in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to the continued focus on cost structure improvements generated by delivery efficiencies and cost controls, the impact of which was partially offset by the impact from the continued competitive pricing environment. In fiscal 2007, continued efficiency improvements in our operating expense structure contributed to the decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue compared to the prior year. Technology services operating margin in fiscal 2007 continued to benefit from improved delivery efficiencies and cost controls, the impact of which was offset in part by the impact of the ongoing portfolio mix shift from higher margin proprietary support to lower margin areas such as IT solution services. Outsourcing services operating margin increased in fiscal 2007 due primarily to improved delivery efficiencies and reduced operating expenses partially offset by contractual pricing pressure. Consulting and integration operating margin decreased in fiscal 2007 due mainly to increased customer project losses and acquisition related costs, the impact of which was partially offset by more efficient utilization of our consultants and operating expense improvement. On a constant currency basis, HPS net revenue increased 2% in fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005. In fiscal 2006, the unfavorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro and the yen. Net revenue in technology services decreased 3% in fiscal 2006 from the prior year due primarily to declines related to competitive pricing pressures and changes in the mix of platforms being serviced. In fiscal 2006, the 7% growth in outsourcing services net revenue from the prior year was driven mainly by new business and existing account growth, with continued focus on making more strategic portfolio decisions to improve profitability. Net revenue in consulting and integration increased 2% in fiscal 2006 from the prior year due primarily to improved performance in Asia Pacific and Europe, Middle East and Africa. HPS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2006 increased by 2.2 percentage points. The operating margin increase was the result of a combination of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin increase in HPS was due primarily to the continued focus on cost structure improvement from delivery efficiencies and cost controls, the impact of which was partially offset by the continued competitive environment in solutions and services business and higher fiscal 2006 bonus accruals. In fiscal 2006, improved efficiencies in our operating expense structure contributed to the decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue compared to fiscal year 2005 despite the impact of higher bonus accruals in fiscal 2006. Technology services operating margin in fiscal 2006 continued to benefit from improved delivery efficiencies and cost controls as well as portfolio decisions made to improve profitability, all of which benefit was offset in part by the impact of the ongoing portfolio mix shift from higher margin proprietary support to lower margin areas such as solution services. Outsourcing services operating margin increased in fiscal 2006 due to delivery efficiencies, reduced operating expenses and more strategic portfolio decisions made to improve profitability. Consulting and integration operating margin improved in fiscal 2006 due to more efficient utilization of our consultants and reduced operating expenses. 54 HP Software For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Net revenue $ 2,325 $ 1,301 $ 1,061 Earnings (loss) from operations $ 347 $ 85 $ (49 ) Earnings (loss) from operations as a % of net revenue 14.9 % 6.5 % (4.6 )% On a constant currency basis, HP Software revenue increased 74% in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. The favorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. Excluding the results of Mercury, HP Software's revenue grew 5% in fiscal 2007. Net revenue associated with the acquisition of Mercury was included in the results of OpenView, which increased 121% in fiscal 2007 and 15% in the same respective period without Mercury. OpenView net revenue growth also was the result of increases in revenue from license and support contracts. Net revenue for OpenCall, our telecommunications solutions product line, decreased 16% in fiscal 2007. The decrease in OpenCall net revenue was due primarily to a platform shift that resulted in a transfer of the hardware revenue to ESS. The operating margin improvement of 8.4 percentage points in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006 was the result primarily of an increase in gross margin and to a lesser degree a decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue. In fiscal 2007, the improvement in gross margin was a result of a favorable change in revenue mix driven by the inclusion of revenue from Mercury licenses and support, which typically have a higher gross margin than the other offerings in the segment, and to a lesser degree by more effective management of the support costs for OpenView and OpenCall. Operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2007 decreased due primarily to cost controls and synergy savings from the Mercury acquisition. In fiscal 2006, Software net revenue increased 23% (8% excluding the impact of acquisitions and 24% on a constant currency basis) from fiscal 2005. The unfavorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro and the yen for fiscal 2006. Peregrine, which HP acquired in December 2005, represented 14.7 percentage points of HP Software's net revenue growth for fiscal 2006. Net revenue associated with the Peregrine acquisition is included in the results of OpenView, our management solutions software product line, which represented 20 percentage points of growth on a weighted-average net revenue basis for fiscal 2006. OpenCall contributed the remaining 3 percentage points of the weighted-average net revenue increase for fiscal 2006. OpenView net revenue growth was the result of acquisitions and increases in support and services contracts. OpenCall net revenue growth was the result of increased product sales and licenses as well as larger contracts. The operating margin improvement of 11.1 percentage points for fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005 was the result primarily of a decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue and an increase in gross margin. The decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue was attributable to growth in field selling costs, research and development and marketing expenses attributable to cost management efforts that was slower than revenue growth. These cost reductions were partially offset by high integration costs associated with the acquisition of Peregrine as well as higher bonus accruals. The improvement in gross margin was driven by an increase in revenue, more effective management of the support and services costs for OpenView and OpenCall and from improved margins of our OpenCall product line resulting from a favorable product mix shift towards higher margin products. 55 Personal Systems Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Net revenue $ 36,409 $ 29,166 $ 26,741 Earnings from operations $ 1,939 $ 1,152 $ 657 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 5.3 % 3.9 % 2.5 % The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2007 2006 Percentage points Notebook PCs 19.3 8.4 Desktop PCs 4.2 0.8 Workstations 1.2 0.6 Handhelds (0.4 ) (0.8 ) Other 0.5 0.1 Total PSG 24.8 9.1 On a constant currency basis, PSG's net revenue increased 21% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The favorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. Unit volumes increased by 28% in fiscal 2007, driving double-digit net revenue growth across all regions. The unit volume increase was the result of strong growth in notebooks, with significant improvements in emerging markets. In fiscal 2007, net revenue for notebook PCs increased 47% while net revenue for desktop PCs increased 8% from the prior-year period. In fiscal 2007, net revenue for consumer clients increased 39%, while net revenue for commercial clients increased 16% from the prior-year period. The net revenue increase in Other PSG in fiscal 2007 was related primarily to improvements in extended warranty sales. The revenue increase was partially offset by decreases in handhelds revenue due to declines in the Personal Digital Assistant ("PDA") product market, which were partially offset by our new converged device and travel companion products. In fiscal 2007, the positive revenue impact from the PSG unit volume increase compared to fiscal 2006 was also moderated by a 5% decline in commercial client ASPs and a 1% decline in consumer client ASPs. ASPs declined from the prior year was a result of price erosion related to component cost reductions, the impact of which was partially offset by increased notebook mix and monitor attach rates. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.4 percentage points in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 as a result of decreases in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue coupled with an increase in gross margin. The increased gross margin was primarily a result of component cost declines and improvements in supply chain costs per unit, the impact of which was partially offset by ASP declines. The operating expense decline as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2007 was the result primarily of the increased net revenue and continued efforts to improve our cost structure through efficiency measures. 56 On a constant currency basis, PSG's net revenue increased 10% in fiscal 2006. The unfavorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro and the yen. In fiscal 2006, net revenue increased across all regions and each business unit with the exception of handhelds, due primarily to an overall volume increase of 15%. The volume increase in fiscal 2006 was the result of strong growth in the consumer and commercial markets, with significant improvement in emerging markets. Net revenue for notebook PCs increased 23% while net revenue for desktop PCs increased slightly in fiscal 2006 from the prior year. Net revenue for consumer clients and commercial clients increased 19% and 4%, respectively, from the prior year. The revenue increases in consumer and commercial clients were partially offset by a decrease in handhelds revenue due to a decline in the PDA product market coupled with our product transition to converged devices. The PSG volume increase in fiscal 2006 was moderated by a decline of 6% in consumer client ASPs and 7% in commercial client ASPs. The ASP declines were due to pricing decisions resulting from lower component costs as well as competitive pricing pressures, the impact of which was partially offset by a strong monitor attach rate in commercial desktops PCs. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.4 percentage points in fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005 as a result of gross margin improvement and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue. The gross margin improvement was due primarily to reduced supply chain costs and warranty expense as a percentage of net revenue, combined with component cost declines. The operating expense decline as a percentage of net revenue was the result primarily of the increased net revenue and continued efforts on improving cost structure through efficiency measures. Operating expenses decreased slightly in fiscal 2006 due primarily to savings from our expense controls, which savings were partially offset by higher bonus accruals in fiscal 2006. Imaging and Printing Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Net revenue $ 28,465 $ 26,786 $ 25,155 Earnings from operations $ 4,315 $ 3,978 $ 3,413 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 15.2 % 14.9 % 13.6 % The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2007 2006 Percentage points Supplies 5.2 5.4 Commercial hardware 1.0 1.4 Consumer hardware 0.1 (0.3 ) Total IPG 6.3 6.5 On a constant currency basis, net revenue increased 4% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The favorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro in fiscal 2007. The growth in printer supplies net revenue in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 reflected higher unit volumes of supplies as a result of the continued expansion of printer hardware placements and the strong performance of supplies for color-related products. The growth in commercial hardware net 57 revenue in fiscal 2007 was attributable mainly to unit volume growth in multifunction printers and revenue from our digital press and large format printing products. The slight increase in consumer hardware net revenue in fiscal 2007 was attributable to increased unit volumes, improved average revenue per unit performance and a mix shift from single function products to All-in-Ones, the impact of which was partially offset by the continued shift in demand to lower priced products and strategic pricing decisions. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.3 percentage points in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006, driven by a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue that was partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. Gross margin decreased due primarily to unfavorable hardware margins, increased costs associated with new product introductions and a change in product mix. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased due primarily to higher prior-year research and development expenses associated with product introduction costs, coupled with higher revenue and more effective spending controls. On a constant currency basis, net revenue increased 7% in fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005. The unfavorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro and the yen in fiscal 2006. In fiscal 2006, the growth in printer supplies net revenue reflected higher unit volumes as a result of the continued expansion of printer hardware placements and the strong performance of color-related products. The growth in commercial hardware net revenue in fiscal 2006 was attributable mainly to unit volume growth in color laser printers and multifunction printers and, to a lesser extent, revenue from our large format printing products with the acquisition of Scitex in November 2005. Commercial and consumer hardware revenue was unfavorably impacted by the continued shift in demand to lower-priced products and strategic pricing decisions, which caused average revenue per unit to decline. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 1.3 percentage points in fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005, which was the result primarily of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin increase was due primarily to improved margins for supplies due to product mix and a favorable portfolio mix shift from hardware to supplies, the impact of which was partially offset by unfavorable consumer hardware margins. Operating expense as a percentage of net revenue for fiscal 2006 declined, due mainly to realized savings from our cost structure initiatives coupled with increased revenue and partially offset by higher bonus accruals. HP Financial Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Net revenue $ 2,336 $ 2,078 $ 2,102 Earnings from operations $ 155 $ 147 $ 213 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 6.6 % 7.1 % 10.1 % HPFS net revenue increased by 12% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The net revenue increase was due primarily to operating lease growth and higher end-of-lease activity. The financing lease growth and increased used equipment sales, to a lesser extent, also contributed to the revenue growth. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.5 percentage point in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 due primarily to a decrease in gross margin, which was partially offset by 58 a decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decrease was driven primarily by increased bad debt expenses and lower bad debt recoveries, as well as lower margins on leases and used equipment sales. The decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due to continued cost controls. HPFS net revenue decreased by 1% in fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005. The net revenue decrease was due primarily to lower used equipment sales and other end-of-lease revenue, which were largely offset by a higher mix of leases classified as operating leases. In fiscal 2006, the 3.0 percentage point decrease in earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue consisted of a decrease in gross margin, which was partially offset by a decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decline was due primarily to competitor pricing pressures, a higher mix of lower margin operating lease assets and lower recoveries for bad debts, the impact of which was partially offset by lower credit losses. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was the result of cost savings achieved through continued cost controls. Financing Originations For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Total financing originations $ 4,441 $ 3,994 $ 4,136 New financing originations, which represent the amounts of financing provided to customers for equipment and related software and services, and include intercompany activity, increased 11% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The increase reflects higher financing associated with HP product sales resulting from improved integration and engagement with HP's sales efforts and a favorable currency impact. Financing originations decreased 3% in fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005 with the decrease reflecting lower financing associated with HP product sales. Portfolio Assets and Ratios HPFS maintains a strategy to generate a competitive return on equity by effectively leveraging its portfolio against the risks associated with interest rates and credit. The HPFS business model is asset-intensive and uses certain internal metrics to measure its performance against other financial services companies, including a segment balance sheet that is derived from our internal management reporting system. The accounting policies used to derive these amounts are substantially the same as those used by the consolidated company. However, certain intercompany loans and accounts that are reflected in the segment balances are eliminated in our Consolidated Financial Statements. 59 The portfolio assets and ratios derived from the segment balance sheet for HPFS were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2007 2006 In millions Portfolio assets (1) $ 8,415 $ 7,345 Allowance for doubtful accounts 84 80 Operating lease equipment reserve 49 42 Total reserves 133 122 Net portfolio assets $ 8,282 $ 7,223 Reserve coverage 1.6 % 1.7 % Debt to equity ratio (2) 6.0 x 6.0 x (1) Portfolio assets include gross financing receivables of approximately $5.4 billion at October 31, 2007 and $4.9 billion at October 31, 2006 and net equipment under operating leases of $1.8 billion at October 31, 2007 and $1.5 billion at October 31, 2006, as disclosed in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Portfolio assets also include capitalized profit on intercompany equipment transactions of approximately $500 million at October 31, 2007 and $400 million at October 31, 2006, and intercompany leases of approximately $700 million at October 31, 2007 and $500 million at October 31, 2006, both of which are eliminated in consolidation. (2) HPFS debt consists of intercompany equity that is treated as debt for segment reporting purposes, intercompany debt and debt issued directly by HPFS. Portfolio assets at October 31, 2007 increased 15% from October 31, 2006. The increase resulted from a favorable currency impact and a high level of financing originations in fiscal 2007. The overall percentage of portfolio assets reserved decreased due primarily to the write-off of assets covered by specific reserves. HPFS funds its operations mainly through a combination of intercompany debt and equity. Corporate Investments For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Net revenue $ 762 $ 566 $ 523 Loss from operations $ (57 ) $ (151 ) $ (174 ) Loss from operations as a % of net revenue (7.5 )% (26.7 )% (33.3 )% The majority of the net revenue in Corporate Investments relates to network infrastructure products sold under the brand "ProCurve Networking." In fiscal 2007, revenue from network infrastructure products increased 33% compared to the same period in fiscal 2006 as new product introductions continued to drive increased sales of enterprise class gigabit Ethernet switch products. Corporate Investments' loss from operations in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to expenses associated with corporate development, global alliances and HP Labs that are carried in the segment. 60 The year-over-year decrease in operating losses was driven primarily by higher earnings from operations generated by network infrastructure products. In fiscal 2006, the majority of the net revenue in Corporate Investments related to network infrastructure products, which grew 8% from fiscal 2005 as a result of increased sales of gigabit Ethernet switch products. Corporate Investments' loss from operations in fiscal 2006 decreased compared to fiscal 2005 due primarily to lower operating expenses related to global alliances and HP Labs and higher gross profits from network infrastructure products. The decrease in operating expenses was due primarily to savings resulting from restructuring actions and lower program spending. Expenses related to global alliances and HP Labs contributed to the majority of the loss from operations. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, including substantial amounts held outside of the United States. Most of the amounts held outside of the United States could be repatriated to the United States but under current law would be subject to United States federal income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Repatriation of some foreign balances is restricted by local laws. We have provided for the United States federal tax liability on these amounts for financial statement purposes, except for foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the United States. Repatriation could result in additional United States federal income tax payments in future years. Our intent is that most of the non-U.S. cash balances would remain outside of the United States and we would meet United States liquidity needs through ongoing cash flows, external borrowings, or both. We utilize a variety of tax planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash or debt is available in the locations in which it is needed. FINANCIAL CONDITION (Sources and Uses of Cash) Our total cash and cash equivalents declined approximately 31% to $11.3 billion at October 31, 2007 from $16.4 billion at October 31, 2006 due primarily to increased spending for repurchases of our common stock and investment spending on acquisitions, which spending was partially offset by positive operating cash flows and increased borrowings. The net $14.7 billion used for investing and financing activities during fiscal 2007 included $10.9 billion for share repurchases, $6.8 billion for cash payments in connection with acquisitions and $2.5 billion for net investments in property, plant and equipment. Partially offsetting these cash expenditures were $3.1 billion of proceeds relating to the issuance of stock under employee stock plans and a $2.6 billion net increase in our debt and commercial paper from increased borrowings. Our cash position remains strong, and we believe our cash balances are sufficient to cover cash outlays expected in fiscal 2008 associated with additional stock repurchases, acquisitions, company bonus payments, and other operating cash requirements. For the fiscal years ended October 31 2007 2006 2005 In millions Net cash provided by operating activities $ 9,615 $ 11,353 $ 8,028 Net cash used in investing activities (9,123 ) (2,787 ) (1,757 ) Net cash used in financing activities (5,599 ) (6,077 ) (5,023 ) Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents $ (5,107 ) $ 2,489 $ 1,248 61 Key Performance Metrics October 31 2007 2006 2005 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable 43 40 39 Days of supply in inventory 34 38 35 Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable (50 ) (59 ) (52 ) Cash conversion cycle 27 19 22 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable ("DSO") measures the average number of days our receivables are outstanding. DSO is calculated by dividing accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, by a 90-day average net revenue. Days of supply in inventory ("DOS") measures the average number of days from procurement to sale of our product. DOS is calculated by dividing inventory by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable ("DPO") measures the average number of days our accounts payable balances are outstanding. DPO is calculated by dividing accounts payable by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our working capital requirements depend upon our effective management of the cash conversion cycle, which represents effectively the number of days that elapse from the day we pay for the purchase of raw materials to the collection of cash from our customers. The cash conversion cycle is the sum of DSO and DOS less DPO. The increase in DSO was due primarily to selectively extending payment terms and reducing cash discount rates for early payments for certain customers. The decrease in DOS was due primarily to more efficient inventory management and higher cost of goods sold during the fourth quarter as a result of increased revenues. The decrease in DPO was due primarily to purchasing linearity and reduced payment terms and cash discounts from our major contract manufacturers. These changes contributed to the increase in our current year cash conversion cycle compared to the prior year. 2007 Compared to 2006 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $1.7 billion during fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The decrease was due primarily to an increase in accounts receivable, a decrease in accounts payable and higher payments for bonuses earned in fiscal 2006 and paid in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. The decease in our cash flow from operations was partially offset by higher earnings in fiscal 2007. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by $6.3 billion in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006, due primarily to higher cash payments made in connection with acquisitions. 62 Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $0.5 billion during fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The decrease was due primarily to higher net issuance of commercial paper and debt, the impact of which was partially offset by increased repurchases of our common stock. Common Stock Repurchases We repurchase shares of our common stock under an ongoing program to manage the dilution created by shares issued under employee benefit plans as well as to repurchase shares opportunistically. This program authorizes repurchases in the open market or in private transactions. In fiscal 2007, we completed share repurchases of approximately 209 million shares. Repurchases of approximately 210 million shares were settled for $9.1 billion, which included approximately 1 million shares repurchased in transactions that were executed in fiscal 2006 but settled in fiscal 2007. In fiscal 2006, we completed share repurchases of approximately 188 million shares. Repurchases of approximately 190 million shares were settled for $6.1 billion in fiscal 2006, including 2 million shares repurchased in transactions that were executed in fiscal 2005 but settled in fiscal 2006. In addition to the above transactions, we entered into an Accelerated Share Repurchase program (the "ASR Program") with a third-party investment bank during the second quarter of fiscal 2007. Pursuant to the terms of the ASR Program, we purchased 40 million shares of our common stock from the investment bank for $1.8 billion (the "Purchase Price") on March 30, 2007 (the "Purchase Date"). We decreased our shares outstanding and reduced the outstanding shares used to calculate the weighted-average common shares outstanding for both basic and diluted EPS on the Purchase Date. The shares delivered to us included shares that the investment bank borrowed from third parties. The investment bank purchased an equivalent number of shares in the open market to cover its position with respect to the borrowed shares during a contractually specified averaging period that began on the Purchase Date and ended on June 6, 2007. At the end of the averaging period, the investment bank's total purchase cost based on the volume weighted-average purchase price of our shares during the averaging period was approximately $90 million less than the Purchase Price. Accordingly, we had the option to receive either additional shares of our common stock or a cash payment in the amount of the difference from the investment bank. In June 2007, we received approximately 2 million additional shares purchased by the investment bank in the open market with a value approximately equal to that amount. We reduced our shares outstanding upon receipt of those shares. Also, we entered into a prepaid variable share purchase program ("PVSPP") with a third-party investment bank during the first quarter of 2006 and prepaid $1.7 billion in exchange for the right to receive a variable number of shares of our common stock weekly over a one-year period beginning in the second quarter of fiscal 2006 and ending during the second quarter of fiscal 2007. We completed all repurchases under the PVSPP on March 9, 2007. As of that date, we had cumulatively received a total of 53 million shares. We retired all shares repurchased and no longer deem those shares outstanding. We intend to continue to repurchase shares as a means to manage dilution from the issuance of shares under employee benefit plans and to purchase shares opportunistically. On March 15, 2007, our Board of Directors authorized an additional $8.0 billion for future share repurchases. As of October 31, 2007, we had remaining authorization of approximately $2.7 billion for future share repurchases. On November 19, 2007, our Board of Directors authorized an additional $8.0 billion for future share repurchases. For more information on our share repurchases, see Item 5 and Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. 63 2006 Compared to 2005 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $3.3 billion during fiscal 2006. The increase in our cash flow from operations was due primarily to higher earnings and lower payments for pension and taxes, with the increase partially offset by higher payments for restructuring costs. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by $1.0 billion during fiscal 2006 due primarily to higher capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment, lower net proceeds from maturities and sales of investments and higher amounts of cash paid for acquisitions. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities increased by $1.1 billion during fiscal 2006 from fiscal 2005. The increase was due primarily to a $2.5 billion increase in repurchases of common stock and a $1.7 billion prepayment for common stock to be repurchased in future periods. These expenditures were partially offset by a $1.6 billion net increase to financing activities resulting from higher borrowings and lower debt payments and $1.4 billion increased proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to our employee stock plans due mainly to increased exercises of employee stock options as a result of higher market prices for our common stock during fiscal 2006. Common Stock Repurchases In fiscal 2006, we completed share repurchases of approximately 188 million shares. Repurchases of approximately 190 million shares were settled for $6.1 billion, which included 2 million shares repurchased in transactions that were executed in fiscal 2005 but settled in fiscal 2006, as compared to approximately 150 million shares repurchased, of which 148 million shares were settled for $3.5 billion in fiscal 2005. In addition to the shares we repurchased, we received approximately 34 million shares for an aggregate price of $1.1 billion under PVSPP as described above. Under the PVSPP, we prepaid $1.7 billion in the first quarter of fiscal 2006 in exchange for the right to receive a variable number of shares of our common stock weekly over a one-year period beginning in the second quarter of fiscal 2006 and ending during the second quarter of fiscal 2007. We recorded the payment as a prepaid stock repurchase in the stockholders' equity section of our Consolidated Balance Sheet and included the payment in the cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. In connection with this program, the investment bank purchased shares of our common stock in the open market over time. The prepaid funds were expended ratably over the term of the program. During fiscal 2006, our Board of Directors authorized an additional $10.0 billion for future repurchases of our outstanding shares of common stock. As of October 31, 2006, we had remaining authorization of approximately $5.6 billion for future share repurchases. LIQUIDITY As previously discussed, we use cash generated by operations as our primary source of liquidity; we believe that internally generated cash flows are sufficient to support business operations, capital expenditures and the payment of stockholder dividends, in addition to a level of discretionary 64 investments and share repurchases. We are able to supplement this near-term liquidity, if necessary, with broad access to capital markets and credit line facilities made available by various foreign and domestic financial institutions. We maintain debt levels that we establish through consideration of a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for operations, investment plans (including acquisitions), share repurchase activities, and the overall cost of capital. Outstanding debt increased to $8.2 billion as of October 31, 2007 as compared to $5.2 billion at October 31, 2006, bearing weighted-average interest rates of 5.2% and 5.1%, respectively. Short-term borrowings increased to $3.2 billion at October 31, 2007 from $2.7 billion at October 31, 2006. The increase in short-term borrowings was due primarily to the net issuance of approximately $1.9 billion of our commercial paper and notes payable and the reclassification from long-term to short-term debt, including $500 million U.S. Dollar Global Notes that will mature in March 2008 and $50 million Series A Medium-Term Notes that matured and we repaid in December 2007. The increase was offset partially by our repayment of $1.0 billion Global Notes in December 2006 and $1.0 billion Global Notes in July 2007. During fiscal 2007, we issued $32 billion and repaid $30 billion of commercial paper. As of October 31, 2007, we had $5 million in total borrowings collateralized by certain financing receivable assets. The majority of our outstanding debt relates to HPFS. We issue debt in order to finance HPFS and as needed for other purposes. HPFS has a business model that is asset-intensive in nature and therefore we fund HPFS more by debt than we fund our other business segments. At October 31, 2007, HPFS had approximately $8.3 billion in net portfolio assets, which included short- and long-term financing receivables and operating lease assets. We have the following resources available to obtain short-term or long-term financings, if we need additional liquidity: At October 31, 2007 Original amount available Used Available In millions 2002 Shelf Registration Statement Debt, U.S. global securities and up to $1,500 of Series B Medium-Term Notes $ 3,000 $ 2,000 $ 1,000 Euro Medium-Term Notes 3,000 3,000 Uncommitted lines of credit 2,455 645 (1) 1,810 Commercial paper programs U.S. 6,000 1,821 4,179 Euro 500 244 256 $ 14,955 $ 4,710 $ 10,245 (1) Approximately $151 million of this amount was recorded as debt as of October 31, 2007; the remaining amount was used to satisfy business operational requirements. In addition to the financing resources listed above, we had additional borrowing activities as described below. In November 2006, in connection with the Mercury acquisition, we assumed notes issued by Mercury with a face value of $300 million, maturing on July 1, 2007 and bearing interest at a rate of 65 4.75% per annum (the "Mercury Notes"). As of July 31, 2007, we had repurchased or repaid at maturity all of the Mercury Notes. In May 2006, we filed a shelf registration statement (the "2006 Shelf Registration Statement") with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC") to enable us to offer and sell from time to time, in one or more offerings, debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares and warrants. On May 23, 2006, we issued $1.0 billion in floating rate global notes due May 22, 2009 under the 2006 Shelf Registration Statement that we redeemed in June 2007. On February 22, 2007, we issued an additional $2.0 billion of global notes under the 2006 Shelf Registration Statement. The global notes included $600 million of notes due March 2012 with a floating interest rate equal to the three-month USD LIBOR plus 0.11% per annum, $900 million of notes due March 2012 with a fixed interest rate of 5.25% per annum and $500 million of notes due March 2017 with a fixed interest rate of 5.40% per annum. We issued the $600 million notes at par and the $900 million notes and $500 million notes at discounts to par at 99.938% and 99.694%, respectively. We used the net proceeds from these note offerings for general corporate purposes, including funding the repurchase of the Mercury Notes as described above and repaying short-term commercial paper. On June 12, 2007, we issued an additional $2.0 billion of global notes under the 2006 Shelf Registration Statement. The global notes included $1.0 billion of notes due June 2009 with a floating interest rate equal to the three-month USD LIBOR plus 0.01% per annum, and $1.0 billion of notes due June 2010 with a floating interest rate equal to the three-month USD LIBOR plus 0.06% per annum. We issued these global notes at par. We used the net proceeds from these offerings for general corporate purposes, including the redemption of the floating rate global notes due May 22, 2009 as described above in June 2007 and the repayment of short-term commercial paper. On December 17, 2007, we repaid $50 million Series A Medium-Term Notes due December 2007 at maturity. We have a $3.0 billion U.S. credit facility expiring in May 2012. This credit facility is a senior unsecured committed borrowing arrangement that we put in place primarily to support our U.S. commercial paper program. Our ability to have a U.S. commercial paper outstanding balance that exceeds the $3.0 billion committed credit facility is subject to a number of factors, including liquidity conditions and business performance. Our credit risk is evaluated by three independent rating agencies based upon publicly available information as well as information obtained in our ongoing discussions with them. Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, Moody's Investors Service and Fitch Ratings currently rate our senior unsecured long-term debt A, A2 and A+ and our short-term debt A-1, Prime-1 and F1, respectively. We do not have any rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity of a material amount of our debt. However, a downgrade in our credit rating would increase the cost of borrowings under our credit facilities. Also, a downgrade in our credit rating could limit our ability to issue commercial paper under our current programs. If this occurs, we would seek alternative sources of funding, including through drawdowns under our credit facility or the issuance of notes under our existing shelf registration statements and our Euro Medium-Term Note Programme. We have revolving trade receivables-based facilities permitting us to sell certain trade receivables to third parties on a non-recourse basis. The aggregate maximum capacity under these programs was approximately $525 million as of October 31, 2007. We sold approximately $2.2 billion of trade 66 receivables during fiscal 2007. As of October 31, 2007, we had approximately $117 million available under these programs. Contractual Obligations The impact that we expect our contractual obligations as of October 31, 2007 to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods is as follows: Payments Due by Period Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years In millions Long-term debt, including capital lease obligations (1) $ 5,827 $ 683 $ 2,059 $ 2,012 $ 1,073 Operating lease obligations 2,193 595 761 409 428 Purchase obligations (2) 2,029 1,826 164 24 15 Total $ 10,049 $ 3,104 $ 2,984 $ 2,445 $ 1,516 (1) Amounts represent the expected cash payments of our long-term debt and do not include any fair value adjustments or discounts. Included in our long-term debt are approximately $48 million of capital lease obligations that are secured by certain equipment. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancelable without penalty. These purchase obligations are related principally to inventory and other items. Funding Commitments During fiscal 2007, we made approximately $133 million of contributions to non-U.S. pension plans, paid $16 million to cover benefit payments to U.S. non-qualified plan participants, and paid $58 million to cover benefit claims under post-retirement benefit plans. In addition, we used $108 million of cash to fund the distribution and subsequent transfer of accrued pension benefits from the U.S. Excess Benefit Plan to the U.S. Executive Deferred Compensation Plan for the terminated vested plan participants. In fiscal 2008, we expect to contribute approximately $145 million to our pension plans and approximately $15 million to cover benefit payments to U.S. non-qualified plan participants. We also expect to pay approximately $80 million to cover benefit claims for our post-retirement benefit plans in fiscal 2008. Our funding policy is to contribute cash to our pension plans so that we meet at least the minimum contribution requirements, as established by local government and funding and taxing authorities. We expect to use contributions made to the post-retirement benefit plans primarily for the payment of retiree health claims incurred during the fiscal year. In conjunction with our February 2007 announcement to modify our U.S. defined benefit pension plan and our Pre-2003 Retiree Medical Program, we offered eligible affected employees an option to participate in the 2007 EER. We funded the cash expenditures associated with the 2007 EER primarily by using available U.S. pension plan assets. We made no incremental pension contributions to the pension plan stemming from the 2007 EER. 67 We have implemented bonus programs that are designed to reward our employees upon achievement of annual performance objectives. We calculate bonuses based on a formula, with targets that are set at the beginning of each fiscal year. Our Board of Directors approves both the formula and the targets. In fiscal 2007, we outperformed against our targets, which will result in a significant bonus payout during the first quarter of fiscal 2008 and a corresponding reduction of cash flow from operations in that quarter. We accrued and expensed this bonus, as it was earned, throughout fiscal 2007. As a result of our approved restructuring plans, we expect future cash expenditures of $173 million, which we recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheet at October 31, 2007. We expect to make cash payments of approximately $123 million in fiscal 2008 and the majority of the remaining $50 million through 2014. Pending and Subsequent Acquisitions For pending acquisitions, see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As part of our ongoing business, we do not participate in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities ("SPEs"), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As of October 31, 2007, we are not involved in any material unconsolidated SPEs. Indemnifications In the ordinary course of business, we enter into contractual arrangements under which we may agree to indemnify the third-party to such arrangement from any losses incurred relating to the services they perform on behalf of us or for losses arising from certain events as defined within the particular contract, which may include, for example, litigation or claims relating to past performance. Such indemnification obligations may not be subject to maximum loss clauses. Historically, payments we have made related to these indemnifications have been immaterial. 68 
