CIK: 47217
Company Name: HEWLETT PACKARD CO
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-12-17


ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. OVERVIEW We are a leading global provider of products, technologies, software, solutions and services to individual consumers, small- and medium-sized businesses, and large enterprises, including customers in the government, health and education sectors. Our offerings span: multi-vendor customer services, including infrastructure technology and business process outsourcing, technology support and maintenance, application development and support services, and consulting and integration services; enterprise information technology infrastructure, including enterprise storage and server technology, networking products and resources, and software that optimizes business technology investments; personal computing and other access devices; and imaging and printing-related products and services. We have seven business segments for financial reporting purposes: Services, Enterprise Storage and Servers ("ESS"), HP Software, the Personal Systems Group ("PSG"), the Imaging and Printing Group ("IPG"), HP Financial Services ("HPFS"), and Corporate Investments. Services, ESS and HP Software are reported collectively as a broader HP Enterprise Business (formerly referred to as the Technology Solutions Group). While the HP Enterprise Business is not an operating segment, we sometimes provide financial data aggregating the segments within it in order to provide a supplementary view of our business. Our strategy and operations are currently focused on the following initiatives: Competitive Positioning We are positioning our businesses to take advantage of important trends in the markets for our products and services. For example, we are aligning our printing business to capitalize on key market trends such as the shift from analog to digital printing and the growth in printable content by developing innovative products for consumers such as the first web-connected home printer, working to enable web and mobile printing, expanding our presence in high-usage annuity businesses including graphics and retail photo printing, and growing our managed print services business. We are also positioning our enterprise business to capitalize on the trend towards converged infrastructure products that integrate storage, networking, servers and management software. In addition, we have developed IT management software offerings that seek to satisfy the increasing demand for virtualization management and increased automation. Driving Operational Efficiency We have implemented an ongoing program to optimize efficiency and reduce cost across the company. As part of those efforts, we are continuing to execute on our multi-year program to consolidate real estate locations worldwide to fewer core sites in order to reduce our IT spending and 36 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) real estate costs. In addition, we are continuing to implement the restructuring plan announced in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 to optimize the cost structure of our services business and the restructuring plan announced in May 2009 to structurally change and improve the effectiveness of several of our product businesses. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of these restructuring plans and the associated restructuring charges. We also took actions in fiscal 2009 to further improve our cost structure and further shift our employee compensation structure from fixed to variable. As part of those actions, we reduced base pay for many of our employees, we reduced the matching contributions under the HP 401(k) Plan for all U.S. employees and began funding these matching contributions quarterly on a discretionary basis based on our financial performance, and we modified our employee stock purchase plan to eliminate the discount applicable to purchases made under the plan. We are continuing to evaluate our businesses and market conditions and may consider additional restructuring or other actions in future periods. Investing for Growth We are investing some of the savings derived from our efficiency initiatives for growth. For example, we are increasing our sales coverage to expand the size of the market that we cover, including expanding into emerging markets such as China, India and Brazil. We are creating innovative new products and developing new channels to connect with our customers, particularly in our PC business. In addition, we are expanding our portfolio of products and services that we can offer to our customers, both through acquisitions and through organic growth. A critical component of this strategy was our acquisition of Electronic Data Systems Corporation ("EDS") in August 2008, which has increased the size and breadth of our services business and enabled us to provide comprehensive IT product and services solutions to our customers. In November 2009, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire 3Com Corporation, a global enterprise provider of networking switching, routing and security solutions, at a price of $7.90 per share in cash or an enterprise value of approximately $2.7 billion. The acquisition is subject to customary closing conditions, including the receipt of domestic and foreign regulatory approvals and the approval of 3Com's stockholders. The transaction is expected to close in our second fiscal quarter of 2010. Leveraging our Portfolio and Scale We now offer one of the IT industry's broadest portfolios of products and services, and we are working to leverage that portfolio as a strategic advantage. For example, in our enterprise business, we are able to provide servers, storage and networking packaged with services that can be delivered to customers in the manner of their choosing, be it in-house, outsourced or as a service via the Internet. Our portfolio of management software completes the package by allowing our customers to manage their IT operations in an efficient and cost-effective manner. In addition, we are working to optimize our supply chain by eliminating complexity, reducing fixed costs, and leveraging our scale to ensure the availability of components at favorable prices even during shortages. We are also expanding our use of industry standard components in our enterprise products to further leverage our scale. 37 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The following provides an overview of our key fiscal 2009 financial metrics and demonstrates how our execution of these initiatives has translated into financial performance: HP Enterprise Business HP Consolidated Services ESS HP Software Total PSG IPG HPFS In millions, except per share amounts Net revenue $ 114,552 $ 34,693 $ 15,359 $ 3,572 $ 53,624 $ 35,305 $ 24,011 $ 2,673 Year-over-year net revenue % (decrease) increase (3.2 )% 65.4 % (20.8 )% (15.4 )% 20.2 % (16.5 )% (18.9 )% (0.9 )% Earnings from operations $ 10,136 $ 5,044 $ 1,518 $ 684 $ 7,246 $ 1,661 $ 4,310 $ 206 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 8.8 % 14.5 % 9.9 % 19.1 % 13.5 % 4.7 % 18.0 % 7.7 % Net earnings $ 7,660 Net earnings per share Basic $ 3.21 Diluted $ 3.14 Cash and cash equivalents at October 31, 2009 totaled $13.3 billion, an increase of $3.1 billion from the October 31, 2008 balance of $10.2 billion. The increase for fiscal 2009 was due primarily to $13.4 billion of cash provided from operations and $1.8 billion of proceeds from the issuance of common stock under employee stock plans, which were partially offset by $5.1 billion of cash used to repurchase common stock, $3.2 billion net investment in property, plant and equipment, and $2.8 billion net payment of our debt. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. The discussion of results of operations at the consolidated level is followed by a more detailed discussion of results of operations by segment. For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our operating results, see the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A, which is incorporated herein by reference. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES General The Consolidated Financial Statements of HP are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of HP's Board of Directors. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are 38 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Revenue Recognition We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and, while the majority of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain multiple elements or non-standard terms and conditions. As a result, significant contract interpretation is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple element arrangement should be treated as separate units of accounting for revenue recognition purposes, and, if so, how the price should be allocated among the elements and when to recognize revenue for each element. We recognize revenue for delivered elements only when the delivered elements have standalone value, uncertainties regarding customer acceptance are resolved and there are no customer-negotiated refund or return rights for the delivered elements. If the arrangement includes a customer-negotiated refund or return right relative to the delivered item and the delivery and performance of the undelivered item is considered probable and substantially in our control, the delivered element constitutes a separate unit of accounting. Changes in the allocation of the sales price between elements may impact the timing of revenue recognition but will not change the total revenue recognized on the contract. We recognize revenue as work progresses on certain fixed-price contracts, such as consulting arrangements. Using a proportional performance method, we estimate the total expected labor costs in order to determine the amount of revenue earned to date. We follow this basis because reasonably dependable estimates of the labor costs applicable to various stages of a contract can be made. Total contract profit is subject to revisions throughout the life of the contract. We record changes in revenue to income, as a result of revisions to cost estimates, in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. We recognize revenue on certain design and build (design, development and/or construction of software and/or systems) projects using the percentage-of-completion method. We use the cost-to-cost method of measurement towards completion as determined by the percentage of cost incurred to date to the total estimated costs of the project. In circumstances when reasonable and reliable cost estimates for a project cannot be made, we recognize revenue using the completed contract method. We record estimated reductions to revenue for customer and distributor programs and incentive offerings, including price protection, promotions, other volume-based incentives and expected returns. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered. Additionally, certain incentive programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience, the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. In October 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2009-13, "Multiple-Deliverable Revenue Arrangements" 39 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) ("ASU 2009-13"). The new standard changes the requirements for establishing separate units of accounting in a multiple element arrangement and requires the allocation of arrangement consideration to each deliverable based on the relative selling price. The selling price for each deliverable is based on vendor-specific objective evidence ("VSOE") if available, third-party evidence ("TPE") if VSOE is not available, or estimated selling price ("ESP") if neither VSOE nor TPE is available. Concurrently to issuing ASU 2009-13, the FASB also issued ASU No. 2009-14, "Certain Revenue Arrangements That Include Software Elements" ("ASU 2009-14"). ASU 2009-14 excludes software that is contained on a tangible product from the scope of software revenue guidance if the software is essential to the tangible product's functionality. HP early adopted the provisions of ASU 2009-13 and ASU 2009-14 as of the beginning of fiscal 2009 for new and materially modified deals originating after November 1, 2008; therefore the previously reported quarterly results have been restated to reflect the impact of adoption. We establish VSOE of selling price using the price charged for a deliverable when sold separately and, in rare instances, using the price established by management having the relevant authority. TPE of selling price is established by evaluating largely similar and interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone sales to similarly situated customers. The best estimate of selling price is established considering internal factors such as margin objectives, pricing practices and controls, customer segment pricing strategies and the product lifecycle. Consideration is also given to market conditions such as competitor pricing strategies and industry technology lifecycles. When determining our best estimate of selling price, we apply management judgment when establishing margin objectives and pricing strategies and evaluating market conditions and product lifecycles. We may modify or develop new go-to-market practices in the future. As these go-to-market strategies evolve, we may modify our pricing practices in the future, which may result in changes in selling prices, impacting both VSOE and ESP. The aforementioned factors may result in a different allocation of revenue to the deliverables in multiple element arrangements from the current fiscal year, which may change the pattern and timing of revenue recognition for these elements but will not change the total revenue recognized for the arrangement. The adoption of ASU 2009-13 and ASU 2009-14 was not material to our financial results, increasing net revenues and net earnings by $255 million and $55 million, respectively for fiscal 2009. The primary driver of the impact was the number of new or materially modified deals, particularly impacting the second half of the fiscal year, which was driven by economic and customer-specific factors. An additional driver of the impact was the extent of hardware or shorter-term service projects sold into longer-term complex service arrangements in a particular quarter, which may vary significantly on a deal-by-deal basis. We are not able to reasonably estimate the effect of adopting these standards on future financial periods as the impact will vary based on the nature and volume of new or materially modified deals in any given period. Business Combinations We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development ("IPR&D"), based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over these fair values is recorded as goodwill. We engage independent third-party appraisal firms to assist us in determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. The significant 40 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) purchased intangible assets recorded by us include customer contracts and lists, developed and core technology and the Compaq trade name. The fair values assigned to the identified intangible assets are discussed in detail in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from customer contracts, customer lists, distribution agreements, and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop IPR&D into commercially viable products and estimating cash flows from projects when completed; Compaq brand awareness and market position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the brand will continue to be used in our product portfolio; and discount rates. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Other estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as additional information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as more fully discussed in Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Restructuring We have engaged, and may continue to engage, in restructuring actions, which require management to utilize significant estimates related to expenses for severance and other employee separation costs, realizable values of assets made redundant or obsolete, lease cancellation and other exit costs. If the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of the restructuring charges could be materially impacted. For a full description of our restructuring actions, refer to our discussions of restructuring in the Results of Operations section and Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Stock-Based Compensation Expense We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payment awards, net of an estimated forfeiture rate. We recognize compensation cost for only those shares expected to vest on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards requires subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the share-based payment awards and stock price volatility. We utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value the stock options granted under our principal option plans. To implement this model, we examined our historical pattern of option exercises to determine if there were any discernable activity patterns based on certain employee populations. From this analysis, we identified three employee populations to which to apply the Black-Scholes model. We determined that implied volatility calculated based on actively traded options on HP common stock is a better indicator of expected volatility and future stock price trends than historical volatility. Therefore, expected volatility used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model in fiscal years 2009, 2008 and 2007 was based on market-based implied volatility. We issue performance-based restricted units ("PRUs") representing hypothetical shares of HP common stock. Each PRU award reflects a target number of shares that may be issued to the award recipient. We determine the actual number of shares the recipient receives at the end of a three-year performance period based on results achieved versus goals based on our annual cash flow from operations as a percentage of revenue and average total shareholder return ("TSR") relative to the S&P 500 over the performance period. We use historic volatility for PRU awards as implied volatility 41 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) cannot be used when simulating multivariate prices for companies in the S&P 500. We estimate the fair value of PRUs using the Monte Carlo simulation model, as the TSR modifier contains a market condition. We update the estimated expense, net of forfeitures, for the cashflow performance against the goal for that year at the end of each reporting period. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management's best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion on stock-based compensation. Taxes on Earnings We calculate our current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in our income tax returns filed during the subsequent year. We record adjustments based on filed returns when we have identified and finalized them, which is generally in the third and fourth quarters of the subsequent year for U.S. federal and state provisions, respectively. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that we are more likely than not to realize. We have considered future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and make a corresponding charge to earnings in the period in which we make such determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the net deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets, we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the tax jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located. Our effective tax rate includes the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. taxes because we plan to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the United States. We plan foreign earnings remittance amounts based on projected cash flow needs as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we will distribute to the United States and provide the U.S. federal taxes due on these amounts. Further, as a result of certain employment actions and capital investments we have undertaken, income from manufacturing activities in certain countries is subject to reduced tax rates, and in some cases is wholly exempt from taxes, for fiscal years through 2022. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact our effective tax rate. 42 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) We are subject to income taxes in the United States and over sixty foreign countries, and we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that our tax return positions are fully supported, but tax authorities are likely to challenge certain positions, which may not be fully sustained. However, our income tax expense includes amounts intended to satisfy income tax assessments that result from these challenges. Determining the income tax expense for these potential assessments and recording the related assets and liabilities requires management judgments and estimates. We evaluate our uncertain tax positions in accordance with the guidance for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. We believe that our reserve for uncertain tax positions, including related interest, is adequate. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of audits could be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax expense and therefore could have a material impact on our tax provision, net income and cash flows. Our reserve for uncertain tax positions is attributable primarily to uncertainties concerning the tax treatment of our international operations, including the allocation of income among different jurisdictions, and related interest. We review our reserves quarterly, and we may adjust such reserves because of proposed assessments by tax authorities, changes in facts and circumstances, issuance of new regulations or new case law, previously unavailable information obtained during the course of an examination, negotiations between tax authorities of different countries concerning our transfer prices, execution of Advanced Pricing Agreements, resolution with respect to individual audit issues, the resolution of entire audits, or the expiration of statutes of limitations. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We determine our allowance for doubtful accounts using a combination of factors to ensure that we have not overstated our trade and financing receivables balances due to uncollectibility. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for all customers based on a variety of factors, including the use of third-party credit risk models that generate quantitative measures of default probabilities based on market factors, the financial condition of customers, the length of time receivables are past due, trends in overall weighted-average risk rating of the total portfolio, macroeconomic conditions, significant one-time events and historical experience. Also, we record specific provisions for individual accounts when we become aware of specific customer circumstances, such as in the case of bankruptcy filings or deterioration in the customer's operating results or financial position. If circumstances related to customers change, we would further adjust our estimates of the recoverability of receivables either upward or downward. The annual general provision for doubtful accounts has averaged approximately 0.06% of net revenue over the last three fiscal years. Using our third-party credit risk model at October 31, 2009, a 50-basis-point deterioration in the weighted-average default probabilities of our significant customers would have resulted in an approximately $36 million increase to our trade allowance at the end of fiscal year 2009. Inventory We state our inventory at the lower of cost or market. We make adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, at the product group level for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired balances. Factors influencing these adjustments include changes in demand, rapid technological changes, product life cycle and development plans, component cost trends, product pricing, physical deterioration and quality issues. Revisions to these adjustments would be required if these factors differ from our estimates. 43 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Valuation of Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets We review goodwill and purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. The provisions of Accounting Standards Codification Topic 350, "Intangibles Goodwill and Other" require that we perform a two-step impairment test on goodwill. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. Our reporting units are consistent with the reportable segments identified in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a weighting of income and market approaches. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on market multiples of revenue or earnings for comparable companies. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not impaired and we are not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we must perform the second step of the impairment test in order to determine the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill. If the carrying value of a reporting unit's goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then we record an impairment loss equal to the difference. We also compare the fair value of purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives to their carrying value. We estimate the fair value of these intangible assets using an income approach. We recognize an impairment loss when the estimated fair value of the intangible asset is less than the carrying value. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit or an indefinite-lived purchased intangible asset is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, assumed royalty rates, future economic and market conditions and determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units. Our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which we performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, did not result in an impairment charge. The excess of fair value over carrying value for each of HP's reporting units as of August 1, 2009, the annual testing date, ranged from approximately $750 million to approximately $35 billion. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the fair value calculations on the goodwill impairment test, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair values of each reporting unit. This hypothetical 10% decrease would result in excess fair value over carrying value ranging from approximately $550 million to approximately $31 billion for each of HP's reporting units. Fair Value of Financial Instruments We measure certain financial assets and liabilities at fair value based on valuation techniques using the best information available, which may include quoted market prices, market comparables, and discounted cash flow projections. Financial instruments are primarily comprised of time deposits, money market funds, commercial paper, corporate and other debt securities, equity securities and other investments in common stock and common stock equivalents and derivative instruments. 44 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) We measure fair value using the framework established by the FASB accounting guidance for fair value measurements and disclosures. This framework requires fair value to be determined based on the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. The valuation techniques are based upon observable and unobservable inputs. Observable or market inputs reflect market data obtained from independent sources. Unobservable inputs require management to make certain assumptions and judgments based on the best information available. Observable inputs are the preferred source of values. These two types of inputs create the following fair value hierarchy: Level 1 Quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical instruments in active markets. Level 2 Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active, and model-based valuation techniques for which all significant assumptions are observable in the market or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 Prices or valuations that require management inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable. A description of the valuation methodologies we use to measure our financial assets and liabilities at fair value is provided below. Cash Equivalents and Investments: We hold time deposits, money market funds, commercial paper, other debt securities primarily consisting of corporate and foreign government notes and bonds, and common stock and equivalents. In general, and where applicable, we use quoted prices in active markets for identical assets to determine fair value. If quoted prices in active markets for identical assets are not available to determine fair value, then we use quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities or inputs that are observable either directly or indirectly. If quoted prices for identical or similar assets are not available, we use internally developed valuation models, whose inputs include bid prices, and third party valuations utilizing underlying asset assumptions. Derivative Instruments: As discussed in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, we mainly hold non-speculative forwards, swaps and options to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures. When active market quotes are not available, we use industry standard valuation models. Where applicable, these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to a present value using market-based observable inputs including interest rate curves, credit risk, foreign exchange rates, and forward and spot prices for currencies. In certain cases, market-based observable inputs are not available and, in those cases, we use management judgment to develop assumptions which are used to determine fair value. Warranty Provision We provide for the estimated cost of product warranties at the time we recognize revenue. We evaluate our warranty obligations on a product group basis. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period of time. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, we base our estimated warranty obligation upon warranty terms, ongoing product failure rates, repair costs, product 45 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) call rates, average cost per call, and current period product shipments. If actual product failure rates, repair rates or any other post sales support costs were to differ from our estimates, we would be required to make revisions to the estimated warranty liability. Warranty terms generally range from 90 days to three years parts and labor, depending upon the product. Over the last three fiscal years, the annual warranty provision has averaged approximately 3.5% of annual net product revenue, while actual annual warranty costs have averaged approximately 3.3% of annual net product revenue. Retirement Benefits Our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations are dependent on various assumptions. Our major assumptions relate primarily to discount rates, salary growth, long-term return on plan assets and medical cost trend rates. We base the discount rate assumption on current investment yields of high quality fixed income investments during the retirement benefits maturity period. The salary growth assumptions reflect our long-term actual experience and future and near-term outlook. Long-term return on plan assets is determined based on historical portfolio results and management's expectation of the future economic environment, as well as target asset allocations. In the beginning of fiscal 2008, we implemented a liability-driven investment strategy for the HP U.S. defined benefit pension plan, which was frozen effective December 31, 2007. As part of the strategy, we transitioned our investment allocation for that plan to predominantly fixed income assets. In fiscal 2008, we acquired EDS. The EDS U.S. defined benefit plan assets were invested predominantly in public equity and alternative investments. At the end of fiscal 2009, the assets of the HP and EDS plans were merged, resulting in a portfolio with a blend of fixed income, equities and alternatives. The expected return on the plan assets, used in calculating the net benefit cost, is 7.99% for fiscal 2010, which reflects the target asset allocation of the merged portfolio. Our medical cost trend assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends. Actual results that differ from our assumptions are accumulated and are amortized generally over the estimated future working life of the plan participants. Our major assumptions vary by plan and the weighted-average rates used are set forth in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Each assumption has different sensitivity characteristics, and, in general, changes, if any, have moved in the same direction over the last several years. For fiscal 2009, changes in the weighted-average rates for the HP benefit plans would have had the following impact on our net periodic benefit cost: A decrease of 25 basis points in the long-term rate of return would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $43 million; A decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $71 million; and An increase of 25 basis points in the future compensation rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $15 million. Loss Contingencies We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations and proceedings that arise in the ordinary course of business. We record a provision for a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Significant 46 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount. We review these provisions at least quarterly and adjust these provisions to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information. Litigation is inherently unpredictable and is subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS In September 2006, the FASB issued a new accounting standard related to fair value measurements. The new standard defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. In February 2008, the FASB issued a new provision which delayed the effective date of the fair value measurements and disclosures for all nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities, except those that are recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). In August 2009, the FASB issued ASU No. 2009-05, "Measuring Liabilities at Fair Value" in relation to the fair value measurement of liabilities. We adopted the applicable portions of the provisions of the new standards in the first and fourth quarters of fiscal 2009, and will adopt the provision related to the nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. Although we will continue to evaluate the application of the provision for the nonfinancial assets and nonfinancial liabilities, we do not expect the adoption to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for additional information pertaining to fair value measurements. In December 2007, the FASB issued a new accounting standard related to business combinations. The new standard expands the definition of a business and a business combination; requires recognition of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and contingent consideration at their fair value on the acquisition date with subsequent changes recognized in earnings; requires acquisition-related expenses and restructuring costs to be recognized separately from the business combination and expensed as incurred; requires in-process research and development to be capitalized at fair value as an indefinite-lived intangible asset; and requires that changes in accounting for deferred tax asset valuation allowances and acquired income tax uncertainties after the measurement period be recognized as a component of provision for taxes. The new standard also establishes disclosure requirements to enable the evaluation of the nature and financial effects of the business combination. In April 2009, the FASB issued a new standard which clarified the accounting for pre-acquisition contingencies. We will adopt these new business combination standards in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. The impact of adoption will be largely dependent on the size and nature of the business combinations completed after the adoption of this statement. In December 2007, the FASB issued a new accounting standard related to noncontrolling interests. The new standard establishes accounting and reporting standards for ownership interests in subsidiaries held by parties other than the parent, the amount of consolidated net income attributable to the parent and to the noncontrolling interest, changes in a parent's ownership interest, and the valuation of retained noncontrolling equity investments when a subsidiary is deconsolidated. The new standard also establishes disclosure requirements that clearly identify and distinguish between the interests of the parent and the interests of the noncontrolling owners. We will adopt this new accounting standard in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We do not expect the adoption of this standard will have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements. 47 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) In May 2008, the FASB issued a new accounting standard related to convertible debt instruments. The new standard requires the issuer of certain convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash (or other assets) on conversion to separately account for the liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument in a manner that reflects the issuer's non-convertible debt borrowing rate. We will adopt this new accounting standard on a retrospective basis in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We do not expect the adoption of this standard will have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements. In June 2008, the FASB issued a new accounting standard that clarifies whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions should be included in computing earnings per share. Under the new standard, we will be required to include restricted stock that contains non-forfeitable rights to dividends in our calculation of basic earnings per share ("EPS"), and will need to calculate basic EPS using the "two-class method." The two-class method of computing EPS is an earnings allocation formula that determines EPS for each class of common stock and participating securities according to dividends declared (or accumulated) and participation rights in undistributed earnings. We will adopt this new accounting standard on a retrospective basis in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We do not expect the adoption of this standard will have a material effect on our calculation of basic EPS. In November 2008, the FASB issued a new accounting standard related to defensive intangible assets. Defensive intangible assets are acquired intangible assets that the acquirer does not intend to actively use but intends to hold to prevent its competitors from obtaining access to them. Under the new standard, defensive intangible assets must be initially recognized at fair value and amortized over the benefit period. We will adopt this new accounting standard in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. The impact of adoption will be largely dependent on the size and nature of business combinations completed after the date of adoption. In December 2008, the FASB issued a new accounting standard that requires additional disclosures about assets held in an employer's defined benefit pension or other postretirement plan. We will adopt this new accounting standard in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We will present the required disclosures in the prescribed format on a prospective basis upon adoption. This new standard will only affect the notes to our consolidated financial statements. In June 2009, the FASB issued a new accounting standard related to transfers of financial assets. It amends previous guidance to remove the concept of a qualifying special-purpose entity and its exemption from consolidation in the transferor's financial statements. This new standard also establishes conditions for reporting a transfer of a portion of a financial asset as a sale, modifies the financial-asset derecognition criteria, revises how interests retained by the transferor in a sale of financial assets are initially measured, removes the guaranteed mortgage securitization recharacterization provisions, and requires additional disclosures. We will adopt this new accounting standard in the first quarter of fiscal 2011. We do not expect the adoption of this standard will have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements. In June 2009, the FASB issued a new accounting standard related to the consolidation of variable interest entities. It eliminates the quantitative approach previously required for determining the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity and requires ongoing qualitative reassessments of whether an enterprise is the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity. This new standard also requires additional disclosures about an enterprise's involvement in variable interest entities. We will adopt this new accounting standard in the first quarter of fiscal 2011. We are currently evaluating the impact the adoption of this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements. 48 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, we adopted the FASB Accounting Standards Codification and the Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles which only affected the specific references to GAAP literature in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. In October 2009, the FASB issued ASU 2009-13. The new standard changes the requirements for establishing separate units of accounting in a multiple element arrangement and requires the allocation of arrangement consideration to each deliverable to be based on the relative selling price. Concurrently to issuing ASU 2009-13, the FASB also issued ASU 2009-14. ASU 2009-14 excludes software that is contained on a tangible product from the scope of software revenue guidance if the software is essential to the tangible product's functionality. A further discussion of the financial impact of ASU 2009-13 and ASU 2009-14 appears under "Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates" above. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion compares the historical results of operations on a GAAP basis for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2009, 2008, and 2007. We have included the results of the business operations acquired from EDS in our consolidated results of operations beginning on August 26, 2008, the closing date of the EDS acquisition. Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2009 2008 2007 In millions Net revenue $ 114,552 100.0 % $ 118,364 100.0 % $ 104,286 100.0 % Cost of sales (1) 87,524 76.4 % 89,699 (2) 75.8 % 78,683 (2) 75.4 % Gross profit 27,028 23.6 % 28,665 24.2 % 25,603 24.6 % Research and development 2,819 2.5 % 3,543 3.0 % 3,611 3.5 % Selling, general and administrative 11,613 10.1 % 13,326 (2) 11.3 % 12,430 (2) 11.9 % Amortization of purchased intangible assets 1,571 1.4 % 967 0.9 % 783 0.7 % In-process research and development charges 7 45 190 0.2 % Restructuring charges 640 0.6 % 270 0.2 % 387 0.4 % Acquisition-related charges 242 0.2 % 41 Pension curtailments and pension settlements, net (517 ) (0.5 )% Earnings from operations 10,136 8.8 % 10,473 8.8 % 8,719 8.4 % Interest and other, net (721 ) (0.6 )% 458 0.4 % Earnings before taxes 9,415 8.2 % 10,473 8.8 % 9,177 8.8 % Provision for taxes 1,755 1.5 % 2,144 1.8 % 1,913 1.8 % Net earnings $ 7,660 6.7 % $ 8,329 7.0 % $ 7,264 7.0 % (1) Cost of products, cost of services and financing interest. (2) Certain pursuit-related costs previously reported under Cost of sales have been realigned retroactively to Selling, general and administrative expenses due to organizational realignments. 49 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Net Revenue The components of the weighted net revenue change from the prior-year period were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2009 2008 Percentage Points Personal Systems Group (5.9 ) 5.6 Imaging and Printing Group (4.7 ) 1.0 Enterprise Storage and Servers (3.4 ) 0.7 HP Software (0.6 ) 0.6 Corporate Investments/Other (0.2 ) (0.2 ) HP Financial Services 0.4 Services 11.6 5.4 Total HP (3.2 ) 13.5 Fiscal 2009 In fiscal 2009, the global slowdown of IT and consumer spending impacted each of our segments. Net revenue decreased 3.2% in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 (increased 1.3% on a constant currency basis). The unfavorable currency impact for fiscal 2009 was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. For fiscal 2009, the Services segment contributed favorably to the total HP net revenue change primarily as a result of the EDS acquisition. U.S. net revenue increased 12% to $41.3 billion for fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008, while net revenue from outside of the United States decreased 10% to $73.2 billion. The increase in U.S. net revenue in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 was primarily a result of the acquisition of EDS. The PSG net revenue decline in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 was primarily the result of the overall slowdown in the global economy. PSG average selling prices ("ASPs") declined in both consumer clients and commercial clients. The ASP decline in fiscal 2009 was offset slightly by an increase in the option and monitor attach rates. PSG unit volumes, however, increased slightly in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. IPG experienced net revenue declines in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 in the commercial and consumer hardware business units and in the supplies business unit. Unit volume declines across each of the business units were a result of the softness in both the business and consumer demand environments. ESS net revenue decreased in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 driven by declines in our industry standard servers ("ISS"), business critical systems and storage business units. The revenue declines were due primarily to the economic slowdown and overall weak demand environment. ISS unit volumes and average unit prices declined in fiscal 2009 as compared to the prior year. HP Software experienced net revenue declines in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 in both the business technology optimization ("BTO") business unit and the other software business unit due primarily to revenue declines in licenses and services, the effect of which was partially offset by increased support revenue as a result of renewal rate increases. 50 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Net revenue in Corporate Investments and Other declined in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008, resulting from lower sales of network infrastructure products primarily as a result of the slowdown in the networking market. HPFS net revenue decreased in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 due to unfavorable currency movements. The net revenue increase in Services in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 was due primarily to net revenue increases in infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services and business process outsourcing primarily as a result of the EDS acquisition in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, the effect of which was partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts and a decline in spending from existing customers. Net revenue in technology services declined in fiscal 2009 due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and weak economic conditions, the effect of which was partially offset by growth in extended warranty. Fiscal 2008 In fiscal 2008, HP net revenue increased approximately 13.5% from the prior-year period (8.4% on a constant currency basis). The favorable currency impact for fiscal 2008 was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. U.S. net revenue was $36.9 billion for fiscal 2008, an increase of 6% from the prior year, while international net revenue increased 17% to $81.4 billion. PSG net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 as a result of a unit volume increase of 22%. The unit volume increase was the result of strong growth in notebooks with continued strength in emerging markets. The positive revenue impact from this unit volume increase was moderated by declines in ASPs in commercial and consumer clients of 7% and 4%, respectively. IPG net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 due to the growth in supplies net revenue as a result of higher unit volumes with strong performance from color-related products. For fiscal 2008, commercial hardware net revenues increased slightly, while consumer hardware net revenues declined due primarily to competitive pricing pressures and a slowing economy. ESS net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 over the prior-year period due primarily to strong performance in storage, which was due in part to growth within our EVA and MSA product lines, and revenue growth in industry standard servers from increased unit volumes and blade revenues. Fiscal 2008 revenues in business critical systems were flat compared to the prior-year period. HP Software net revenue growth in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 was attributable to strong growth in our BTO business unit resulting from revenue increases in support, growth in license revenue, partially as a result of our acquisition of Opsware Inc. ("Opsware") in September 2007, and, to a lesser extent, increased services contract sales. HPFS net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 from the prior year due primarily to an increase in the mix of operating leases as a portion of our asset portfolio and growth in average portfolio assets. Services net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 over the prior year due primarily to net revenue increases in technology services, infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services and business process outsourcing primarily as a result of the EDS acquisition on August 26, 2008. 51 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Gross Margin The gross margin table below identifies each segment's weighted contribution to the change in the total company gross margin from the corresponding prior year. The segment contribution components of the gross margin decline as compared to the prior-year periods were as follows: 2009 2008 Percentage Points Enterprise Storage and Servers (0.8 ) (0.1 ) Services (0.1 ) (0.2 ) HP Software (0.1 ) 0.1 HP Financial Services Corporate Investments/Other Imaging and Printing Group 0.2 (0.1 ) Personal Systems Group 0.2 (0.1 ) Total HP (0.6 ) (0.4 ) Fiscal 2009 Total company gross margin decreased by 0.6 percentage points in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. From a segment perspective and on a weighted basis, ESS had the largest impact to the total company gross margin decline due to mix and rate declines. ESS gross margin decreased in fiscal 2009 from the prior year due primarily to competitive pricing across each of the segment business units and product mix shifts. The gross margin in our Services segment increased for fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 due primarily to the continued focus on cost structure improvements, including delivery efficiencies and cost controls in our technology services business, and EDS-related acquisition synergies. This was partially offset by the mix effect from the acquisition of the EDS business, which has lower gross margins. The increase in HP Software gross margin in fiscal 2009 from the prior year resulted primarily from a favorable support and services revenue mix and improved services margins, the effect of which was partially offset by an unfavorable license revenue mix. The HPFS gross margin decline in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 was driven by unfavorable currency impacts, lower margins relating to end-of-lease activities, higher bad debt expenses and lower margins for remarketing and buyout activities, the effect of which was partially offset by higher portfolio margins. Gross margin in Corporate Investments and Other declined for fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 as a result of a unit volume decline in the sale of network infrastructure products and competitive pricing pressures. The improvement in IPG gross margin in fiscal 2009 from the prior year resulted primarily from an increase in the supplies mix and supplies pricing, the effect of which was partially offset by hardware margin declines. 52 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) PSG had the most favorable impact to the change in total company gross margin due to the mix effect of its gross margin representing a smaller component of our total gross margin from levels experienced in the prior-year period. PSG gross margin declined in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008, resulting from ASPs declining at a faster pace than component costs combined with a mix shift towards lower-end products, the effects of which were partially offset by lower warranty and supply chain costs and improvements in the option attach rate. Fiscal 2008 Total company gross margin decreased slightly in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. On a segment basis, an increase in HP Software gross margin and a small increase in ESS gross margin were offset by small gross margin declines in Services and HPFS and flat gross margin growth across our remaining segments. The slight improvement in ESS gross margin in fiscal 2008 from the prior year was primarily a result of improved cost management and attach rates in industry standard servers. Services gross margin declined in fiscal 2008 from the prior year due primarily to the impact from the continued competitive pricing environment, partially offset by the continued focus on cost structure improvements generated by delivery efficiencies and cost controls. For fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, the improvement in HP Software gross margin was primarily the result of cost savings in the BTO business unit. HPFS gross margin declined slightly in fiscal 2008 due primarily to higher bad debt expenses, the effect of which was partially offset by increased margins on end-of-lease activity. IPG gross margin remained flat in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007 with improved supplies margins resulting from mix shifts being offset by unfavorable hardware margins. In fiscal 2008, PSG gross margin remained flat due primarily to declining ASPs offset by an increase in the attach rate of higher-margin options. Operating Expenses Research and Development Total research and development ("R&D") expense decreased in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 due primarily to favorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro, as well as effective cost controls, the effect of which was partially offset by additional expenses related primarily to Services. In fiscal 2009, R&D expense as a percentage of net revenue decreased for ESS, PSG, and IPG, and increased for HP Software, Services and Corporate Investments. Total R&D decreased in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, due primarily to effective cost controls, the impact of which was partially offset by the unfavorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro. Each of our major segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in R&D expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008. 53 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Selling, General and Administrative Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expense decreased in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 due primarily to favorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro, lower compensation expense as well as effective cost management, the impact of which was partially offset by additional expenses related to the EDS acquisition. In fiscal 2009, SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue decreased for each of our segments, except for Corporate Investments. Total SG&A expense increased in fiscal 2008 due primarily to higher field selling costs as a result of our investments in sales resources, unfavorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro, and additional expenses related to the EDS acquisition. Each of our major segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue during fiscal 2008. Amortization of Purchased Intangible Assets The increase in amortization expense in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 was due primarily to amortization expenses related to the intangible assets purchased as part of the EDS acquisition. The increase in amortization expense during fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007 was due primarily to amortization expenses related to the intangible assets purchased as part of the EDS acquisition as well as other acquisitions made in fiscal 2008. For more information on our amortization of purchased intangibles assets, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. In-Process Research and Development Charges We record IPR&D charges in connection with acquisitions accounted for as business combinations as more fully described in Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. In fiscal 2009, fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2007, we recorded IPR&D charges of $7 million, $45 million and $190 million, respectively, related to acquisitions. The decrease in IPR&D in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 was due primarily to higher IPR&D expenses in the prior year as a result of our EDS acquisition in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008. Restructuring Restructuring charges for fiscal 2009 were $640 million. These charges included $346 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2008 restructuring plan, $297 million of severance costs associated with our fiscal 2009 restructuring plan, and a reduction of $3 million related to adjustments to other restructuring plans. Restructuring charges for fiscal 2008 were $270 million, which included $246 million of charges due primarily to severance and facility costs related to the EDS acquisition and a net charge of $24 million relating to adjustments for existing restructuring programs. Restructuring charges for fiscal 2007 were $387 million, which included $354 million of expenses related to severance and other benefit costs associated with those employees who elected to participate in the early retirement program implemented in fiscal 2007 and a net charge of $33 million relating to adjustments to our previous restructuring programs. 54 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) For more information on our restructuring charges, see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Workforce Rebalancing As part of our ongoing business operations, we incurred workforce rebalancing charges for severance and related costs within certain business segments in fiscal 2009. Workforce rebalancing activities are considered part of normal operations as we continue to optimize our cost structure. Workforce rebalancing costs are included in our business segment results, and we expect to incur additional workforce rebalancing costs in the future. Acquisition-related Charges We recorded acquisition-related charges of $242 million and $41 million in fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2008, respectively, related primarily to consulting and integration costs as well as retention bonuses associated with the EDS acquisition. The increase in the acquisition-related charges in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to our acquisition of EDS in August 2008. Pension Curtailments and Pension Settlements, Net In fiscal 2007, we recognized a net gain on pension curtailments and settlements of $517 million, relating primarily to a $542 million curtailment gain associated with a modification to our U.S. defined benefit pension plan and post-retirement benefit plan. This curtailment gain was offset partially by net settlement losses related to our other pension plan design changes. For more information on our retirement and post-retirement benefit plans, see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Interest and Other, Net Interest and other, net decreased by $721 million in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. The decrease was driven primarily by higher interest expenses due to higher average debt balances principally related to the EDS acquisition, lower interest income as a result of lower interest rates, and higher currency losses on balance sheet remeasurement items. Additionally, there were higher gains from the sale of real estate in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2009. Interest and other, net decreased by $458 million in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The decrease resulted primarily from currency losses on balance sheet remeasurement items and lower interest income as a result of lower interest rates, the effect of which was partially offset by lower interest expense. Additionally, the prior-year period benefited from higher gains from the sale of real estate. Provision for Taxes Our effective tax rates were 18.6%, 20.5% and 20.8% in fiscal 2009, fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2007, respectively. HP's effective tax rate generally differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% due to favorable tax rates associated with some earnings from HP's operations in lower-tax jurisdictions throughout the world. HP has not provided U.S. taxes for all of such earnings because HP plans to reinvest some of those earnings indefinitely outside the United States. 55 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The decrease in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 was due primarily to the net income tax benefits recorded for fiscal 2009 which were related to foreign net operating losses, adjustments to estimated fiscal 2008 tax accruals upon filing the 2008 income tax returns, valuation allowance reversals for state and foreign net operating losses, and other miscellaneous items. The decrease in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 was related in part to lower tax rates in other jurisdictions. For a full reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and further explanation of our provision for taxes, see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Segment Information A description of the products and services, as well as financial data, for each segment can be found in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. We have realigned segment financial data for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2008 and 2007 to reflect changes in HP's organizational structure that occurred at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2009. We describe these changes more fully in Note 19. We have presented the business segments in this Annual Report on Form 10-K based on the distinct nature of various businesses such as customer base, homogeneity of products and technology. The discussions below include the results of each of our segments. HP Enterprise Business Services, ESS and HP Software are reported collectively as a broader HP Enterprise Business. We describe the results of the business segments of the HP Enterprise Business in more detail below. Services As a result of the acquisition of EDS, we renamed our services segment and reorganized the business units within that segment to better align them to our enhanced services portfolio. The business reorganization resulted in three new business units: application services, infrastructure technology outsourcing and business process outsourcing. As part of this reorganization, the businesses included in the former HP consulting and integration business unit were divided among the application services and technology services business units and the HP Software segment. In addition, the businesses included in the former outsourcing services business unit were divided among the infrastructure technology outsourcing and business process outsourcing business units. Further, the managed print services offering under technology services was moved to IPG. 56 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Historical Results For fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 (1) 2007 (1) In millions In millions In millions Net revenue $ 34,693 $ 20,977 $ 15,329 Earnings from operations $ 5,044 $ 2,518 $ 1,782 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 14.5 % 12.0 % 11.6 % (1) Reflects certain reclassifications made to historical results to conform to the current year presentation as noted in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. The components of the weighted net revenue growth as compared to the prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2009 2008 Percentage Points Infrastructure technology outsourcing 39.9 18.7 Application services 17.3 8.5 Business process outsourcing 10.6 4.0 Technology services (2.4 ) 5.6 Total Services 65.4 % 36.8 % Services net revenue increased 65.4% (71.6% when adjusted for currency) for fiscal 2009, as compared to fiscal 2008. The increase in revenues is due primarily to the acquisition of EDS on August 26, 2008. Services net revenue for fiscal 2009 includes revenue from infrastructure technology outsourcing, technology services, application services and business process outsourcing, which accounted for approximately 46%, 28%, 17% and 9% of revenues, respectively. Net revenue in infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services and business process outsourcing increased due to the EDS acquisition. The net revenue increase in infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services, and business process outsourcing was partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts and a decline in spending from existing customers not being offset with new growth due to slowing demand in the current economic environment. Application services and business process outsourcing were impacted to a greater degree than infrastructure technology outsourcing. Net revenue in technology services declined due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and weak economic conditions, the effect of which was partially offset by growth in extended warranty. Services earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 2.5 percentage points for fiscal 2009, as compared to fiscal 2008. The operating margin increased due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue. There was also an increase in gross margin for fiscal 2009. Operating expense declined as a result of a continued focus on cost structure improvements from overall cost controls. The gross margin in our Services segment increased for fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 due primarily to the continued focus on cost structure improvements, including delivery efficiencies and cost controls in our technology services business, and EDS-related acquisition synergies. This was partially offset by the mix effect from the acquisition of the EDS business, which has lower gross margins. 57 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Services net revenue (including EDS results from August 26, 2008) increased 36.8% (30.0% when adjusted for currency) for fiscal 2008, as compared to fiscal 2007. Net revenue increased from the prior year primarily due to the acquisition of EDS. Services net revenue (excluding EDS results from August 26, 2008) increased 11.7% (4.8% when adjusted for currency) for fiscal 2008, as compared to fiscal 2007. Services net revenue (including EDS results from August 26, 2008) for fiscal 2008 includes revenue from technology services, infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services and business process outsourcing, which accounted for approximately 49%, 36%, 12% and 3% of revenues, respectively. Net revenue in technology services increased in fiscal 2008 from the prior year due primarily to growth in IT solution support services, extended warranty revenue and favorable currency impacts, the impact of which was partially offset by competitive pricing pressures. Net revenue in infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services and business process outsourcing increased driven mainly by the EDS acquisition, an increase in volume, favorable currency impacts and new business. Services earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue (including EDS results from August 26, 2008) increased by 0.4 percentage points for fiscal 2008, as compared to fiscal 2007. The operating margin increase was the result of a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue, partially offset by a slight decrease in gross margin. The gross margin decrease in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to the impact of the continued competitive pricing environment, which was partially offset by the continued focus on cost structure improvements generated by delivery efficiencies and cost controls. In fiscal 2008, continued efficiency improvements in our operating expense structure contributed to the decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue compared to the prior year. Combined Segment Results The combined segment results below refer to the results of our services business for fiscal 2008, which include the results of EDS from the acquisition date, combined with the EDS results for the nine months ended June 30, 2008 and the period from August 1, 2008 to the acquisition date. The combined segment results are presented for informational purposes only and are not indicative of the results of operations that would have been achieved had the businesses been operated together during that period. For the fiscal year ended October 31 2009 Combined Segment Results 2008 (1) % (Decrease) Increase In millions In millions Net revenue $ 34,693 $ 39,194 (11.5 )% Earnings from operations $ 5,044 $ 3,216 56.9 % Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 14.5 % 8.2 % (1) Refers to the results of Services for the year ended October 31, 2008 combined with the EDS results for the nine months ended June 30, 2008 and for the period from August 1, 2008 to the acquisition date. In order to conform the presentation to our segment earnings from operations, we excluded certain EDS expenses that we do not allocate to our segments. 58 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Services net revenue decreased 11.5% (3.8% when adjusted for currency) for fiscal 2009, as compared to the fiscal 2008 combined segment results presented in the table above. Services net revenue for the prior period combined segment results includes revenue from infrastructure technology outsourcing, technology services, application services and business process outsourcing, which accounted for approximately 46%, 26%, 19% and 9% of revenues, respectively. The net revenue declines were due primarily to an unfavorable currency impact, deferred revenue write-down resulting from purchase accounting, and lower add-on business due to the slowing economic environment. Further, Services net revenue for fiscal 2009 as compared to the combined segment results for fiscal 2008 reflects a weighted net revenue decline in the infrastructure technology outsourcing, business process outsourcing, technology services and application services units of 5.0%, 3.9%, 1.3% and 1.3%, respectively. Services earnings from operations as a percentage of net segment revenue increased 6.3 percentage points for fiscal 2009, as compared to the fiscal 2008 combined segment results. Operating margin increased as a result of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. Gross margin increased due primarily to the continued focus on cost structure improvements, including delivery efficiencies and cost controls, and acquisition synergies. The continued improvements in our operating expense structure contributed to the decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue compared to fiscal 2008. Enterprise Storage and Servers For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions Net revenue $ 15,359 $ 19,400 $ 18,639 Earnings from operations $ 1,518 $ 2,577 $ 2,148 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 9.9 % 13.3 % 11.5 % The components of the weighted net revenue change as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2009 2008 Percentage Points Industry standard servers (12.1 ) 1.5 Business critical systems (4.9 ) (0.1 ) Storage (3.8 ) 2.7 Total ESS (20.8 ) 4.1 ESS net revenue decreased 20.8% (16.0% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008. The revenue decline was due primarily to the economic slowdown and overall weak demand environment. ISS net revenue declined 20% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 due to declines in unit volume. ISS average unit prices declined in fiscal 2009 while improving in the second half of fiscal 2009 as a result of a new product ramp up. Total ESS blades revenue declined by 8% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. Business critical systems net revenue decreased 27% in fiscal 2009 compared to fiscal 2008 driven by a decline in Integrity server revenue due to weaker market conditions and by the planned phase-out of the PA-RISC and Alpha Server product lines. Storage net revenue declined 17% in fiscal 2009 compared to fiscal 2008 due to a decline in disk and tape products as a result of a 59 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) weaker demand environment, the effects of which were partially offset by revenue resulting from the acquisition of Lefthand Networks, which was completed in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. In fiscal 2009, ESS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 3.4 percentage points compared to fiscal 2008, due primarily to a decline in gross margin. Gross margin in fiscal 2009 decreased due primarily to competitive pricing across each of the segment business units and product mix shifts. Operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2009 was generally consistent with the fiscal 2008. ESS net revenue increased 4.1% (decreased 0.5% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. Storage net revenue increased 13% in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007, with strong performance in mid-range EVA, entry MSA, tape media and storage software. Industry standard servers net revenue grew 2% in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007 as a result of growth in blade revenue and unit volumes. Revenue growth in the industry standard servers business was partially offset by the decline in average unit prices driven by market movement to low-end product lines and component cost declines. Business critical systems net revenue growth was flat in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007. Integrity servers net revenue grew 22% in fiscal 2008 and represents 79% of the business critical systems revenue mix, up from 64% in fiscal 2007. The increase was offset by revenue declines in the PA-RISC product line and the planned phase-out of our Alpha Server product line. Integrity servers revenue in fiscal 2008 also included revenue from Montvale-based Integrity servers. In fiscal 2008, ESS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.8 percentage points compared to fiscal 2007, due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. Gross margin increased slightly in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007 due primarily to cost management and improved attach rates in industry standard servers, the effect of which was mostly offset by competitive pricing in storage and industry standard servers and a mix shift to entry level integrity servers. The decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to continued cost structure improvements. HP Software For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions Net revenue $ 3,572 $ 4,220 $ 3,628 Earnings from operations $ 684 $ 499 $ 248 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 19.1 % 11.8 % 6.8 % The components of the weighted net revenue change as compared to the prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2009 2008 Percentage Points Business technology optimization (9.7 ) 14.2 Other software (5.7 ) 2.1 Total HP Software (15.4 ) 16.3 HP Software net revenue decreased 15.4% (10.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008, due to softening in enterprise spending and declines in large deals. For fiscal 2009, revenue 60 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) from licenses and services declined, the effect of which was partially offset by increased support revenue as a result of renewal rate increases. Net revenue from BTO decreased 15% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. Net revenue from other software decreased 17% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008, due to declines in revenues for communication and media solutions, business intelligence solutions and information management. HP Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 7.3 percentage points in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. The operating margin improvement in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to increased gross margin coupled with decreased operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin in fiscal 2009 resulted primarily from a favorable support and services revenue mix and improved services margins, the effect of which was partially offset by an unfavorable license revenue mix. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to continued cost controls. HP Software net revenue increased 16.3% (10.4% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. Net revenue from BTO increased 23% in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. BTO net revenue growth in fiscal 2008 was driven by increases in support, higher license revenue due in part to the Opsware acquisition, and increases in services contracts. Net revenue from other software increased by 6% in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The growth in other software net revenue in fiscal 2008 was attributable primarily to the growth in the information management business due in part to our acquisition of Tower Software in May 2008 and increases in services from business intelligence solutions, the effect of which was partially offset by a net revenue decline in communication and media solutions resulting from a competitive environment following network equipment provider industry consolidation and the transfer of some hardware revenues to ESS due to a platform shift. HP Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 5.0 percentage points in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The operating margin increase in fiscal 2008 was the result of a combination of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to cost savings in the BTO business, cost structure improvements as a result of increased scale in the information management business and, to a lesser extent, a favorable change in the revenue mix driven by higher revenues from the BTO business, which typically has higher gross margins than the remainder of the segment. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to continued cost controls, the effect of which was partially offset by increased field selling costs driven by sales force investments. Personal Systems Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions Net revenue $ 35,305 $ 42,295 $ 36,409 Earnings from operations $ 1,661 $ 2,375 $ 1,939 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 4.7 % 5.6 % 5.3 % 61 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of the weighted net revenue change as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2009 2008 Percentage Points Desktop PCs (8.9 ) 2.1 Notebook PCs (5.8 ) 13.8 Workstations (1.5 ) 0.4 Handhelds (0.4 ) (0.5 ) Other 0.1 0.4 Total PSG (16.5 ) 16.2 PSG net revenue decreased 16.5% (11.6% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008. The revenue decline was primarily the result of the overall slowdown in the global economy. Despite the overall regional declines, revenue in China increased for fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. PSG net revenue decreased across all businesses in fiscal 2009. Unit volume increased slightly in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008, as an increase in notebook PC volume was offset by a decline in desktop PCs, workstations, and handheld devices. The unit volume increase in notebook PCs was due in part to growth of the HP and Compaq mini notebooks. In fiscal 2009, net revenue for notebook PCs decreased 11%, while net revenue for desktop PCs decreased 23% from fiscal 2008. Workstations and handheld revenues declined 33% and 52%, respectively, in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008. In fiscal 2009, net revenue for consumer clients decreased 14%, while net revenue for commercial clients decreased 19% from fiscal 2008. The net revenue increase in Other PSG was related primarily to increased sales of extended warranties, support services and third-party branded options. In fiscal 2009, PSG net revenue was also impacted by ASP declines. ASPs in consumer clients declined 21%, while ASPs in commercial clients declined 16%. ASPs declined from fiscal 2008 due primarily to a competitive pricing environment, component cost reductions and the impact of currency combined with a mix shift toward lower-end models. The ASP decline in fiscal 2009 was offset slightly by an increase in the option and monitor attach rates. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.9 percentage points in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008. The decrease was due primarily to a gross margin decline resulting from ASPs declining at a faster pace than component costs combined with a mix shift toward lower-end products, the effects of which were partially offset by lower warranty and supply chain costs and improvements in the option attach rate. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2009 was the result of effective cost controls. PSG net revenue increased 16.2% (10.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. Unit volumes increased by 22% in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The unit volume increase was the result of strong growth in notebooks, with continued strength in emerging markets. In fiscal 2008, net revenue for notebook PCs increased 28% while net revenue for desktop PCs increased 5% from fiscal 2007. In fiscal 2008, net revenue for consumer clients increased 19%, while net revenue for commercial clients increased 15% from fiscal 2007. The net revenue increase in Other PSG in fiscal 2008 was related primarily to increased sales of third-party branded options and extended warranties. The revenue increase was partially offset by a decline in handhelds revenue driven by product transition within converged devices. In fiscal 2008, the positive revenue impact from the PSG unit volume increase compared to fiscal 2007 was also moderated by a 7% decline in commercial client ASPs and a 62 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 4% decline in consumer client ASPs. ASPs declined from fiscal 2007 as a result of price erosion related to component cost reductions and a competitive pricing environment, the effect of which was partially offset by an increased notebook mix and improved attach rates for monitors and other options. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.3 percentage points in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 as a result of a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue combined with a flat gross margin. Gross margin performance was a result of declining ASPs offset by an increase in the attach rate of higher-margin options. The operating expense decline as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 was the result primarily of the increased net revenue and continued efforts to improve our cost structure through efficiency measures. Imaging and Printing Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions Net revenue $ 24,011 $ 29,614 $ 28,609 Earnings from operations $ 4,310 $ 4,559 $ 4,293 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 18.0 % 15.4 % 15.0 % The components of the weighted net revenue change as compared to the prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2009 2008 Percentage Points Commercial hardware (8.9 ) 0.2 Supplies (6.6 ) 5.1 Consumer hardware (3.4 ) (1.8 ) Total IPG (18.9 ) 3.5 IPG net revenue decreased 18.9% (16.5% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008, reflecting the impact of the global economic slowdown. Net revenue for commercial hardware declined 36% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. The net revenue decline in commercial hardware was driven by a unit volume decline of 38% in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008, due primarily to worldwide market weaknesses impacting both our laser and our graphics businesses. Supplies net revenue declined 11% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. The supplies net revenue decline in fiscal 2009 was across all platforms and was the result of reductions in channel inventory and unfavorable currency impacts, the effect of which was partially moderated by supplies pricing. Net revenue for consumer hardware declined 27% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. The net revenue decline in consumer hardware was driven by a unit volume decline of 24% in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008, reflecting the weak demand environment and channel inventory reductions. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 2.6 percentage points in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. Operating margin improvement in fiscal 2009 was a combination of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The improvement in gross margin in fiscal 2009 resulted primarily from an increase in the supplies mix and supplies pricing, the effect of which was partially offset by hardware margin declines due to 63 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) unfavorable currency impacts and declines in average revenue per unit. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to effective cost controls. IPG net revenue increased 3.5% (decreased 0.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. The growth in printer supplies net revenue in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 reflected higher unit volumes of supplies as a result of the strong performance of color-related products. The slight increase in commercial hardware net revenue in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 was due mainly to unit volume growth in multifunction printers, color laser printers and large format printing products and revenue from recent acquisitions, partially offset by continued competitive pricing pressures. The decrease in consumer hardware net revenue in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 was due primarily to discontinued sales of cameras, competitive pricing pressures and lower unit volumes of consumer hardware as a result of slower growth in the overall consumer printer market. Both consumer and commercial hardware were impacted by the continued shift in demand to lower-priced products and a slowing economy, which caused average revenue per unit in each category to decline. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.4 percentage points in fiscal 2008 from the prior fiscal year. The operating margin improvement in fiscal 2008 was due to lower operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. In fiscal 2008, the gross margin remained flat driven by improved margins for supplies as a result of product mix, the effect of which was offset by unfavorable hardware margins. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to higher revenue and continued cost controls, the effect of which was partially offset by increased investments in our enterprise printing sales force. HP Financial Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions Net revenue $ 2,673 $ 2,698 $ 2,336 Earnings from operations $ 206 $ 192 $ 155 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 7.7 % 7.1 % 6.6 % HPFS net revenue decreased by 0.9% in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008. The net revenue decrease was due to unfavorable currency movements. On a constant currency basis, fiscal 2009 net revenue increased due primarily to portfolio growth, increased operating lease mix and higher buyout activities, the effect of which was partially offset by lower levels of remarketing and end-of-lease activity. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.6 percentage points in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses, the effect of which was partially offset by a decline in gross margin. The operating expense decrease was due to continued cost controls. The decline in gross margin was driven by an unfavorable currency impact, lower margins relating to end of lease activity, higher bad debt expenses, and lower remarketing and buyout margins, the effect of which was partially offset by higher portfolio margins. HPFS net revenue increased by 15.5% in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. The net revenue increase was due primarily to a shift towards operating leases from financing leases in the overall portfolio asset mix, higher average portfolio assets during the year, higher end-of-lease activity and a favorable currency impact. 64 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.5 percentage points in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue and increased margin on end-of lease activity, the effect of which was offset by higher bad debt expenses and lower portfolio margins due to higher operating leases in the portfolio asset mix. The operating expense decrease as a percentage of revenue is driven by a higher rate of increase in revenues relative to operating expenses due to higher operating lease mix of the portfolio and continued cost controls. Financing Originations For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions Total financing originations $ 5,210 $ 4,872 $ 4,441 New financing originations, which represent the amounts of financing provided to customers for equipment and related software and services and include intercompany activity, increased 6.9% in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 and 9.7% in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. The increases reflect higher financing associated with HP product sales and services offerings resulting from improved integration and engagement with HP's sales efforts offset by unfavorable currency impact. Portfolio Assets and Ratios HPFS maintains a strategy to generate a competitive return on equity by effectively leveraging its portfolio against the risks associated with interest rates and credit. The HPFS business model is asset-intensive and uses certain internal metrics to measure its performance against other financial services companies, including a segment balance sheet that is derived from our internal management reporting system. The accounting policies used to derive these amounts are substantially the same as those used by the consolidated company. However, certain intercompany loans and accounts that are reflected in the segment balances are eliminated in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The portfolio assets and ratios derived from the segment balance sheet for HPFS were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2009 2008 In millions Portfolio assets (1) $ 10,017 $ 8,297 Allowance for doubtful accounts (2) 108 90 Operating lease equipment reserve 71 60 Total reserves 179 150 Net portfolio assets $ 9,838 $ 8,147 Reserve coverage 1.8 % 1.8 % Debt to equity ratio (3) 7.0x 6.5x (1) Portfolio assets include gross financing receivables of approximately $6.1 billion and $5.1 billion at October 31, 2009 and October 31, 2008 and net equipment under operating leases of $2.2 billion and $1.8 billion at October 31, 2009 and October 31, 2008, as disclosed in Note 11 to the 65 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Portfolio assets also include capitalized profit on intercompany equipment transactions of approximately $700 million at October 31, 2009 and October 31, 2008, and intercompany leases of approximately $1.0 billion and $800 million at October 31, 2009 and October 31, 2008, both of which are eliminated in consolidation. (2) Allowance for doubtful accounts includes both the short-term and the long-term portions of the allowance on financing receivables. (3) HPFS debt consists of intercompany equity that is treated as debt for segment reporting purposes, intercompany debt and debt issued directly by HPFS. Net portfolio assets at October 31, 2009 increased 20.8% from October 31, 2008. The increase resulted from higher levels of financing originations in fiscal 2009 and a favorable currency impact. The overall percentage of portfolio assets reserves remained flat due to continued strong portfolio performance. HPFS funds its operations mainly through a combination of intercompany debt and equity. In addition to the balances reflected above, HP assumed net portfolio assets of $51 million through the acquisition of EDS. Rollforward of Reserves: October 31, 2008 Additions to allowance Deductions, net of recoveries October 31, 2009 In millions Allowance for doubtful accounts $ 90 $ 63 $ (45 ) $ 108 Operating lease equipment reserve 60 19 (8 ) 71 Total reserve $ 150 $ 82 $ (53 ) $ 179 Corporate Investments For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions Net revenue $ 768 $ 965 $ 762 (Loss) earnings from operations $ (56 ) $ 49 $ (57 ) (Loss) earnings from operations as a % of net revenue (7.3 )% 5.1 % (7.5 )% Net revenue in Corporate Investments relates primarily to network infrastructure products sold under the brand "ProCurve Networking." In fiscal 2009, revenue from network infrastructure products decreased 19.6% as compared to fiscal 2008, resulting from the slowdown in the networking market and a resulting decrease in sales of enterprise ethernet switch products. Partially offsetting the revenue decline was revenue resulting from the acquisition of Colubris Networks, Inc. ("Colubris"), which HP acquired in October 2008. Corporate Investments reported a loss from operations in fiscal 2009 as compared to the positive earnings from operations reported in fiscal 2008 due primarily to lower earnings from operations generated by network infrastructure products. Gross margin in Corporate Investments declined for fiscal 2009 as the result of a unit volume decline in the sale of network infrastructure products and 66 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) competitive pricing pressure. The loss from operations in Corporate Investments was also impacted by expenses carried in the segment associated with corporate development, global alliances and HP Labs, which declined from fiscal 2008. In fiscal 2008, the majority of the net revenue in Corporate Investments related to network infrastructure products sold under the brand "ProCurve Networking," which grew 26.2% from fiscal 2007 as the result of continued increased sales of enterprise class gigabit and 10 gigabit Ethernet switch products. Fiscal 2008 network infrastructure revenue included a small amount of revenue from Colubris. Corporate Investments reported earnings from operations in fiscal 2008 as compared to losses in fiscal 2007 due primarily to increased earnings from operations generated by network infrastructure products, and operating expenses related to HP Labs was flat as compared to fiscal 2007. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, including substantial amounts held outside of the United States. Most of the amounts held outside of the United States could be repatriated to the United States but, under current law, would be subject to United States federal income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Repatriation of some foreign balances is restricted by local laws. We have provided for the United States federal tax liability on these amounts for financial statement purposes, except for foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the United States. Repatriation could result in additional United States federal income tax payments in future years. Where local restrictions prevent an efficient intercompany transfer of funds, our intent is that cash balances would remain outside of the United States and we would meet United States liquidity needs through ongoing cash flows, external borrowings, or both. We utilize a variety of tax planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. The information discussed below is presented based on our historical results, which include the results of EDS for the period following the August 26, 2008 closing date of the acquisition. LIQUIDITY We use cash generated by operations as our primary source of liquidity; we believe that internally generated cash flows are generally sufficient to support business operations, capital expenditures and the payment of stockholder dividends, in addition to a level of discretionary investments and share repurchases. We are able to supplement this near-term liquidity, if necessary, with broad access to capital markets and credit line facilities made available by various foreign and domestic financial 67 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) institutions. Our liquidity is subject to various risks including the market risks identified in the section entitled "Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures about Market Risk" in Item 7A. For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In billions Cash and cash equivalents $ 13.3 $ 10.2 $ 11.3 Total debt $ 15.8 $ 17.9 $ 8.2 Available borrowing resources (1) $ 18.1 $ 11.7 $ 10.3 (1) In addition to these available borrowing resources, we are able to offer for sale, from time to time, in one or more offerings, an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares and warrants under the 2009 Shelf Registration Statement. Our cash position remains strong, and we believe our cash balances are sufficient to cover cash outlays expected in fiscal 2010. Cash Flows The following table summarizes the key cash flow metrics from our consolidated statements of cash flow: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions Net cash provided by operating activities $ 13,379 $ 14,591 $ 9,615 Net cash used in investing activities (3,580 ) (13,711 ) (9,123 ) Net cash used in financing activities (6,673 ) (2,020 ) (5,599 ) Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 3,126 $ (1,140 ) $ (5,107 ) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by approximately $1.2 billion for fiscal 2009, as compared to fiscal 2008. The decrease was due primarily to increased utilization of cash resources for payment of operating liabilities such as accounts payable, other current liabilities and restructuring along with a decrease in net earnings, the impact of which was partially offset by the increased generation of cash resources through the utilization of operating assets such as inventory and other current assets along with increased amortization expense. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $5.0 billion for fiscal 2008, as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase was due primarily to higher net earnings in fiscal 2008, a decrease in accounts and financing receivables, and increased accounts payable. 68 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Our key working capital metrics are as follows: October 31 2009 2008 2007 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable 48 45 43 Days of supply in inventory 23 27 34 Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable (1) . (57 ) (52 ) (53 ) Cash conversion cycle 14 20 24 (1) Beginning in the second quarter of fiscal 2009, we reclassified certain activity within Other accrued liabilities to Accounts payable as this better represents the nature of the activity. All prior periods have been revised to conform to the current presentation. Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable ("DSO") measures the average number of days our receivables are outstanding. DSO is calculated by dividing ending accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, by a 90-day average net revenue. Our accounts receivable balance was $13.4 billion as of October 31, 2007. Days of supply in inventory ("DOS") measures the average number of days from procurement to sale of our product. DOS is calculated by dividing ending inventory by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our inventory balance was $8.0 billion as of October 31, 2007. Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable ("DPO") measures the average number of days our accounts payable balances are outstanding. DPO is calculated by dividing ending accounts payable by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our accounts payable balance was $12.4 billion as of October 31, 2007. Our working capital requirements depend upon our effective management of the cash conversion cycle, which represents effectively the number of days that elapse from the day we pay for the purchase of raw materials to the collection of cash from our customers. The cash conversion cycle is the sum of DSO and DOS less DPO. The cash conversion cycle for fiscal 2009 decreased by 6 days as compared to fiscal 2008. The increase in DSO was due primarily to our improving penetration into the enterprise market which tends to have a higher DSO profile, optimizing terms to drive shareholder value as well as more sales in the month of October. The decrease in DOS was due to lower inventory levels driven primarily by improved inventory management. The increase in DPO was due primarily to a change in purchasing linearity in the fourth quarter. The cash conversion cycle for the fiscal 2008 decreased by 4 days as compared to fiscal 2007. The increase in DSO was due primarily to a higher accounts receivable balance during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 compared to the same period in fiscal 2007 and the effect of the EDS acquisition. The decrease in DOS was due primarily to more efficient inventory management, higher cost of goods sold during the fourth quarter of 2008 as a result of increased revenues and the effect of the EDS acquisition. The slight decrease in DPO was due to the effect of the EDS acquisition. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities decreased by approximately $10.1 billion for fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 due primarily to higher cash payments made in connection with fiscal 2008 69 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) acquisitions and increased by approximately $4.6 billion for fiscal 2008, as compared to fiscal 2007 due to fiscal 2008 acquisition activity. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities increased by approximately $4.7 billion for fiscal 2009, as compared to fiscal 2008. The increase was due primarily to higher net repayments of commercial paper and debt, the impact of which was partially offset by decreased repurchases of our common stock. Net cash used in financing activities decreased by approximately $3.6 billion for fiscal 2008, as compared to fiscal 2007. The decrease was due primarily to higher net issuance of commercial paper and debt. For more information on our share repurchase programs, see Item 5 and Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. CAPITAL RESOURCES Debt Levels For the fiscal years ended October 31 2009 2008 2007 In millions, except interest rates and ratios Short-term debt $ 1,850 $ 10,176 $ 3,186 Long-term debt $ 13,980 $ 7,676 $ 4,997 Debt-equity ratio 0.39x 0.46x 0.21x Weighted-average interest rate 2.7% 3.6% 5.3% We maintain debt levels that we establish through consideration of a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for operations, investment plans (including acquisitions), share repurchase activities, overall cost of capital, and targeted capital structure. In fiscal 2009 short-term debt decreased by $8.3 billion and long-term debt increased by $6.3 billion as compared to fiscal 2008. This was primarily due to the replacement of short-term debt with long-term debt as capital market conditions improved from last year, which was partially offset by a reclassification of $1 billion from long-term to short-term. Short-term debt and long-term debt increased by $7.0 billion and $2.7 billion respectively, for fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The net increase in total debt is due mainly to commercial paper issued in conjunction with the EDS acquisition. Our debt-equity ratio is calculated as the carrying value of debt divided by the carrying value of equity. Our debt-equity ratio decreased by 0.07x in fiscal 2009, due primarily to the net repayment of $2.0 billion debt. It increased by 0.25x in fiscal 2008 due primarily to funding the EDS acquisition by debt. Our weighted-average interest rate reflects the average effective rate on our borrowings prevailing during the year; it factors in the impact of swapping some of our global notes with fixed interest rates for global notes with floating interest rates. For more information on our interest rate swaps, see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. The slightly lower weighted average interest rates over the past three years is a result of the combination of lower market interest rates and swapping some of our fixed interest obligations 70 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) associated with some of our fixed global notes for variable rate obligations through interest rate swaps in a declining rates environment. For more information on our borrowings, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Available Borrowing Resources At October 31, 2009, we had the following resources available to obtain short-term or long-term financings if we need additional liquidity: At October 31, 2009 In millions 2009 Shelf Registration Statement (1) Unspecified Commercial paper programs (2) 16,200 Uncommitted lines of credit (3) 1,600 Revolving trade receivables-based facilities (4) 269 (1) In May 2009, we filed a shelf registration statement (the "2009 Shelf Registration Statement") with the SEC to enable us to offer for sale, from time to time and as the capital markets permit, in one or more offerings, an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares and warrants. (2) Our commercial paper programs are supported by various credit facilities, including a $3.5 billion credit facility expiring in February 2010 and a $2.9 billion credit facility expiring in May 2012. Our ability to have a U.S. commercial paper outstanding balance that exceeds the $6.4 billion supported by our credit facilities is subject to a number of factors, including liquidity conditions and business performance. HP also has registered for the Commercial Paper Funding Facility ("CPFF") provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which would enable HP to issue three-month unsecured commercial paper through a special purpose vehicle of the Federal Reserve. The maximum amount of commercial paper that HP may issue at any time through this program is $10.4 billion less the total principal amount of all other outstanding commercial paper that HP has issued. The CPFF program is currently scheduled to expire on February 1, 2010. As of October 31, 2009, HP had not issued any commercial paper under the CPFF program. See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information about these credit facilities and the CPFF program. (3) HP maintains uncommitted lines of credit from a number of financial institutions that are available through various foreign subsidiaries. (4) We have revolving trade receivables-based facilities permitting us to sell certain trade receivables to third parties on a non-recourse basis. The aggregate maximum capacity under these programs was $568 million as of October 31, 2009. 71 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Credit Ratings Our credit risk is evaluated by three independent rating agencies based upon publicly available information as well as information obtained in our ongoing discussions with them. The ratings for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2009 were: For the fiscal year ended October 31, 2009 Standard & Poor's Ratings Services Moody's Investors Service Fitch Ratings Services Short-term debt ratings A-1 Prime-1 F1 Long-term debt ratings A A2 A+ We do not have any rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity of a material amount of our debt. However, a downgrade in our credit rating would increase the cost of borrowings under our credit facilities. Also, a downgrade in our credit rating could limit our ability to issue commercial paper under our current programs. If this occurs, we would seek alternative sources of funding, including drawdowns under our credit facilities or the issuance of notes under our existing shelf registration statements. CONTRACTUAL AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS The impact that we expect our contractual and other obligations as of October 31, 2009 to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods is as follows: Payments Due by Period Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years In millions Principal payments on long-term debt (1) $ 14,203 $ 1,027 $ 5,403 $ 6,119 $ 1,654 Interest payments on long-term debt (2) 1,772 386 661 328 397 Operating lease obligations 3,412 949 1,244 597 622 Purchase obligations (3) 2,033 1,775 224 31 3 Capital lease obligations 568 134 142 62 230 Total $ 21,988 $ 4,271 $ 7,674 $ 7,137 $ 2,906 (1) Amounts represent the expected principal cash payments relating to our long-term debt and do not include any fair value adjustments or discounts and premiums. (2) Amounts represent the expected interest cash payments relating to our long-term debt. We have outstanding interest rate swap agreements accounted for as fair value hedges that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with some of our fixed global notes for variable rate obligations. The impact of these interest rate swaps was factored into the calculation of the future interest payments on long-term debt. (3) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancelable without penalty. These purchase obligations are related principally to inventory and other items. 72 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) In addition to the above, at October 31, 2009, we had approximately $1.3 billion of recorded liabilities and related interest and penalties pertaining to uncertainty in income tax positions, which will be partially offset by $58 million of deferred tax assets and interest receivable. These liabilities and related interest and penalties include $19 million expected to be paid within one year. For the remaining amount, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when cash settlement with the tax authorities might occur due to the uncertainties related to these tax matters. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on taxes. Funding Commitments In fiscal 2010, we expect to contribute approximately $820 million to our pension and post-retirement plan funding. Our funding policy is to contribute cash to our pension plans so that we meet at least the minimum contribution requirements, as established by local government, funding and taxing authorities. Funding for the years following 2010 would be based on the then current market conditions, actuarial estimates and plan funding status. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on pension activity. As a result of our approved restructuring plans, we expect future cash expenditures of approximately $1.9 billion. We expect to make cash payments of approximately $1.1 billion in fiscal 2010 and the majority of the remaining amount through 2012. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on restructuring activities. Guarantees and Indemnifications See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on liabilities that may arise from guarantees and indemnifications. Litigation and Contingencies See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on liabilities that may arise from litigation and contingencies. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As part of our ongoing business, we have not participated in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities ("SPEs"), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As of October 31, 2009, we are not involved in any material unconsolidated SPEs. 73 Table of Contents 
