CIK: 47217
Company Name: HEWLETT PACKARD CO
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-12-14


ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. OVERVIEW We are a leading global provider of products, technologies, software, solutions and services to individual consumers, small- and medium-sized businesses, and large enterprises, including customers in the government, health and education sectors. Our offerings span: personal computing and other access devices; multi-vendor customer services, including infrastructure technology and business process outsourcing, technology support and maintenance, application development and support services and consulting and integration services; imaging and printing-related products and services; and enterprise information technology infrastructure, including enterprise storage and server technology, networking products and solutions, IT management software, information management solutions and security intelligence/risk management solutions. We have seven business segments for financial reporting purposes: the Personal Systems Group ("PSG"), Services, the Imaging and Printing Group ("IPG"), Enterprise Servers, Storage and Networking ("ESSN"), HP Software, HP Financial Services ("HPFS") and Corporate Investments. Our strategy and operations are currently focused on the following initiatives: Strategic Focus The core of our business is our hardware products, which include our PC, server, storage, networking, and imaging and printing products. Our software business provides enterprise IT management software, information management solutions and security intelligence/risk management solutions delivered in the form of traditional software licenses or as software-as-a-service that allow us to differentiate our hardware products and deploy them in a manner that helps our customers solve problems and meets our customers' needs to manage their infrastructure, operations, application life cycles, application quality and security, business processes, and structured and unstructured data. Our Converged Infrastructure portfolio of servers, storage and networking combined with our Cloud Service Automation software suite enables enterprise and service provider clients to deliver infrastructure, platform and software-as-a-service in a private, public or hybrid cloud environment. Layered on top of our hardware and software businesses is our services business, which provides opportunities to drive usage of HP products and solutions, enables us to implement and manage all the technologies upon which our customers rely, and gives us a platform to be more solution-oriented and a better strategic partner with our customers. Leveraging our Portfolio and Scale We offer one of the IT industry's broadest portfolios of products and services, and we leverage that portfolio to our strategic advantage. For example, we are able to provide servers, storage and networking products packaged with services that can be delivered to customers in the manner of their 37 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) choosing, be it in-house, outsourced as a service via the Internet or via a hybrid environment. Our portfolio of management software completes the package by allowing our customers to manage their IT operations in an efficient and cost-effective manner. In addition, we are working to optimize our supply chain by eliminating complexity, reducing fixed costs, and leveraging our scale to ensure the availability of components at favorable prices even during shortages. We are also expanding our use of industry standard components in our enterprise products to further leverage our scale. Investing in our Business We are investing in our business to strengthen our position in our core markets and accelerate growth in adjacent markets in anticipation of market trends, such as cloud computing, unstructured data, data center consolidation and automation, digitization, analytics and IT security. We are also creating innovative new products and developing new channels to connect with our customers. In addition, we have been making focused investments to strengthen our portfolio of products and services that we can offer to our customers, both through organic investments as well as through acquisitions. These investments will allow us to expand in higher margin and higher growth industry segments and further strengthen our portfolio of hardware, software and services. Driving Operational Effectiveness We are continuing to work to optimize operational effectiveness across the company. Operational effectiveness remains critical to the success of HP, and we are implementing efficiency, productivity and quality initiatives throughout the company. For example, we are continuing to execute our ongoing initiatives to transform our supply chain and leverage our corporate infrastructure. We have also adopted an initiative to implement better tools, standardize key processes, integrate critical IT systems, minimize redundant or legacy systems and take other actions to improve our productivity, sales, forecasting and business decisions. In addition, we are continuing to implement the multi-year restructuring plan announced in June 2010 relating to our enterprise services business. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of this restructuring plan and the associated restructuring charges. The following provides an overview of our key fiscal 2011 financial metrics: HP (1) Consolidated PSG Services IPG ESSN HP Software HPFS In millions, except per share amounts Net revenue $ 127,245 $ 39,574 $ 35,954 $ 25,783 $ 22,241 $ 3,217 $ 3,596 Year-over-year net revenue % increase (decrease) 1.0 % (2.9 )% 1.2 % 0.1 % 9.3 % 17.9 % 18.0 % Earnings from operations $ 9,677 $ 2,350 $ 5,149 $ 3,973 $ 3,026 $ 698 $ 348 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 7.6 % 5.9 % 14.3 % 15.4 % 13.6 % 21.7 % 9.7 % Net earnings $ 7,074 Net earnings per share Basic $ 3.38 Diluted $ 3.32 (1) Includes Corporate Investments and eliminations. 38 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Cash and cash equivalents at October 31, 2011 totaled $8.0 billion, a decrease of $2.9 billion from the October 31, 2010 balance of $10.9 billion. The decrease for fiscal 2011 was due primarily to $10.5 billion of net cash paid for business acquisitions, $10.1 billion of cash used to repurchase common stock and $3.5 billion net investment in property, plant and equipment, the effect of which was partially offset by $12.6 billion of cash provided from operations and $8.3 billion from the net issuance of debt. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. The discussion of results of operations at the consolidated level is followed by a more detailed discussion of results of operations by segment. For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our operating results, see the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A, which is incorporated herein by reference. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES General The Consolidated Financial Statements of HP are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of HP's Board of Directors. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The summary of significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Revenue Recognition We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and, while the majority of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain multiple elements or non-standard terms and conditions. As a result, significant contract interpretation is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple element arrangement should be treated as separate units of accounting for revenue recognition purposes, and, if so, how the price should be allocated among the elements and when to recognize 39 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) revenue for each element. We recognize revenue for delivered elements as separate units of accounting only when the delivered elements have standalone value, uncertainties regarding customer acceptance are resolved and there are no customer-negotiated refund or return rights for the delivered elements. For elements with no standalone value, we recognize revenue consistent with the pattern of the associated deliverables. If the arrangement includes a customer-negotiated refund or return right relative to the delivered item and the delivery and performance of the undelivered item is considered probable and substantially in our control, the delivered element constitutes a separate unit of accounting. Changes in the allocation of the sales price between elements may impact the timing of revenue recognition but will not change the total revenue recognized on the contract. We recognize revenue as work progresses on certain fixed-price contracts, such as consulting arrangements. Using a proportional performance method, we estimate the total expected labor costs in order to determine the amount of revenue earned to date. We follow this basis because reasonably dependable estimates of the labor costs applicable to various stages of a contract can be made. Total contract profit is subject to revisions throughout the life of the contract. We record changes in revenue to income, as a result of revisions to cost estimates, in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. We recognize revenue on certain design and build (design, development and/or constructions of software and/or systems) projects using the percentage-of-completion method. We use the cost-to-cost method of measurement towards completion as determined by the percentage of cost incurred to date to the total estimated costs of the project. In circumstances when reasonable and reliable cost estimates for a project cannot be made, we recognize revenue using the completed contract method. We record estimated reductions to revenue for customer and distributor programs and incentive offerings, including price protection, promotions, other volume-based incentives and expected returns. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered. Additionally, certain incentive programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of the incentive, the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Under our revenue recognition policies, we establish the selling prices used for each deliverable based on the vendor-specific objective evidence ("VSOE"), if available, third-party evidence, if VSOE is not available, or estimated selling price if neither VSOE nor third-party evidence is available. We establish VSOE of selling price using the price charged for a deliverable when sold separately and, in rare instances, using the price established by management having the relevant authority. Third-party evidence of selling price is established by evaluating largely similar and interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone sales to similarly situated customers. The best estimate of selling price ("ESP") is established considering internal factors such as margin objectives, pricing practices and controls, customer segment pricing strategies and the product life cycle. Consideration is also given to market conditions such as competitor pricing strategies and industry technology life cycles. When determining ESP, we apply management judgment to establish margin objectives and pricing strategies and to evaluate market conditions and product life cycles. We may modify or develop new go-to-market practices in the future. As these go-to-market strategies evolve, we may modify our pricing practices in the future, which may result in changes in selling prices, impacting both VSOE and ESP. The aforementioned factors may result in a different allocation of revenue to the deliverables in multiple element arrangements from the current fiscal year, which may change the pattern and timing of 40 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) revenue recognition for these elements but will not change the total revenue recognized for the arrangement. Warranty Provision We provide for the estimated cost of product warranties at the time we recognize revenue. We evaluate our warranty obligations on a product group basis. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period of time. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, we base our estimated warranty obligation upon warranty terms, ongoing product failure rates, repair costs, product call rates, average cost per call, and current period product shipments. If actual product failure rates, repair rates or any other post sales support costs were to differ from our estimates, we would be required to make revisions to the estimated warranty liability. Warranty terms generally range from 90 days to three years for parts and labor, depending upon the product. Over the last three fiscal years, the annual warranty provision has averaged approximately 3.3% of annual net product revenue, while actual annual warranty costs have experienced favorable trends and averaged approximately 3.2% of annual net product revenue. Business Combinations We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development ("IPR&D"), based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. We engage independent third-party appraisal firms to assist us in determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include but are not limited to future expected cash flows from customer contracts, customer lists, distribution agreements, and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop IPR&D into commercially viable products and estimating cash flows from projects when completed; brand awareness and market position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the brand will continue to be used in our product portfolio; and discount rates. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Other estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as additional information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as more fully discussed in Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Valuation of Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets We review goodwill and purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. The provisions of the accounting standard for goodwill and other intangibles require that we perform a two-step impairment test on goodwill. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each 41 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) reporting unit to its carrying value. In general, our reporting units are consistent with the reportable segments identified in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. However, for the webOS business within Corporate Investments, the reporting unit is one step below the segment level. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a weighting of income and market approaches. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on market multiples of revenue or earnings for comparable companies. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not impaired and we are not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we must perform the second step of the impairment test in order to determine the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill. If the carrying value of a reporting unit's goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then we record an impairment loss equal to the difference. We also compare the fair value of purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives to their carrying value. We estimate the fair value of these intangible assets using an income approach. We recognize an impairment loss when the estimated fair value of the intangible asset is less than the carrying value. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit or an indefinite-lived purchased intangible asset is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, assumed royalty rates, future economic and market conditions and determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units. Our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which we performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, resulted in an impairment charge for the webOS business as discussed in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. There was no impairment for HP's remaining reporting units. The excess of fair value over carrying value for each of HP's reporting units as of August 1, 2011, the annual testing date, ranged from approximately $0.4 billion to approximately $25.6 billion. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the fair value calculations on the goodwill impairment test, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair values of each reporting unit. This hypothetical 10% decrease would result in excess fair value over carrying value ranging from approximately $0.2 billion to approximately $22.7 billion for each of HP's reporting units. We also performed our annual impairment analysis of the indefinite-lived intangible asset valued at $1.4 billion. There was no impairment of the indefinite-lived intangible as a result of the analysis. The excess of fair value over carrying value of the Compaq trade name in the PSG business is approximately $144 million as of August 1, 2011, the annual testing date. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the fair value calculation, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair value of the intangible which resulted in an excess of fair value over carrying value of approximately $13 million. In addition, if a future change in HP's branding strategy resulted in the reclassification of the Compaq trade name from an indefinite-lived intangible to a definite-lived intangible, there would be a significant decrease in the fair value of the asset. 42 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) We will continue to evaluate goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles on an annual basis as of the beginning of its fourth fiscal quarter or whenever events, changes in circumstances or changes in management business strategy indicate that there may be a potential indicator of impairment. On December 9, 2011, we announced that we had determined to contribute the webOS software to the open source community. We are currently evaluating the impact that this decision will have on the $273 million in related intangible assets and goodwill recorded on the consolidated balance sheet. Restructuring We have engaged, and may continue to engage, in restructuring actions, which require management to utilize significant estimates related to the timing and the expenses for severance and other employee separation costs, realizable values of assets made redundant or obsolete, lease cancellation and other exit costs. If the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of the restructuring charges could be materially impacted. For a full description of our restructuring actions, refer to our discussions of restructuring in the Results of Operations section and Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Stock-Based Compensation Expense We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payment awards, net of an estimated forfeiture rate. We recognize compensation cost for only those shares expected to meet the service and performance vesting conditions on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. These compensation costs are determined at the aggregate grant level for service-based awards and at the individual vesting tranche level for awards with performance and/or market conditions. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards requires subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the share-based payment awards and stock price volatility. We utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value the service-based stock options granted under our principal option plans. To implement this model, we examined our historical pattern of option exercises to determine if there were any discernable activity patterns based on certain employee populations. From this analysis, we identified three employee populations to which to apply the Black-Scholes model. We determined that implied volatility calculated based on actively traded options on HP common stock is a better indicator of expected volatility and future stock price trends than historical volatility. We issued performance-based restricted units ("PRUs") representing hypothetical shares of HP common stock. Each PRU award reflected a target number of shares that may be issued to the award recipient. We determine the actual number of shares the recipient receives at the end of a three-year performance period based on results achieved versus goals based on our annual cash flow from operations as a percentage of revenue and total shareholder return ("TSR") relative to the S&P 500 over the performance period. We use historic volatility for PRU awards, as implied volatility cannot be used when simulating multivariate prices for companies in the S&P 500. We estimate the fair value of PRUs using the Monte Carlo simulation model, as the TSR modifier contains a market condition. We update the estimated expense, net of forfeitures, for the cash flow performance against the goal for that year at the end of each reporting period. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management's best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of 43 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to meet the service and performance vesting conditions. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion on stock-based compensation. Taxes on Earnings We calculate our current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the final positions reflected in our income tax returns filed during the subsequent year. We record adjustments based on filed returns when we have identified and finalized them, which is generally in the third and fourth quarters of the subsequent year for U.S. federal and state provisions, respectively. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that we are more likely than not to realize. We have considered future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and make a corresponding charge to earnings in the period in which we make such determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the net deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets, we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the tax jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located. Our effective tax rate includes the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. taxes because we plan to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the United States. We plan foreign earnings remittance amounts based on projected cash flow needs as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we will distribute to the United States and provide the U.S. federal taxes due on these amounts. Further, as a result of certain employment actions and capital investments we have undertaken, income from manufacturing activities in certain countries is subject to reduced tax rates, and in some cases is wholly exempt from taxes, for fiscal years through 2024. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact our effective tax rate. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and approximately 80 foreign countries, and we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that our tax return positions are fully supported, but tax authorities are likely to challenge certain positions, which may not be fully sustained. However, our income tax expense includes amounts intended to satisfy income tax assessments that result from these challenges. Determining the income tax expense for these potential assessments and recording the related assets and liabilities requires management judgments and estimates. We evaluate our uncertain tax positions in accordance with the guidance for 44 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. We believe that our reserve for uncertain tax positions, including related interest, is adequate. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of audits could be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax expense and therefore could have a material impact on our tax provision, net income and cash flows. Our reserve for uncertain tax positions is attributable primarily to uncertainties concerning the tax treatment of our international operations, including the allocation of income among different jurisdictions, and related interest. We review our reserves quarterly, and we may adjust such reserves because of proposed assessments by tax authorities, changes in facts and circumstances, issuance of new regulations or new case law, previously unavailable information obtained during the course of an examination, negotiations between tax authorities of different countries concerning our transfer prices, execution of Advanced Pricing Agreements, resolution with respect to individual audit issues, the resolution of entire audits, or the expiration of statutes of limitations. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion on taxes on earnings. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We determine our allowance for doubtful accounts using a combination of factors to ensure that we have not overstated our trade and financing receivables balances due to uncollectibility. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for all customers based on a variety of factors, including the use of third-party credit risk models that generate quantitative measures of default probabilities based on market factors, the financial condition of customers, the length of time receivables are past due, trends in overall weighted-average risk rating of the total portfolio, macroeconomic conditions, significant one-time events and historical experience. Also, we record specific provisions for individual accounts when we become aware of specific customer circumstances, such as in the case of bankruptcy filings or deterioration in the customer's operating results or financial position. If the circumstances related to the customer change, we would further adjust our estimates of the recoverability of receivables either upward or downward. The annual provision for doubtful accounts has averaged approximately 0.16% of net revenue over the last three fiscal years. Using our third-party credit risk model at October 31, 2011, a 50-basis-point deterioration in the weighted-average default probabilities of our significant customers would have resulted in an approximately $62 million increase to our trade allowance at the end of fiscal year 2011. Inventory We state our inventory at the lower of cost or market. We make adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, at the product group level for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired balances. Factors influencing these adjustments include changes in demand, rapid technological changes, product life cycle and development plans, component cost trends, product pricing, physical deterioration and quality issues. Revisions to these adjustments would be required if these factors differ from our estimates. Fair Value of Financial Instruments We measure certain financial assets and liabilities at fair value based on valuation techniques using the best information available, which may include quoted market prices, market comparables and discounted cash flow projections. Financial instruments are primarily comprised of time deposits, money market funds, commercial paper, corporate and other debt securities, equity securities and other investments in common stock and common stock equivalents and derivative instruments. 45 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Cash Equivalents and Investments: We hold time deposits, money market funds, commercial paper, other debt securities primarily consisting of corporate and foreign government notes and bonds, and common stock and equivalents. In general, and where applicable, we use quoted prices in active markets for identical assets to determine fair value. If quoted prices in active markets for identical assets are not available to determine fair value, then we use quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities or inputs that are observable either directly or indirectly. If quoted prices for identical or similar assets are not available, we use internally developed valuation models, whose inputs include bid prices, and third party valuations utilizing underlying asset assumptions. Derivative Instruments: As discussed in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, we mainly hold non-speculative forwards, swaps and options to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures. When active market quotes are not available, we use industry standard valuation models. Where applicable, these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to a present value using market-based observable inputs including interest rate curves, credit risk, foreign exchange rates, and forward and spot prices for currencies. In certain cases, market-based observable inputs are not available and, in those cases, we use management judgment to develop assumptions which are used to determine fair value. Retirement Benefits Our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations are dependent on various assumptions. Our major assumptions relate primarily to discount rates, salary growth and long-term return on plan assets. We base the discount rate assumption on current investment yields of high quality fixed-income investments during the retirement benefits maturity period. The salary growth assumptions reflect our long-term actual experience and future and near-term outlook. Long-term return on plan assets is determined based on historical portfolio results and management's expectations related to the future economic environment, as well as target asset allocations. Our major assumptions vary by plan and the weighted-average rates used are set forth in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Each assumption has different sensitivity characteristics, and, in general, changes, if any, have moved in the same direction over the last several years. For fiscal 2011, changes in the weighted-average rates for the HP benefit plans would have had the following impact on our net periodic benefit cost: A decrease of 25 basis points in the long-term rate of return would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $56 million; A decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $82 million; and An increase of 25 basis points in the future compensation rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $18 million. Loss Contingencies We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations and proceedings that arise in the ordinary course of business. We record a provision for a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount. We review these provisions at least quarterly and adjust these provisions to reflect the impact of negotiations, 46 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information. Litigation is inherently unpredictable and is subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion of litigation and contingencies. ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS In June 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued amendments to the FASB Accounting Standards Codification relating to the presentation of comprehensive income in our financial statements. The amendments require the presentation of total comprehensive income, the components of net income, and the components of other comprehensive income either in a single continuous statement of comprehensive income or in two separate but consecutive statements. We will adopt these amendments in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012. CONSTANT CURRENCY PRESENTATION Revenue from our international operations has historically represented, and we expect will continue to represent, a majority of our overall net revenue. As a result, our revenue growth has been impacted, and we expect will continue to be impacted, by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. In order to provide a framework for assessing how each of our business segments performed excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, we present the year-over-year percentage change in revenue performance on a constant currency basis, which assumes no change in the exchange rate from the prior-year period. This constant currency disclosure is provided in addition to, and not as a substitute for, the year-over-year percentage change in revenue on an as-reported basis. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion compares the historical results of operations on a GAAP basis for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2011, 2010, and 2009. Unless otherwise noted, all comparative performance data included below reflect year-over-year comparisons. 47 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2011 (1) 2010 (2) 2009 (2) In millions Net revenue $ 127,245 100.0 % $ 126,033 100.0 % $ 114,552 100.0 % Cost of sales (3) 97,529 76.6 % 95,956 76.1 % 87,489 76.4 % Gross profit 29,716 23.4 % 30,077 23.9 % 27,063 23.6 % Research and development 3,254 2.6 % 2,959 2.3 % 2,819 2.5 % Selling, general and administrative 13,466 10.6 % 12,718 10.2 % 11,648 10.2 % Amortization of purchased intangible assets 1,607 1.3 % 1,484 1.2 % 1,578 1.3 % Impairment of goodwill and purchased intangibles assets 885 0.7 % Restructuring charges 645 0.5 % 1,144 0.9 % 640 0.6 % Acquisition-related charges 182 0.1 % 293 0.2 % 242 0.2 % Earnings from operations 9,677 7.6 % 11,479 9.1 % 10,136 8.8 % Interest and other, net (4) (695 ) (0.5 )% (505 ) (0.4 )% (721 ) (0.6 )% Earnings before taxes 8,982 7.1 % 10,974 8.7 % 9,415 8.2 % Provision for taxes 1,908 1.5 % 2,213 1.7 % 1,755 1.5 % Net earnings $ 7,074 5.6 % $ 8,761 7.0 % $ 7,660 6.7 % (1) In August 2011, we announced that we would wind down the webOS device business. The table below sets forth the impact of these webOS-related actions on the specific line items in the table above: Impact of webOS related actions in fiscal 2011 Net revenue $ (142 ) Cost of sales $ 548 Gross profit $ (690 ) Research and development $ 23 Selling, general and administrative $ 42 Impairment of goodwill and purchased intangible assets $ 885 Restructuring charges $ 33 Earnings from operations $ (1,673 ) (2) In connection with organizational realignments implemented in the first quarter of fiscal 2011, certain costs previously reported as Cost of sales have been reclassified as Selling, general and administrative expenses to better align those costs with the functional areas that benefit from those expenditures. (3) Cost of products, cost of services and financing interest. (4) For fiscal 2011, Interest and other, net includes $276 million of charges in connection with the acquisition of Autonomy Corporation plc ("Autonomy"), which is primarily comprised of the $265 million net cost of British pound options bought to limit foreign exchange rate risk. 48 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Net Revenue The components of the weighted net revenue change were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2011 2010 (1) Percentage Points Enterprise Servers, Storage and Networking 1.5 3.7 HP Financial Services 0.4 0.3 HP Software 0.4 0.1 Services 0.3 0.1 Imaging and Printing Group 1.5 Corporate Investments/Other (0.7 ) (0.5 ) Personal Systems Group (0.9 ) 4.8 Total HP 1.0 10.0 (1) Reflects certain reclassifications made to historical results to conform to the current year presentation as noted in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Fiscal 2011 In fiscal 2011, total HP net revenue increased 1.0% (decreased 0.9% on a constant currency basis). U.S. net revenue decreased 1.0% to $44.1 billion, while net revenue from outside of the United States increased 2.0% to $83.1 billion. As reflected in the table above, the ESSN segment was the largest contributor to HP net revenue growth as a result of balanced growth across all regions. ESSN segment net revenue growth was helped by the strong performance in products related to our 3PAR Inc. ("3PAR") and 3Com Corporation ("3Com") acquisitions. An analysis of the change in net revenue for each business segment is included under "Segment Information" below. Fiscal 2010 In fiscal 2010, total HP net revenue increased 10.0% (8.3% on a constant currency basis). U.S. net revenue increased 7.8% to $44.5 billion, while net revenue from outside of the United States increased 11.3% to $81.5 billion. For fiscal 2010, the PSG segment was the largest contributor to HP net revenue growth as a result of balanced growth across the regions. An analysis of the change in net revenue for each business segment is included under "Segment Information" below. Gross Margin Fiscal 2011 In fiscal 2011, total HP gross margin decreased by 0.5 percentage points. The decline was driven by a lower gross margin in the Services, IPG and Corporate Investments segments, the effect of which was partially offset by a favorable commodity pricing environment in the PSG and ESSN segments, and a favorable mix from higher HP Software and HP Networking revenue. PSG gross margin increased in fiscal 2011 primarily as a result of a favorable commodity pricing environment, combined with lower warranty costs. 49 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Services gross margin decreased in fiscal 2011 due primarily to lower than expected revenue, rate concessions arising from recent contract renewals, a lower than expected resource utilization rate and a higher mix of lower-margin Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing revenue. The decrease was partially offset by a continued focus on operating improvements and cost initiatives that favorably impacted the cost structure of both our enterprise services and technology services businesses. IPG gross margin declined in fiscal 2011 due primarily to increased logistics costs and supply chain constraints in LaserJet printer engines and toner as a result of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, and an unfavorable currency impact driven primarily by the strength of the yen. In addition, IPG gross margin declined due to a continuing mix shift in Consumer Hardware and Commercial Hardware toward lower price point products, coupled with a lower mix of supplies revenue. These effects were partially offset by reductions in IPG's cost structure as a result of continued efforts to optimize our supply chain. ESSN gross margin increased in fiscal 2011 primarily as a result of lower product costs and a higher mix of networking products, the effect of which was partially offset by price declines as a result of competitive pressure. HP Software gross margin decreased in fiscal 2011 due primarily to rate declines in licenses and services. HPFS gross margin decreased in fiscal 2011 due primarily to lower portfolio margins from a higher mix of operating leases, the effect of which was partially offset by lower bad debt expense as a percentage of revenue and higher margins on lease extensions and buyouts. Corporate Investments gross margin decreased in fiscal 2011 primarily as a result of the impact of the wind down of the webOS device business, which resulted in expenses for supplier-related obligations, sales incentive programs and inventory write downs. Fiscal 2010 In fiscal 2010, total HP gross margin increased by 0.3 percentage points. The increase was a result of an increased mix in networking products and rate increase in Services, the effect of which was partially offset by strong revenue growth in personal computers and printer hardware that have lower gross margins. PSG gross margin declined in fiscal 2010 primarily as a result of higher component costs, the effect of which was partially offset by lower warranty and logistics expenses. Services gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 due primarily to the continued focus on operating improvements, including delivery efficiencies and cost controls in our technology services business and acquisition synergies related to the acquisition of Electronic Data Systems Corporation ("EDS"). IPG gross margin declined in fiscal 2010 due primarily to a higher mix of hardware and a correspondingly lower mix of supplies, the effect of which was partially offset by cost savings associated with our ongoing efforts to optimize our supply chain. ESSN gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 due primarily to lower product costs and strong volume, the effect of which was partially offset by a product mix shift resulting from the strength in Industry Standard Servers ("ISS"), which has lower gross margins. 50 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HP Software gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 primarily as a result of a higher license and support mix, the effect of which was partially offset by a reduced services gross margin rate. HPFS gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 primarily as a result of higher portfolio margins due to favorable financing conditions and higher remarketing margin, the effect of which was partially offset by higher bad debt and lower buyout margin. Corporate Investments gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 primarily as a result of the impact from the acquisition Palm, Inc. ("Palm"). Operating Expenses Research and Development Total research and development ("R&D") expense increased in fiscal 2011 due primarily to additional expenses from acquired companies. In fiscal 2011, R&D expense increased for ESSN, Corporate Investments and HP Software and decreased for Services and PSG. The increase for ESSN was driven by acquisition investments and innovation-focused spend in networking and storage products. The increase for Corporate Investments was due to investments in the development of webOS and webOS devices during the first three quarters of fiscal 2011. Total R&D expense increased in fiscal 2010 due primarily to additional expenses from acquired companies. In fiscal 2010, R&D expense increased for ESSN, IPG, Corporate Investments, HP Software and Services, and decreased for PSG. Selling, General and Administrative Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expense increased in fiscal 2011 due primarily to higher field selling costs as a result of our investments in sales resources to grow revenue. The increase in fiscal 2011 was partially offset by $334 million in net gains on the sale of real estate and a $77 million net gain on the divestiture of our Halo video collaboration products business. In fiscal 2011, SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue increased for each of our segments except for HPFS, Services and IPG, each of which experienced a decrease. Total SG&A expense increased in fiscal 2010 due primarily to higher field selling and marketing costs as a result of our investments in sales resources to grow revenue. In fiscal 2010, SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue decreased for each of our segments except for IPG, which experienced an increase. Amortization of Purchased Intangible Assets The increase in amortization expense in fiscal 2011 was due primarily to increased amortization of purchased intangible assets from acquisitions completed during fiscal 2010. This increase was partially offset by decreased amortization expenses related to certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions reaching the end of their amortization periods. The decrease in amortization expense in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions reaching the end of their amortization periods, the effect of which was partially offset by increased amortization of purchased intangible assets from acquisitions completed during fiscal 2010. 51 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) For more information on our amortization of purchased intangibles assets, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Impairment of goodwill and purchased intangible assets As a result of the decision to wind down the webOS device business in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, HP recorded an impairment charge to goodwill and certain purchased intangible assets associated with the Palm acquisition. For more information on our impairment charges, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Restructuring Charges Restructuring charges for fiscal 2011 were $645 million. These charges included $326 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2008 restructuring plan, $266 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2010 enterprise services restructuring plan and $33 million related to the decision to wind down the webOS device business. Restructuring charges for fiscal 2010 were $1.1 billion. These charges included $650 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2010 enterprise services restructuring plan, $429 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2008 restructuring plan, $46 million and $18 million associated with the Palm and 3Com restructuring plans, respectively, and an increase of $1 million related to adjustments to other restructuring plans. Restructuring charges for fiscal 2009 were $640 million. These charges included $346 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2008 restructuring plan, $297 million of severance costs associated with our fiscal 2009 restructuring plan, and a reduction of $3 million related to adjustments to other restructuring plans. For more information on our restructuring charges, see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. As part of our ongoing business operations, we incurred workforce rebalancing charges for severance and related costs within certain business segments in fiscal 2011. Workforce rebalancing activities are considered part of normal operations as we continue to optimize our cost structure. Workforce rebalancing costs are included in our business segment results, and we expect to incur additional workforce rebalancing costs in the future. Acquisition-related Charges In fiscal 2011, we recorded acquisition-related charges of $182 million primarily for consulting and integration costs associated with the Autonomy acquisition, as well as retention bonuses for acquisitions completed in fiscal 2010. In fiscal 2010, we recorded acquisition-related charges of $293 million primarily for consulting and integration costs, acquisition costs and retention bonuses associated with the EDS, 3Com, Palm, 3PAR and ArcSight, Inc. acquisitions. Interest and Other, Net Interest and other, net expense increased by $190 million in fiscal 2011. The increase was driven by $276 million of charges incurred in connection with the acquisition of Autonomy, which is primarily 52 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) comprised of the $265 million net cost of British pound options bought to limit foreign exchange rate risk. The increase was also as a result of higher interest expenses due to higher average debt balances, the effect of which was partially offset by lower litigation costs and lower currency transaction losses. Interest and other, net improved by $216 million in fiscal 2010. The improvement was driven primarily by lower currency losses on balance sheet remeasurement items, lower interest expenses on debt balances due to lower interest rates, and a value-added tax refund, the effect of which was partially offset by an increase to our litigation accruals. Provision for Taxes Our effective tax rates were 21.2%, 20.2% and 18.6% in fiscal 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. Our effective tax rate generally differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% due to favorable tax rates associated with certain earnings from our operations in lower-tax jurisdictions throughout the world. The jurisdictions with favorable tax rates that have the most significant effective tax rate impact in the periods presented include Singapore, the Netherlands, China, Ireland and Puerto Rico. We plan to reinvest some of the earnings of these jurisdictions indefinitely outside the United States and therefore have not provided U.S. taxes on those indefinitely reinvested earnings. The increase in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2011 was due primarily to nondeductible goodwill and increases in valuation allowances. The increase in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to a decrease in the income tax benefits related to foreign earnings. For a full reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and further explanation of our provision for taxes, see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Segment Information A description of the products and services, as well as financial data, for each segment can be found in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. We have realigned segment financial data for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2010 and 2009 to reflect changes in HP's organizational structure that occurred at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2011. We describe these changes more fully in Note 19. We have presented the business segments in this Annual Report on Form 10-K based on the distinct nature of various businesses such as customer base, homogeneity of products and technology. The discussions below include the results of each of our segments. Personal Systems Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Net revenue $ 39,574 $ 40,741 $ 35,305 Earnings from operations $ 2,350 $ 2,032 $ 1,661 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 5.9 % 5.0 % 4.7 % 53 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of the weighted net revenue change by PSG business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2011 2010 Percentage Points Workstations 1.1 1.5 Desktop PCs (0.7 ) 7.5 Notebook PCs (3.2 ) 6.7 Other (0.1 ) (0.3 ) Total PSG (2.9 ) 15.4 PSG revenue decreased 2.9% (decreased 4.7% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2011 due primarily to softness in the consumer PC markets, the effect of which was partially offset by strength in commercial businesses. Unit volume was up 2.3% due primarily to the continued commercial refresh cycle, the effect of which was partially offset by a decline in volume in the consumer business. In fiscal 2011, Workstations revenue increased 24.1% due to the ongoing corporate refresh cycle and strength in the commercial PC market. Net revenue from Desktop PCs decreased 1.7% while Notebook PCs revenue decreased 5.7% as a result of consumer market softness. In fiscal 2011, net revenue for consumer clients decreased 15.4% while commercial client revenue increased 9.2%. Net revenue in Other decreased 6.6% due primarily to the wind down of the handheld business and decreased sales of consumer warranty extensions. For fiscal 2011, the favorable impact on PSG net revenue from unit increases was offset by a 5% decrease in average selling prices ("ASPs") due primarily to the competitive pricing environment. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 0.9 percentage points in fiscal 2011. The increase was driven by improvements in gross margin resulting primarily from a favorable component pricing environment and lower warranty costs. Partially offsetting the increase in gross margin was an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue due primarily to unfavorable currency impact and increased selling costs. PSG revenue increased 15.4% (12.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2010. The revenue increase resulted from balanced growth across all regions. PSG unit volume and net revenue increased across all business units except Other in fiscal 2010. Unit volume was up 14% as the commercial refresh cycle and continued demand for consumer notebooks drove an increase in shipments. In fiscal 2010, net revenue from Notebook PCs increased 12% while Desktop PCs revenue increased 20%. Workstations revenue increased 42%. In fiscal 2010, net revenue for consumer clients increased 12% while commercial client revenue increased 20%. Net revenue in Other decreased 10% due primarily to lower handheld volumes, offset slightly by increased sales of calculators, home servers and warranty extensions. For fiscal 2010, the favorable impact on PSG net revenue from unit increases was accompanied by a 1% increase in ASPs. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 0.3 percentage points in fiscal 2010. The increase was driven by improvements in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue, the effect of which was offset partially by a slight decline in gross margins. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due to effective cost controls and operating leverage benefits from increased volume. The decrease in gross margins was a result of higher component costs, the effect of which was partially offset by lower warranty and logistics expenses. 54 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Services For fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Net revenue $ 35,954 $ 35,529 $ 35,380 Earnings from operations $ 5,149 $ 5,661 $ 5,102 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 14.3 % 15.9 % 14.4 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by Services business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2011 2010 Percentage Points Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing 0.7 1.1 Technology Services 0.7 (0.1 ) Application Services 0.2 (0.4 ) Business Process Outsourcing (0.6 ) (0.3 ) Other 0.2 0.1 Total Services 1.2 0.4 Services net revenue increased 1.2% (decreased 1.3% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2011 due to revenue increases in Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing and Technology Services. Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing net revenue increased by 2% in fiscal 2011. An increase in product-related revenue and a favorable currency impact were partially offset by a shortfall in short-term project contracts with existing clients. Technology Services net revenue increased by 2% in fiscal 2011, due primarily to growth in our consulting business and a favorable currency impact, the effect of which was partially offset by reduced sales of third-party hardware. Application Services net revenue increased by 1% in fiscal 2011. The increase was driven by a favorable currency impact, the effect of which was partially offset by declines in short-term project work and weakness in public sector spending. Business Process Outsourcing net revenue decreased by 7% in fiscal 2011 due primarily to the ExcellerateHRO divestiture completed at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2010. Services earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 1.6 percentage points in fiscal 2011. Operating margin decreased due primarily to lower than expected revenue, rate concessions arising from recent contract renewals, a lower than expected resource utilization rate and a higher mix of lower-margin Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing revenue. The decrease in operating margin was partially offset by a reduction in bad debt expense and a continued focus on operating improvements and cost initiatives that favorably impacted the cost structure of both our enterprise services and technology services businesses. Services net revenue increased 0.4% (decreased 2.0% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2010. Net revenue in Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing increased by 3% in fiscal 2010. The revenue increase was due to favorable currency impact and growth in data center services and networking services. Net revenue in Technology Services was flat in fiscal 2010, due primarily to lower contract revenue tied to reduced levels of enterprise hardware sales in the prior-year period and market conditions in the current-year period, the effect of which was partially offset by a favorable currency impact. Net revenue in Application Services decreased by 2% in fiscal 2010. The revenue decrease was driven primarily by market conditions and existing contract completion, the effect of which was partially 55 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) offset by new business and a favorable currency impact. Net revenue in Business Process Outsourcing decreased by 4% in fiscal 2010. The revenue decrease was due primarily to a divestiture completed at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2010 and challenging economic conditions in certain industries, the effect of which was partially offset by a favorable currency impact. Services earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.5 percentage points in fiscal 2010. Operating margin increased primarily due to continued focus on operating improvements and cost initiatives that favorably impacted the cost structure of our enterprise services business, delivery efficiencies and cost controls in our technology services business, as well as EDS-related acquisition synergies. Imaging and Printing Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Net revenue $ 25,783 $ 25,764 $ 24,011 Earnings from operations $ 3,973 $ 4,412 $ 4,310 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 15.4 % 17.1 % 18.0 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by IPG business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2011 2010 Percentage Points Commercial Hardware 0.9 3.3 Supplies (0.4 ) 3.0 Consumer Hardware (0.4 ) 1.0 Total IPG 0.1 7.3 IPG net revenue increased 0.1% (decreased 0.9% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2011, due primarily to a net revenue increase in Commercial Hardware. Net revenue for Commercial Hardware increased 4% in fiscal 2011 due primarily to double-digit net revenue growth in the graphics business, coupled with strong performance in transactional laser products in emerging geographies. These effects were partially offset by supply chain constraints in LaserJet printers as a result of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan. Net revenue for Supplies decreased 1% in fiscal 2011, driven by reductions in channel inventory and slower demand, particularly in EMEA. These effects were partially offset by growth in large format printing supplies. Net revenue for Consumer Hardware decreased 4% in fiscal 2011, driven primarily by overall reductions in consumer electronics spending and competitive pricing pressures reflected in a mix shift towards lower-priced products and a decline in the average revenue per unit of 6%. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 1.7 percentage points in fiscal 2011, due primarily to a decline in gross margin, the effect of which was partially offset by lower operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decline in fiscal 2011 was due primarily to increased logistics costs and supply chain constraints in LaserJet printers as a result of the Japan earthquake and tsunami, an unfavorable currency impact driven primarily by the strength of the yen, a continued mix shift in Consumer Hardware and Commercial Hardware to lower price point products coupled with a lower mix of supplies. These effects were partially offset by reductions in IPG's 56 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) cost structure as a result of continued efforts to optimize our supply chain. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2011 was due primarily to reduced marketing and administrative expenses, the effect of which was partially offset by higher field selling cost expenses. IPG net revenue increased 7.3% (8.4% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2010, reflecting a continued improvement in market conditions. Net revenue for Commercial Hardware increased 17% in fiscal 2010, due primarily to unit volume growth of 19% driven by improved product availability. Supplies net revenue increased 4% in fiscal 2010, due primarily to increased printing, which resulted in stronger supply usage. Net revenue for Consumer Hardware increased 9% in fiscal 2010, driven primarily by unit volume growth of 11%. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.9 percentage points in fiscal 2010, due primarily to a decline in gross margin and increases in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decline in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to a higher mix of Hardware and a correspondingly lower mix of Supplies, the effect of which was partially offset by cost savings associated with our ongoing efforts to optimize our supply chain. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to increased marketing activities, the effect of which was partially offset by reduced administrative expenses. Enterprise Servers, Storage and Networking For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Net revenue $ 22,241 $ 20,356 $ 16,121 Earnings from operations $ 3,026 $ 2,825 $ 1,657 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 13.6 % 13.9 % 10.3 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by ESSN business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2011 2010 Percentage Points Industry Standard Servers 4.7 20.3 HP Networking 4.3 5.9 Storage 1.3 1.9 Business Critical Systems ("BCS") (1.0 ) (1.8 ) Total ESSN 9.3 26.3 ESSN net revenue increased 9.3% (7.3% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2011 due to growth in HP Networking and ISS. Total revenue from server and storage blades increased by 10% in fiscal 2011. ISS net revenue increased by 8% in fiscal 2011, driven primarily by unit volume growth coupled with increased average unit prices due to favorable demand for the latest generation of ISS products. The revenue increase was also driven by expansion in our converged infrastructure solutions and strong demand from public and private cloud customers. HP Networking net revenue increased by 51% due largely to our acquisition of 3Com in April 2010, strong market demand for our core data center products and the impact of our continued investments in sales coverage. Storage net revenue increased by 7% in fiscal 2011 driven primarily by strong performance in products related to our acquisition of 3PAR in September 2010 and growth in scale out storage arrays, entry-level arrays and StoreOnce data 57 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) deduplication products. BCS net revenue decreased by 9% in fiscal 2011 mainly as a result of orders being delayed or cancelled following an announcement by an alliance partner that it intends to cease software development for our Itanium-based servers. The impact from reduced sales of Itanium-based servers was partially offset by higher demand for the latest generation of BCS scale-up x86 products and growth in NonStop servers. ESSN earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.3 percentage points in fiscal 2011 driven by an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue, the effect of which was partially offset by an increase in gross margin. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due primarily to additional expenses associated with acquisitions and investments in R&D and sales coverage. The gross margin increase was driven by lower product costs and a higher mix of networking products, the effect of which was partially offset by price declines as a result of competitive pressure. ESSN net revenue increased 26.3% (23.8% when adjusted for currency) for fiscal 2010. ESSN blades revenue increased by 37% in fiscal 2010. ISS net revenue increased by 35% in fiscal 2010, driven primarily by unit volume growth coupled with increased average unit prices due to improving market conditions and demand for the latest generation of ISS products. Storage net revenue increased by 9% in fiscal 2010, driven primarily by strong performance in products related to our acquisition of Lefthand Networks, and growth in high-end disk products and storage networking products. BCS net revenue decreased 12%, due primarily to market conditions and competitive pressures, the effect of which was partially offset by new product introductions in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. HP Networking net revenue increased by 124% due to the acquisition of 3Com, improved market demand and continued investment in sales coverage. ESSN earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 3.6 percentage points in fiscal 2010, driven by a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue and an increase in gross margin. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased as a result of operating leverage benefits from increased volume and cost controls, partially offset by acquisitions. The gross margin increase in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to lower product costs and strong volume, the effect of which was partially offset by a product mix shift resulting from the strength in ISS. HP Software For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Net revenue $ 3,217 $ 2,729 $ 2,655 Earnings from operations $ 698 $ 782 $ 731 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 21.7 % 28.7 % 27.5 % HP Software net revenue increased 17.9% (16.3% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2011 due to revenues from acquired companies as well as growth in the organic business. The revenue growth was driven by good performance from our security and management suite offerings. In fiscal 2011, net revenue from services, licenses and support increased by 25%, 24% and 11%, respectively. HP Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 7.0 percentage points in fiscal 2011. The operating margin decline was due primarily to the impact of deferred revenue write-downs and integration costs associated with acquisitions and investments in sales coverage and 58 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) R&D, the effect of which was partially offset by the capitalization of certain software development costs. HP Software net revenue increased 2.8% (0.6% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2010 mainly due to growth in support and license renewals. In fiscal 2010 net revenue from both support and licenses increased by 4%, while net revenue from services decreased by 4%. HP Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.2 percentage points in fiscal 2010. The operating margin improvement in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin in fiscal 2010 was primarily a result of a higher license and support mix, the effect of which was partially offset by a reduced services gross margin rate. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to lower field selling, administrative and acquisition integration costs. HP Financial Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Net revenue $ 3,596 $ 3,047 $ 2,673 Earnings from operations $ 348 $ 281 $ 206 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 9.7 % 9.2 % 7.7 % HPFS net revenue increased by 18.0% in fiscal 2011. The net revenue increase was due primarily to portfolio growth as a result of higher customer demand, a higher operating lease mix due to higher service-led financing volume, higher end-of-lease revenue from residual expirations in line with portfolio growth, and higher early buyout revenue and favorable currency movements. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.5 percentage points in fiscal 2011 due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue, the effect of which was partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. The decrease in operating expenses was due primarily to continued improvement in cost efficiencies. The decrease in gross margin was the result of lower portfolio margins from a higher mix of operating leases, the effect of which was partially offset by lower bad debt expense as a percentage of revenue and higher margins on lease extensions and buyouts. HPFS net revenue increased by 14.0% in fiscal 2010. The net revenue increase was due to portfolio growth as a result of higher customer demand, a higher operating lease mix due to higher service-led financing volume, higher end-of-lease rental, buyout and remarketing activity, and favorable currency movements. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.5 percentage points in fiscal 2010 due primarily to an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue. The increase in gross margin was the result of higher portfolio margins due to favorable financing conditions and higher remarketing margins, the effect of which was partially offset by higher bad debt and lower buyout margins. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue was driven primarily by improved cost efficiencies. 59 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Financing Originations For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Total financing originations $ 6,765 $ 5,987 $ 5,210 New financing originations, which represent the amount of financing provided to customers for equipment and related software and services, including intercompany activity, increased 13.0% and 14.9% in fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2010, respectively. The increases reflect higher financing associated with HP product sales and services offerings resulting from improved integration and engagement with HP's sales efforts and a favorable currency impact. Portfolio Assets and Ratios HPFS maintains a strategy to generate a competitive return on equity by effectively leveraging its portfolio against the risks associated with interest rates and credit. The HPFS business model is asset-intensive and uses certain internal metrics to measure its performance against other financial services companies, including a segment balance sheet that is derived from our internal management reporting system. The accounting policies used to derive these amounts are substantially the same as those used by the consolidated company. However, certain intercompany loans and accounts that are reflected in the segment balances are eliminated in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The portfolio assets and ratios derived from the segment balance sheet for HPFS were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2011 2010 In millions Portfolio assets (1) $ 12,699 $ 11,418 Allowance for doubtful accounts (2) 130 140 Operating lease equipment reserve 84 83 Total reserves 214 223 Net portfolio assets $ 12,485 $ 11,195 Reserve coverage 1.7 % 2.0 % Debt to equity ratio (3) 7.0x 7.0x (1) Portfolio assets include gross financing receivables of approximately $7.3 billion and $6.7 billion at October 31, 2011 and October 31, 2010, respectively, and net equipment under operating leases of $2.7 billion and $2.5 billion at October 31, 2011 and October 31, 2010, respectively, as disclosed in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Portfolio assets also include capitalized profit on intercompany equipment transactions of approximately $1.0 billion and $0.8 billion at October 31, 2011 and October 31, 2010, respectively, and intercompany leases of approximately $1.7 billion and $1.3 billion at October 31, 2011 and October 31, 2010, respectively, both of which are eliminated in consolidation. (2) Allowance for doubtful accounts includes both the short-term and the long-term portions of the allowance on financing receivables. (3) HPFS debt consists of intercompany equity that is treated as debt for segment reporting purposes, intercompany debt and debt issued directly by HPFS. 60 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Net portfolio assets at October 31, 2011 increased 11.5% from October 31, 2010. The increase resulted from higher levels of financing originations in fiscal 2011 and a favorable currency impact. The overall reserve coverage ratio decreased as a percentage of the portfolio assets. HPFS funds its operations mainly through a combination of intercompany debt and equity. HPFS recorded net bad debt expenses of $60 million and $75 million in fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2010, respectively. Corporate Investments For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Net revenue $ 322 $ 346 $ 191 Loss from operations $ (1,616 ) $ (366 ) $ (300 ) Loss from operations as a % of net revenue (501.9 )% (105.8 )% (157.1 )% Net revenue in Corporate Investments in fiscal 2011 relates primarily to mobile devices associated with the Palm acquisition, business intelligence solutions and licensing of HP technology to third parties. In fiscal 2011, the revenue decrease was due primarily to lower business intelligence solutions revenue, the effect of which was partially offset by revenue from webOS devices. Business intelligence solutions revenue declined mainly due to lower revenue from consulting services. Corporate Investments reported a higher loss from operations in fiscal 2011 due primarily to $755 million of expenses for supplier-related obligations and sales incentive programs related to winding down the webOS device business. The loss from operations in Corporate Investments was also due to expenses carried in the segment associated with corporate development, global alliances and HP Labs, which expenses increased from fiscal 2010 and were partially offset by a gain on the divestiture of HP's Halo video collaboration products business. Net revenue in Corporate Investments in fiscal 2010 relates primarily to business intelligence solutions and licensing of HP technology to third parties. The revenue increase in Corporate Investments was also due to revenue resulting from the acquisition of Palm, which HP completed in July 2010. Corporate Investments reported a loss from operations in fiscal 2010 due primarily to the impact from investments in research and product development. The earnings from operations in Corporate Investments were also impacted by expenses carried in the segment associated with corporate development, global alliances and HP Labs that declined from fiscal 2009. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, with substantially all of those amounts held outside of the United States. A majority of the amounts held outside of the United States are generally utilized to support non-U.S. liquidity needs. Most of the amounts held outside of the United States could be repatriated to the United States but, under current law, would be subject to United States federal income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Repatriation of some foreign balances is restricted by local laws. We have provided for the U.S. federal tax liability on these amounts for financial statement purposes, except for foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the United States. Repatriation could result in additional U.S. federal income tax payments 61 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) in future years. Where local restrictions prevent an efficient intercompany transfer of funds, our intent is that cash balances would remain outside of the United States and we would meet U.S. liquidity needs through ongoing cash flows, external borrowings, or both. We utilize a variety of tax planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. We do not expect restrictions or potential taxes on repatriation of amounts held outside of the United States to have a material effect on HP's overall liquidity, financial condition or results of operations. LIQUIDITY We use cash generated by operations as our primary source of liquidity; we believe that internally generated cash flows are generally sufficient to support business operations, capital expenditures and the payment of stockholder dividends, in addition to discretionary investments and share repurchases. We are able to supplement this near-term liquidity, if necessary, with broad access to capital markets and credit line facilities made available by various foreign and domestic financial institutions. Our liquidity is subject to various risks including the market risks identified in the section entitled "Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures about Market Risk" in Item 7A. For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In billions Cash and cash equivalents $ 8.0 $ 10.9 $ 13.3 Total debt $ 30.6 $ 22.3 $ 15.8 Available borrowing resources (1)(2) $ 14.6 $ 13.8 $ 18.1 (1) In addition to these available borrowing resources, we are able to offer for sale, from time to time, in one or more offerings, an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares and warrants under a shelf registration statement filed with the SEC in May 2009 (the "2009 Shelf Registration Statement"). (2) Available borrowing resources does not include 2.2 billion ($3.6 billion) in borrowing resources under our 364-day senior unsecured bridge term loan agreement that was entered into in August 2011 and terminated in November 2011. Our cash position remains strong, and we believe our cash balances and anticipated cash flow generated from operations are sufficient to cover cash outlays expected in fiscal 2012. Cash Flows The following table summarizes the key cash flow metrics from our consolidated statements of cash flow: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions Net cash provided by operating activities $ 12,639 $ 11,922 $ 13,379 Net cash used in investing activities (13,959 ) (11,359 ) (3,580 ) Net cash used in financing activities (1,566 ) (2,913 ) (6,673 ) Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents $ (2,886 ) $ (2,350 ) $ 3,126 62 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $0.7 billion for fiscal 2011, as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was due primarily to higher cash generated through the utilization of operating assets, primarily accounts and financing receivables, and lower utilization of cash resources for payment of accounts payable, the impact of which was partially offset by decrease in net earnings and cash utilized as a result of higher inventory levels. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by approximately $1.5 billion for fiscal 2010, as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease was due primarily to an increase in accounts and financing receivables resulting from higher revenues in the fourth quarter and higher payments for account payable activities, the impact of which was partially offset by the increase in net earnings. Our key working capital metrics are as follows: October 31 2011 2010 2009 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable 51 50 48 Days of supply in inventory 27 23 23 Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable (52 ) (52 ) (57 ) Cash conversion cycle 26 21 14 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable ("DSO") measures the average number of days our receivables are outstanding. DSO is calculated by dividing ending accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, by a 90-day average net revenue. Our accounts receivable balance was $18.2 billion as of October 31, 2011. Days of supply in inventory ("DOS") measures the average number of days from procurement to sale of our product. DOS is calculated by dividing ending inventory by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our inventory balance was $7.5 billion as of October 31, 2011. Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable ("DPO") measures the average number of days our accounts payable balances are outstanding. DPO is calculated by dividing ending accounts payable by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our accounts payable balance was $14.7 billion as of October 31, 2011. Our working capital requirements depend upon our effective management of the cash conversion cycle, which represents effectively the number of days that elapse from the day we pay for the purchase of raw materials to the collection of cash from our customers. The cash conversion cycle is the sum of DSO and DOS less DPO. The cash conversion cycle for fiscal 2011 increased by five days as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase in DSO was primarily the result of unfavorable impact on receivables from the Autonomy acquisition, extended payment terms and an increase in unbilled and aged accounts receivables, the effect of which was offset by a favorable currency impact due to the strengthening U.S. dollar. The increase in DOS was a result of higher inventory levels at October 31, 2011 due primarily to a macro economic slow down impacting our consumer businesses, the timing of shipments in our commercial hardware businesses and strategic purchases of certain components. DPO remained flat year over year. The cash conversion cycle for fiscal 2010 increased by seven days as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase in DSO was due primarily to linearity and fewer cash discounts in the fourth quarter. DOS 63 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) remained flat year over year. The decrease in DPO was due primarily to a change in purchasing linearity in the fourth quarter. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by $2.6 billion for fiscal 2011, as compared to fiscal 2010, and increased by approximately $7.8 billion for fiscal 2010, as compared to fiscal 2009. The increases were due primarily to higher investments in acquisitions in both 2011 and 2010. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities decreased by approximately $1.3 billion for fiscal 2011, as compared to fiscal 2010. The decrease was due primarily to higher net proceeds from the issuance of debt and a decrease in cash paid for repurchases of our common stock, the impact of which was partially offset by higher net repayment of commercial paper and a decrease in cash received from the issuance of common stock under employee stock plans. Net cash used in financing activities decreased by approximately $3.8 billion for fiscal 2010, as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease was due primarily to a higher net issuance of commercial paper, the impact of which was partially offset by increased repurchases of our common stock and lower global debt issuances. For more information on our share repurchase programs, see Item 5 and Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. CAPITAL RESOURCES Debt Levels For the fiscal years ended October 31 2011 2010 2009 In millions, except interest rates and ratios Short-term debt $ 8,083 $ 7,046 $ 1,850 Long-term debt $ 22,551 $ 15,258 $ 13,980 Debt-equity ratio 0.79x 0.55x 0.39x Weighted-average interest rate 2.4 % 2.0 % 2.7 % We maintain debt levels that we establish through consideration of a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for operations, investment plans (including acquisitions), share repurchase activities, overall cost of capital, and targeted capital structure. Short-term debt and long-term debt increased by $1.0 billion and $7.3 billion, respectively, for fiscal 2011, as compared to fiscal 2010. The net increase in total debt is due primarily to investments in acquisitions and share repurchases. In fiscal 2010, short-term debt and long-term debt increased by $5.2 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively, as compared to fiscal 2009. This was due primarily to spending on acquisitions and share repurchases. Our debt-equity ratio is calculated as the carrying value of debt divided by the carrying value of equity. Our debt-equity ratio increased by 0.24x in fiscal 2011, due primarily to the issuance of $11.6 billion of U.S Dollar Global Notes and a decrease in shareholders equity by $1.8 billion at the end of fiscal 2011. Our debt-equity ratio increased by 0.16x in fiscal 2010, due primarily to the issuance 64 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) of $3.0 billion of U.S Dollar Global Notes and a $4 billion net increase in commercial paper at the end of fiscal 2010. Our weighted-average interest rate reflects the average effective rate on our borrowings prevailing during the year; it factors in the impact of swapping some of our global notes with fixed interest rates for global notes with floating interest rates. For more information on our interest rate swaps, see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. The lower weighted-average interest rate over the past three years is a result of the combination of lower market interest rates and swapping some of our fixed interest obligations associated with some of our fixed global notes for variable rate obligations through interest rate swaps in a declining rates environment. On December 9, 2011, HP issued $3 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes under the 2009 Shelf Registration Statement. The Global Notes consisted of fixed rate notes at market rates with maturities of three, five and ten years from the date of issuance. For more information on our borrowings, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Available Borrowing Resources At October 31, 2011, we had the following resources available to obtain short-term or long-term financings if we need additional liquidity: At October 31, 2011 In millions 2009 Shelf Registration Statement (1) Unspecified Commercial paper programs (1) $13,285 364-day senior unsecured bridge term loan agreement (1)(2) $ 3,604 Uncommitted lines of credit (1) $ 1,300 Revolving trade receivables-based facilities (3) $ 701 (1) For more information on our available borrowings resources, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. (2) The 364-day senior unsecured bridge term loan agreement was terminated in November 2011. (3) For more information on our revolving trade receivables-based facilities, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Credit Ratings Our credit risk is evaluated by three independent rating agencies based upon publicly available information as well as information obtained in our ongoing discussions with them. The ratings as of October 31, 2011 were: Standard & Poor's Ratings Services Moody's Investors Service Fitch Ratings Services Short-term debt ratings A-1 Prime-1 F1 Long-term debt ratings A A2 A+ 65 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Standard & Poor's Ratings Services downgraded our short-term and long term ratings on November 30, 2011, and Fitch Ratings Services downgraded our long term ratings on December 2, 2011. Accordingly, the ratings as of December 14, 2011 were: Standard & Poor's Ratings Services Moody's Investors Service Fitch Ratings Services Short-term debt ratings A-2 Prime-1 F1 Long-term debt ratings BBB+ A2 A Our credit ratings remain under negative outlook by Fitch Ratings Services and have been under review for possible downgrade by Moody's Investors Service since October 28, 2011. While we do not have any rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity of a material amount of our debt, these downgrades have increased the cost of borrowing under our credit facilities, have reduced market capacity for our commercial paper, and may require the posting of additional collateral under some of our derivative contracts. In addition, any further downgrade in our credit ratings by any of the three rating agencies may further impact us in a similar manner, and, depending on the extent of the downgrade, could have a negative impact on our liquidity and capital position. We will rely on alternative sources of funding, including drawdowns under our credit facilities or the issuance of debt or other securities under our existing shelf registration statement, if necessary to offset reductions in the market capacity for our commercial paper. CONTRACTUAL AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS The impact that we expect our contractual and other obligations as of October 31, 2011 to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods is as follows: Payments Due by Period Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years In millions Principal payments on long-term debt (1) $ 25,953 $ 4,238 $ 10,476 $ 4,800 $ 6,439 Interest payments on long-term debt (2) 5,064 651 993 643 2,777 Operating lease obligations 3,283 811 1,112 650 710 Purchase obligations (3) 2,297 2,009 183 40 65 Capital lease obligations 423 82 285 18 38 Total $ 37,020 $ 7,791 $ 13,049 $ 6,151 $ 10,029 (1) Amounts represent the expected principal cash payments relating to our long-term debt and do not include any fair value adjustments or discounts and premiums. (2) Amounts represent the expected interest cash payments relating to our long-term debt. We have outstanding interest rate swap agreements accounted for as fair value hedges that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with some of our fixed global notes for variable rate obligations. The impact of these interest rate swaps was factored into the calculation of the future interest payments on long-term debt. (3) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the 66 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) transaction. These purchase obligations are related principally to inventory and other items. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancellable without penalty. Purchase obligations also exclude open purchase orders that are routine arrangements entered into in the ordinary course of business, as they are difficult to quantify in a meaningful way. Even though open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. In addition to the above, at October 31, 2011, we had approximately $2.1 billion of recorded liabilities and related interest and penalties pertaining to uncertainty in income tax positions, which will be partially offset by $293 million of deferred tax assets and interest receivable. These liabilities and related interest and penalties include $77 million expected to be paid within one year. For the remaining amount, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when cash settlement with the tax authorities might occur due to the uncertainties related to these tax matters. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on taxes. Funding Commitments In fiscal 2012, we expect to contribute approximately $658 million to our pension and post-retirement plan funding. Our funding policy is to contribute cash to our pension plans so that we meet at least the minimum contribution requirements, as established by local government, funding and taxing authorities. Funding for the years following 2012 would be based on the then current market conditions, actuarial estimates and plan funding status. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on pension activity. As a result of our approved restructuring plans, we expect future cash expenditures of approximately $1.1 billion. We expect to make cash payments of approximately $0.9 billion in fiscal 2012 with remaining cash payments through 2016. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on restructuring activities. Guarantees and Indemnifications See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on liabilities that may arise from guarantees and indemnifications. Litigation and Contingencies See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on liabilities that may arise from litigation and contingencies. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As part of our ongoing business, we have not participated in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities ("SPEs"), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As of October 31, 2011, we are not involved in any material unconsolidated SPEs. 67 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HP has revolving trade receivables-based facilities permitting it to sell certain trade receivables to third parties on both a non-recourse and a partial recourse basis. The total aggregate capacity of the facilities was $1.5 billion as of October 31, 2011, including a $1.0 billion partial recourse facility entered into in May 2011 and an aggregate capacity of $0.5 billion in non-recourse facilities. For more information on our revolving trade receivables-based facilities, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements in Item 1, which is incorporated herein by reference. 68 Table of Contents 
