CIK: 47217
Company Name: HP INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2015-12-16


ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is organized as follows: HP Separation Transaction. A discussion of the separation of Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Hewlett-Packard Company's former enterprise technology infrastructure, software, services and financing businesses. Overview. A discussion of our business and overall analysis of financial and other highlights affecting the company to provide context for the remainder of MD&A. The overview analysis compares fiscal 2015 to fiscal 2014. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. A discussion of accounting policies and estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results. Results of Operations. An analysis of our financial results comparing fiscal 2015 to fiscal 2014 and fiscal 2014 to fiscal 2013. A discussion of the results of operations at the consolidated level is followed by a more detailed discussion of the results of operations by segment. Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our cash flows and a discussion of our financial condition and liquidity. Contractual and Other Obligations. An overview of contractual obligations, retirement and post-retirement benefit plan funding, restructuring plans, separation costs, uncertain tax positions and off-balance sheet arrangements. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist the reader in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. HP Separation Transaction On November 1, 2015 (the "Distribution Date"), we completed the separation of Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Hewlett-Packard Company's former enterprise technology infrastructure, software, services and financing businesses (the "Separation"). In connection with the Separation, Hewlett-Packard Company changed its name to HP Inc. On November 1, 2015, each of our stockholders of record as of the close of business on October 21, 2015 (the "Record Date") received one share of Hewlett Packard Enterprise common stock for every one share of our common stock held as of the Record Date. We distributed a total of approximately 1.8 billion shares of Hewlett Packard Enterprise common stock to our stockholders. Hewlett Packard Enterprise is now an independent public company trading on the New York Stock Exchange ("NYSE") under the symbol "HPE". After the Separation, we do not beneficially own any shares of Hewlett Packard Enterprise common stock. 43 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The process of completing the Separation was highly complex and involved significant costs and expenses. Accordingly, we incurred separation costs and foreign tax expenses associated with separating into two companies. In fiscal 2015, we recorded nonrecurring separation costs and net foreign tax expenses of $1.6 billion, which were primarily related to third-party consulting, contractor fees and other incremental costs directly associated with the separation process. We expect total separation charges and net foreign tax expenses to be approximately $180 million in fiscal 2016. Additionally, the separation into two independent companies is expected to result in total dis-synergies of approximately $400 million to $450 million annually, which costs are primarily associated with corporate functions such as finance, legal, IT, real estate and human resources. Such dis-synergies are expected to be divided approximately equally between HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise. We recorded a deferred tax asset on these costs and expenses as they were incurred through fiscal 2015. We expect a portion of these deferred tax assets associated with separation costs and expenses will be eliminated, given that some will be non-deductible, at the time the Separation is executed. Furthermore, we concluded on the legal form of the Separation and in May 2015 announced that Hewlett Packard Enterprise will be the spinnee company in the United States ("U.S."). Accordingly, we implemented certain internal reorganizations of, and transactions among, our wholly-owned subsidiaries and operating activities in preparation for the legal form of separation. As a result, we recognized gross incremental foreign tax expenses related to the separation of foreign legal entities of approximately $300 million and foreign tax credits of approximately $100 million in fiscal 2015 with additional tax credit amounts expected over several years. As of October 31, 2015, we also expect separation-related capital expenditures of approximately $30 million in fiscal 2016. In connection with the Separation, we and Hewlett Packard Enterprise have entered into a separation and distribution agreement as well as various other agreements that provide a framework for the relationships between the parties going forward, including among others a tax matters agreement, an employee matters agreement, a transition service agreement, a real estate matters agreement, a master commercial agreement and an information technology service agreement. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we transferred substantially all of the assets, liabilities and operations of enterprise technology infrastructure, software, services and financing businesses to Hewlett Packard Enterprise in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2015. The historical results of operations and the financial position of Hewlett Packard Enterprise are included in the consolidated financial statements of HP Inc. for each of the fiscal years included in this report and will be reported as discontinued operations beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2016. Beginning November 1, 2015, we no longer consolidate Hewlett Packard Enterprise within our financial results or reflect the financial results of Hewlett Packard Enterprise within our continuing results of operations. OVERVIEW As of October 31, 2015, we were a leading global provider of products, technologies, software, solutions and services to individual consumers, small- and medium-sized businesses ("SMBs") and large enterprises, including customers in the government, health and education sectors. Our offerings span the following: personal computing and other access devices; imaging- and printing-related products and services; 44 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) enterprise IT infrastructure, including enterprise server and storage technology, networking products and solutions, technology support and maintenance; multi-vendor customer services, including technology consulting, outsourcing and support services across infrastructure, applications and business process domains; and software products and solutions, including application testing and delivery, big data analytics, enterprise security, information governance and IT Operations Management. As of October 31, 2015, we had seven segments for financial reporting purposes: Personal Systems, Printing, the Enterprise Group ("EG"), Enterprise Services ("ES"), Software, HP Financial Services ("HPFS") and Corporate Investments. Effective November 1, 2015, we report three segments as part of continuing operations: Personal Systems, Printing and Corporate Investments. The following provides an overview of our key financial metrics by segment for fiscal 2015: Printing and Personal Systems Group HP Consolidated Personal Systems Printing Total Enterprise Group Enterprise Services Software HPFS Corporate Investments (3) Dollars in millions, except per share amounts Net revenue (1) $ 103,355 $ 31,469 $ 21,232 $ 52,701 $ 27,907 $ 19,806 $ 3,458 $ 3,216 $ 27 Year-over-year change % (7.3 )% (8.3 )% (8.5 )% (8.4 )% 0.7 % (11.6 )% (6.6 )% (8.1 )% (91.1 )% Earnings from operations (2) $ 5,471 $ 1,064 $ 3,865 $ 4,929 $ 3,981 $ 1,051 $ 760 $ 349 $ (565 ) Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 5.3 % 3.4 % 18.2 % 9.4 % 14.3 % 5.3 % 22.0 % 10.9 % NM Year-over-year change percentage points (1.1 )pts (0.3 )pts 0.0 pts (0.2 )pts (0.1 )pts 1.7 pts (0.4 )pts (0.2 )pts NM (1) HP consolidated net revenue excludes intersegment net revenue and other. (2) Segment earnings from operations exclude corporate and unallocated costs, stock-based compensation expense, amortization of intangible assets, restructuring charges, acquisition and other related charges, separation costs, defined benefit plan settlement charges and impairment of data center assets. (3) "NM" represents not meaningful. HP consolidated net revenue declined 7.3% (decreased 2.1% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2015 as compared to fiscal 2014. The leading contributors to the net revenue decline were unfavorable currency impacts across all major segments, key account runoff and soft demand in Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing ("ITO") in ES, lower desktop sales in Personal Systems and lower sales of printers and supplies. Partially offsetting these declines was growth within the EG segment from sales of ISS servers. Gross margin was 24.0% ($24.8 billion) and 23.9% ($26.6 billion) for fiscal 2015 and 2014, respectively. The 0.1 percentage point increase in gross margin was due primarily to service delivery efficiencies and improvements in underperforming contracts in ES. Partially offsetting the gross margin increase was the impact from a higher mix of ISS products in EG, competitive pricing pressures in Printing and the impact from the sale of intellectual property ("IP") in the prior-year period. We continue to experience gross margin pressures resulting from a competitive pricing environment across our hardware portfolio. HP's operating margin decreased by 1.1 percentage points in fiscal 2015 as compared to fiscal 2014 due primarily to separation costs, pension plan settlement charges, data center impairments and the impact from the sale of IP in the prior-year period. Partially offsetting these 45 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) declines was the gross margin increase, lower selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses and lower restructuring charges. As of October 31, 2015, cash and cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments were $17.7 billion, representing an increase of approximately $2.2 billion from the October 31, 2014 balance of $15.5 billion. The increase in cash and cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments in fiscal 2015 was primarily due to the following factors: cash received from operating cash flows of $6.5 billion and cash received for net issuances and repayments of debt of $5.0 billion; partially offset by investments in property, plant and equipment and business acquisitions net of divestitures of $3.2 billion and $2.4 billion, respectively, cash utilization for share repurchases of common stock of $2.9 billion and dividend payments to stockholders of $1.2 billion. We continue to experience challenges that are representative of trends and uncertainties that may affect our business and results of operations. One set of challenges relates to dynamic and accelerating market trends such as the decline in the PC market. Certain of our legacy hardware businesses face challenges as customers migrate to cloud-based offerings and reduce their purchases of hardware products. A second set of challenges relates to changes in the competitive landscape. Our major competitors are expanding their product and service offerings with integrated products and solutions, our business-specific competitors are exerting increased competitive pressure in targeted areas and are entering new markets, our emerging competitors are introducing new technologies and business models, and our alliance partners in some businesses are increasingly becoming our competitors in others. A third set of challenges relates to business model changes and our go-to-market execution. The macroeconomic weakness we have experienced has moderated in some geographic regions but remains an overall challenge. A discussion of some of these challenges at the segment level is set forth below. In Personal Systems, we are witnessing soft demand in the Personal Computer ("PC") market as customers hold onto their PCs longer, thereby extending PC refresh cycles. Demand for PCs is being impacted by weaker macroeconomic conditions and currency devaluations in certain Asian and European markets. Additionally, industry wide, PC channels in some regions are working through excess channel inventory, which is impacting sell in. As such, we see continued market headwinds for the next several quarters. However, we are optimistic and see opportunity in the market long term given our strength in Commercial and the launch of Windows 10, combined with Intel's Skylake processor family transition, which may represent a catalyst for demand through introduction of breakthrough form factors. In Personal Systems, we are maintaining our strategic focus on profitable growth through improved market segmentation with respect to enhanced innovation in multi-operating systems, multi-architecture, geography, customer segments and other key attributes. Additionally, HP is investing significantly in premium and mobility form factors such as convertible notebooks, detachable notebooks, and commercial tablets in order to meet customer preference for mobile, thinner and lighter devices. In Printing, we are experiencing the impact of the growth in mobility and demand challenges in consumer and commercial markets. We are also experiencing an overall competitive pricing environment due to aggressive pricing from our Japanese competitors, given the weakness of the Japanese yen. To be successful in addressing these challenges, we need to continue to execute on our key initiatives of focusing on products targeted at high usage categories and introducing new revenue delivery models to consumer customers. In the consumer market, our Ink in the Office products are driving unit volume due to our OfficeJet Pro product lines. The Ink in the Office 46 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) initiative also targets shifting ink into SMBs through our OfficeJet Pro X printers which leverage our Page-Wide Array technology. In the commercial market, our focus is on placing higher value printer units which also offers a positive annuity of toner and ink and accelerating growth in graphics. We are accomplishing this in several growth areas: in multi-function and Enterprise Ink printers with recently introduced products that are increasing demand, in managed print services, which presents a strong after-market supplies opportunity, and in graphics with product innovation such as our Indigo product line. We plan to continue this focus on shifting the mix in the installed base to more value-added units, and expanding our innovative ink, laser and graphics programs. In EG, we are experiencing challenges due to multiple market trends, including the increasing demand for hyperscale computing infrastructure products, the transition to cloud computing and a highly competitive pricing environment. In addition, demand for our Business Critical Systems ("BCS") products continues to weaken as has the overall market for UNIX products. The effect of lower BCS and traditional storage revenue along with a higher mix of ISS density optimized server products and midrange Converged Storage solutions is impacting support attach opportunities in Technology Services ("TS"). To be successful in overcoming these challenges, we must address business model shifts and go-to-market execution challenges, while continuing to pursue new product innovation that builds on our existing capabilities in areas such as cloud and data center computing, software-defined networking, storage, blade servers and wireless networking. In ES, we are facing challenges, including managing the revenue runoff from several large contracts, pressured public sector spending, a competitive pricing environment and market pressures from a mixed economic recovery in Europe, the Middle East and Africa ("EMEA"). We are also experiencing commoditization in the IT infrastructure services market that is placing pressure on traditional ITO pricing and cost structures. There is also an industry-wide shift to highly automated, asset-light delivery of IT infrastructure and applications leading to headcount consolidation. To be successful in addressing these challenges, we must execute on the ES multi-year turnaround plan, which includes a cost reduction initiative to align our costs to our revenue trajectory, a focus on new logo wins and Strategic Enterprise Services ("SES") and initiatives to improve execution in sales performance and accountability, contracting practices and pricing. In Software, we are facing challenges, including the market shift to SaaS and go-to-market execution challenges. To be successful in addressing these challenges, we must improve our go-to-market execution with multiple product delivery models which better address customer needs and achieve broader integration across our overall product portfolio as we work to capitalize on important market opportunities in cloud, big data and security. To address these challenges, we continue to pursue innovation with a view towards developing new products and services aligned with market demand, industry trends and the needs of our customers and partners. In addition, we need to continue to improve our operations, with a particular focus on enhancing our end-to-end processes and efficiencies. We also need to continue to optimize our sales coverage models, align our sales incentives with our strategic goals, improve channel execution, strengthen our capabilities in our areas of strategic focus, and develop and capitalize on market opportunities. 47 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our operating results, see the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A, which is incorporated herein by reference. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES General The Consolidated Financial Statements of HP are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying amount of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of HP's Board of Directors. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting amounts are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates. Making estimates and judgments about future events is inherently unpredictable and is subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. A summary of significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or services are rendered, the sales price or fee is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured, as well as when other revenue recognition principles are met, including industry-specific revenue recognition guidance. We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and while many of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements we enter into which contain non-standard terms and conditions. Further, many of our arrangements include multiple elements. As a result, significant contract interpretation may be required to determine the appropriate accounting, including the identification of deliverables considered to be separate units of accounting, the allocation of the transaction price among elements in the arrangement and the timing of revenue recognition for each of those elements. We recognize revenue for delivered elements as separate units of accounting when the delivered elements have standalone value to the customer. For elements with no standalone value, we recognize revenue consistent with the pattern of the undelivered elements. If the arrangement includes a customer-negotiated refund or return right or other contingency relative to the delivered items and the delivery and performance of the undelivered items is considered probable and substantially within our control, the delivered element constitutes a separate unit of accounting. In arrangements with 48 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) combined units of accounting, changes in the allocation of the transaction price among elements may impact the timing of revenue recognition for the contract but will not change the total revenue recognized for the contract. We establish the selling prices used for each deliverable based on vendor specific objective evidence ("VSOE") of selling price, if available, third-party evidence ("TPE"), if VSOE of selling price is not available, or estimated selling price ("ESP"), if neither VSOE of selling price nor TPE is available. We establish VSOE of selling price using the price charged for a deliverable when sold separately and, in rare instances, using the price established by management having the relevant authority. TPE of selling price is established by evaluating largely similar and interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone sales to similarly situated customers. ESP is established based on management's judgment considering internal factors such as margin objectives, pricing practices and controls, customer segment pricing strategies and the product life cycle. Consideration is also given to market conditions such as competitor pricing strategies and industry technology life cycles. We may modify or develop new go-to-market practices in the future, which may result in changes in selling prices, impacting both VSOE of selling price and ESP. In most arrangements with multiple elements, the transaction price is allocated to the individual units of accounting at inception of the arrangement based on their relative selling price. However, the aforementioned factors may result in a different allocation of the transaction price to deliverables in multiple element arrangements entered into in future periods. This may change the pattern and timing of revenue recognition for identical arrangements executed in future periods, but will not change the total revenue recognized for any given arrangement. We reduce revenue for customer and distributor programs and incentive offerings, including price protection, rebates, promotions, other volume-based incentives and expected returns. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered. For certain incentive programs, we estimate the number of customers expected to redeem the incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of the incentive. For hardware products, we recognize revenue generated from direct sales to end customers and indirect sales to channel partners (including resellers, distributors and value-added solution providers) when the revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. For indirect sales to channel partners, we recognize revenue at the time of delivery when the channel partner has economic substance apart from HP and HP has completed its obligations related to the sale. For the various software products we sell (e.g., big data analytics and applications, application delivery management, enterprise security and IT Operations Management), we assess whether the software products were sold on a standalone basis or with hardware products. If the software sold with a hardware product is not essential to the functionality of the hardware product and is more-than-incidental, we treat it as a software deliverable. We recognize revenue from the sale of perpetual software licenses at inception of the license term, assuming all revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied. Term-based software license revenue is generally recognized ratably over the term of the license. We use the residual method to allocate revenue to software licenses at inception of the arrangement when VSOE of fair value for all undelivered elements, such as post-contract customer support, exists and all other revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied. Revenue from maintenance and unspecified upgrades or updates provided 49 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) on a when-and-if-available basis is recognized ratably over the period during which such items are delivered. For hosting or SaaS arrangements, we recognize revenue as the service is delivered, generally on a straight-line basis, over the contractual period of performance. In hosting arrangements, we consider the rights provided to the customer (e.g. whether the customer has the contractual right to take possession of the software at any time during the hosting period without significant penalty and the feasibility of the customer to operate or contract with another vendor to operate the software) in determining whether the arrangement includes the sale of a software license. In hosting arrangements where software licenses are sold, license revenue is generally recognized according to whether perpetual or term licenses are sold, when all other revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. We recognize revenue from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including extended warranty contracts and software post-contract customer support agreements, ratably over the contract period. For certain fixed-price contracts, such as consulting arrangements, we recognize revenue as work progresses using a proportional performance method. We estimate the total expected labor costs in order to determine the amount of revenue earned to date. We apply a proportional performance method because reasonably dependable estimates of the labor costs applicable to various stages of a contract can be made. On fixed-price contracts for design and build projects (to design, develop and construct software infrastructure and systems), we recognize revenue as work progresses using the percentage-of-completion method. We use the cost-to-cost method to measure progress toward completion as determined by the percentage of costs incurred to date compared to the total estimated costs of the project. Total project costs are subject to revision throughout the life of a fixed-price contract. Provisions for estimated losses on fixed-price contracts are recognized in the period when such losses become known and are recorded as a component of cost of sales. In circumstances when reasonable and reliable cost estimates for a project cannot be made we recognize revenue using the completed contract method. Outsourcing services revenue is generally recognized in the period when the service is provided and the amount earned is not contingent on the occurrence of any future event. We recognize revenue using an objective measure of output for per unit-priced contracts. Revenue for fixed-price outsourcing contracts with periodic billings is recognized on a straight-line basis if the service is provided evenly over the contract term. Provisions for estimated losses on outsourcing arrangements are recognized in the period when such losses become probable and estimable and are recorded as a component of cost of sales. Warranty We accrue the estimated cost of product warranties at the time we recognize revenue. We evaluate our warranty obligations on a product group basis. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period of time. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, we base our estimated warranty obligation on contractual warranty terms, repair costs, product call rates, average cost per call, current period product shipments and ongoing product failure rates, as well as specific product class failure outside of our baseline experience. Warranty terms generally range from 90 days to three years for parts and labor, depending upon the product. Over the last three fiscal years, the annual warranty expense and actual warranty costs have averaged approximately 2.5% and 2.7% of annual net product revenue, respectively. 50 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Restructuring We have engaged in restructuring actions which require management to estimate the timing and amount of severance and other employee separation costs for workforce reduction and enhanced early retirement programs, fair value of assets made redundant or obsolete, and the fair value of lease cancellation and other exit costs. We accrue for severance and other employee separation costs under these actions when it is probable that benefits will be paid and the amount is reasonably estimable. The rates used in determining severance accruals are based on existing plans, historical experiences and negotiated settlements. For a full description of our restructuring actions, refer to our discussions of restructuring in "Results of Operations" below and in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Retirement and Post-Retirement Benefits Our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations depend on various assumptions. Our major assumptions relate primarily to discount rates, mortality rates, expected increases in compensation levels and the expected long-term return on plan assets. The discount rate assumption is based on current investment yields of high-quality fixed-income securities with maturities similar to the expected benefits payment period. Mortality rates help predict the expected life of plan participants and are based on a historical demographic study of the plan. The expected increase in the compensation levels assumption reflects our long-term actual experience and future expectations. The expected long-term return on plan assets is determined based on asset allocations, historical portfolio results, historical asset correlations and management's expected returns for each asset class. We evaluate our expected return assumptions annually including reviewing current capital market assumptions to assess the reasonableness of the expected long-term return on plan assets. We update the expected long-term return on assets when we observe a sufficient level of evidence that would suggest the long-term expected return has changed. In any fiscal year, significant differences may arise between the actual return and the expected long-term return on plan assets. Historically, differences between the actual return and expected long-term return on plan assets have resulted from changes in target or actual asset allocation, short-term performance relative to expected long-term performance, and to a lesser extent, differences between target and actual investment allocations, the timing of benefit payments compared to expectations, and the use of derivatives intended to effect asset allocation changes or hedge certain investment or liability exposures. For the recognition of net periodic benefit cost, the calculation of the expected long-term return on plan assets uses the fair value of plan assets as of the beginning of the fiscal year unless updated as result of interim remeasurement. Our major assumptions vary by plan, and the weighted-average rates used are set forth in Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. The following table provides the impact changes in the weighted-average assumptions of discount rates, the 51 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) expected increase in compensation levels and the expected long-term return on plan assets would have had on our net periodic benefit cost for fiscal 2015: Change in percentage points Change in Net Periodic Benefit Cost in millions Assumptions: Discount rate (25 ) $ 88 Expected increase in compensation levels 25 $ 17 Expected long-term return on plan assets (25 ) $ 75 Taxes on Earnings We calculate our current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the final positions reflected in our income tax returns. We adjust our current and deferred tax provisions based on income tax returns which are generally filed in the third or fourth quarters of the subsequent fiscal year. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that we are more likely than not to realize. In determining the need for a valuation allowance, we consider future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we were to determine that it is more likely than not that we will be unable to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and recognize a corresponding charge to earnings or other comprehensive income in the period in which we make such a determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously recognized valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets, we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located. Our effective tax rate includes the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. federal taxes because we plan to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the U.S. We plan distributions of foreign earnings based on projected cash flow needs as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we expect to indefinitely invest outside the U.S. and the amounts we expect to distribute to the U.S. and provide the U.S. federal taxes due on amounts expected to be distributed to the U.S. Further, as a result of certain employment actions and capital investments we have undertaken, income from manufacturing activities in certain jurisdictions is subject to reduced tax rates and, in some cases, is wholly exempt from taxes for fiscal years through 2026. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact how future earnings are repatriated to the U.S., and our related future effective tax rate. We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and approximately 105 other countries, and we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that positions 52 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) taken on our tax returns are fully supported, but tax authorities may challenge these positions, which may not be fully sustained on examination by the relevant tax authorities. Accordingly, our income tax provision includes amounts intended to satisfy assessments that may result from these challenges. Determining the income tax provision for these potential assessments and recording the related effects requires management judgments and estimates. The amounts ultimately paid on resolution of an audit could be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax provision and, therefore, could have a material impact on our income tax provision, net income and cash flows. Our accrual for uncertain tax positions is attributable primarily to uncertainties concerning the tax treatment of our international operations, including the allocation of income among different jurisdictions, intercompany transactions and related interest. For a further discussion on taxes on earnings, refer to Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Inventory We state our inventory at the lower of cost or market on a first-in, first-out basis. We make adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value at the product group level for estimated excess or obsolescence. Factors influencing these adjustments include changes in demand, technological changes, product life cycle and development plans, component cost trends, product pricing, physical deterioration and quality issues. Business Combinations We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the assets acquired, including in-process research and development ("IPR&D"), liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests in the acquiree generally based on their fair values at the acquisition date. IPR&D is initially capitalized at fair value as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter. When the IPR&D project is complete, it is reclassified as an amortizable purchased intangible asset and is amortized over its estimated useful life. If an IPR&D project is abandoned, we will record a charge for the value of the related intangible asset to the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in the period it is abandoned. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair value of these assets acquired, liabilities assumed and non-controlling interests in the acquiree is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair values of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests in the acquiree, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, expected future cash flows, which includes consideration of future growth rates and margins, attrition rates, future changes in technology and brand awareness, loyalty and position, and discount rates. Fair value estimates are based on the assumptions management believes a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability. Amounts recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions existing at the acquisition date becomes available. Goodwill We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. While we are permitted to conduct a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is necessary to perform a two-step quantitative goodwill impairment test, for our annual goodwill impairment test in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we performed a quantitative test for all of our reporting units. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the 53 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) reporting unit level. As of October 31, 2015, our reporting units are consistent with the reportable segments identified in Note 2, except for ES, which includes two reporting units: MphasiS Limited; and the remainder of ES. In the first step of the goodwill impairment test, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying amount. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using a weighting of fair values derived most significantly from the income approach and, to a lesser extent, the market approach. Under the income approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. Cash flow projections are based on management's estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins, taking into consideration industry and market conditions. The discount rate used is based on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit's ability to execute on the projected cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate fair value based on market multiples of revenue and earnings derived from comparable publicly-traded companies with operating and investment characteristics similar to the reporting unit. We weight the fair value derived from the market approach depending on the level of comparability of these publicly-traded companies to the reporting unit. When market comparables are not meaningful or not available, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using only the income approach. For the MphasiS Limited reporting unit, we utilized the quoted market price in an active market to estimate fair value. In order to assess the reasonableness of the estimated fair value of our reporting units, we compare the aggregate reporting unit fair value to HP's market capitalization and calculate an implied control premium (the excess of the sum of the reporting units' fair value over HP's market capitalization). We evaluate the control premium by comparing it to observable control premiums from recent comparable transactions. If the implied control premium is not believed to be reasonable in light of these recent transactions, we reevaluate reporting unit fair values, which may result in an adjustment to the discount rate and/or other assumptions. This reevaluation could result in a change to the estimated fair value for certain or all of our reporting units. Estimating the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions and the determination of appropriate comparable publicly-traded companies. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to individual reporting units to determine the carrying amount of each reporting unit. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds the carrying amount of the net assets assigned to that reporting unit, goodwill is not impaired and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we perform the second step of the goodwill impairment test to measure the amount of impairment loss, if any. In the second step, the reporting unit's assets, including any unrecognized intangible assets, liabilities and non-controlling interests are measured at fair value in a hypothetical analysis to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill for the reporting unit in the same manner as if the reporting unit was being acquired in a business combination. If the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill is less than its carrying amount, the difference is recorded as an impairment loss. Our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which we performed as of the first day of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, did not result in any impairment charges. The excess of fair value over carrying amount for our reporting units ranged from 19% to approximately 2,600% of carrying amounts. The Software reporting unit has the lowest excess of fair value over carrying amount at 19%. 54 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the estimated fair value of our reporting units in the goodwill impairment test, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair value of each reporting unit. This hypothetical 10% decrease resulted in an excess of fair value over carrying amount for our reporting units ranging from 7% to approximately 2,400% of the carrying amounts with the Software reporting unit having the lowest excess of fair value over carrying amount of 7%. The fair value of the Software reporting unit is estimated using equal weighting of both the income and market approaches. Our Software business is facing multiple challenges including the market shift to SaaS and go-to-market execution challenges. If we are not successful in addressing these challenges, our projected revenue growth rates could decline resulting in a decrease in the fair value of the Software reporting unit. The fair value of the Software reporting unit could also be negatively impacted by declines in market multiples of revenue for comparable publicly-traded companies, changes in management's business strategy or significant and sustained declines in our stock price, which could result in an indicator of impairment. Intangible Assets We review intangible assets with finite lives for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of our finite-lived intangible assets is assessed based on the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. If the undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying amount, the finite-lived intangible assets are considered to be impaired. The amount of the impairment loss, if any, is measured as the difference between the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value. We estimate the fair value of finite-lived intangible assets by using an income approach or, when available and appropriate, using a market approach. Fair Value of Derivative Instruments We use derivative instruments to manage a variety of risks, including risks related to foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates. We use forwards, swaps and at times, options to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures. We do not use derivative instruments for speculative purposes. As of October 31, 2015, the gross notional of our derivative portfolio was $52.6 billion. Assets and liabilities related to derivative instruments are measured at fair value, and were $1.1 billion and $0.5 billion, respectively as of October 31, 2015. Fair value is the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the absence of active markets for the identical assets or liabilities, such measurements involve developing assumptions based on market observable data and, in the absence of such data, internal information that is consistent with what market participants would use in a hypothetical transaction that occurs at the measurement date. The determination of fair value often involves significant judgments about assumptions such as determining an appropriate discount rate that factors in both risk and liquidity premiums, identifying the similarities and differences in market transactions, weighting those differences accordingly and then making the appropriate adjustments to those market transactions to reflect the risks specific to the asset or liability being valued. We generally use industry standard valuation models to measure the fair value of our derivative positions. When prices in active markets are not available for the identical asset or liability, we use industry standard valuation models to measure fair value. Where applicable, these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to present value using market-based 55 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) observable inputs, including interest rate curves, HP and counterparty credit risk, foreign currency exchange rates, and forward and spot prices. For a further discussion on fair value measurements and derivative instruments, refer to Note 11 and Note 12, respectively, to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Loss Contingencies We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations and proceedings including those consisting of IP, commercial, securities, employment, employee benefits and environmental matters that arise in the ordinary course of business. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both the probability of having incurred a liability and the estimated amount of the liability. We review these matters at least quarterly and adjust these liabilities to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel and other updated information and events, pertaining to a particular case. Based on our experience, we believe that any damage amounts claimed in the specific litigation and contingencies matters further discussed in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, are not a meaningful indicator of HP's potential liability. Litigation is inherently unpredictable. However, we believe we have valid defenses with respect to legal matters pending against us. Nevertheless, cash flows or results of operations could be materially affected in any particular period by the resolution of one or more of these contingencies. We believe we have recorded adequate provisions for any such matters and, as of October 31, 2015, it was not reasonably possible that a material loss had been incurred in excess of the amounts recognized in our financial statements. ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Revenue from our international operations has historically represented, and we expect will continue to represent, a majority of our overall net revenue. As a result, our net revenue growth has been impacted, and we expect will continue to be impacted, by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. In order to provide a framework for assessing performance excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, we present the year-over-year percentage change in net revenue on a constant currency basis, which assumes no change in foreign currency exchange rates from the prior-year period and doesn't adjust for any repricing or demand impacts from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This information is provided so that net revenue can be viewed without the effect of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, which is consistent with how management evaluates our net revenue results and trends. This constant currency disclosure is provided in addition to, and not as a substitute for, the year-over-year percentage change in revenue on a GAAP basis. Other companies may calculate and define similarly labeled items differently, which may limit the usefulness of this measure for comparative purposes. 56 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 103,355 100.0 % $ 111,454 100.0 % $ 112,298 100.0 % Cost of sales (1) 78,596 76.0 % 84,839 76.1 % 86,380 76.9 % Gross profit 24,759 24.0 % 26,615 23.9 % 25,918 23.1 % Research and development 3,502 3.4 % 3,447 3.1 % 3,135 2.8 % Selling, general and administrative 12,185 11.8 % 13,353 12.0 % 13,267 11.8 % Amortization of intangible assets 931 0.9 % 1,000 0.9 % 1,373 1.2 % Restructuring charges 1,017 1.0 % 1,619 1.5 % 990 0.9 % Acquisition and other related charges 90 0.1 % 11 0.0 % 22 0.0 % Separation costs 1,259 1.2 % Defined benefit plan settlement charges 168 0.2 % Impairment of data center assets 136 0.1 % Earnings from operations 5,471 5.3 % 7,185 6.4 % 7,131 6.4 % Interest and other, net (739 ) (0.7 )% (628 ) (0.6 )% (621 ) (0.6 )% Earnings before taxes 4,732 4.6 % 6,557 5.8 % 6,510 5.8 % Provision for taxes (178 ) (0.2 )% (1,544 ) (1.3 )% (1,397 ) (1.2 )% Net earnings $ 4,554 4.4 % $ 5,013 4.5 % $ 5,113 4.6 % (1) Cost of products, cost of services and financing interest. Net Revenue In fiscal 2015, total HP net revenue declined 7.3% (decreased 2.1% on a constant currency basis) as compared to fiscal 2014. U.S. net revenue decreased 2.9% to $37.7 billion, and net revenue from outside of the U.S. decreased 9.6% to $65.7 billion. In fiscal 2014, total HP net revenue declined 0.8% (decreased 0.4% on a constant currency basis) as compared to fiscal 2013. U.S. net revenue decreased 3.7% to $38.8 billion, while net revenue from outside of the U.S. increased 0.9% to $72.6 billion. 57 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of the weighted net revenue change by segment were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 Percentage Points Personal Systems (2.6 ) 1.8 Enterprise Services (2.3 ) (1.5 ) Printing (1.8 ) (0.8 ) HP Financial Services (0.3 ) (0.1 ) Corporate Investments/Other (0.3 ) 0.1 Software (0.2 ) (0.1 ) Enterprise Group 0.2 (0.2 ) Total HP (7.3 ) (0.8 ) Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 For fiscal 2015, total net revenue decreased 7.3 percentage points. From a segment perspective, the primary factors contributing to the change in net revenue are summarized as follows: Personal Systems net revenue decreased due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, particularly in EMEA, and weakening market demand; ES net revenue decreased due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, revenue runoff in key accounts and weak growth in new and existing accounts; Printing net revenue decreased due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, weak market demand and competitive pricing pressures; HPFS net revenue decreased due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts led by weakness in the euro and lower asset management activity primarily in customer buyouts; Corporate Investments net revenue decreased due to the sale of IP in the prior-year period; Software net revenue decreased due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and declines in license revenue; and EG net revenue increased due to growth in Industry Standard Servers ("ISS") and net revenue resulting from our acquisition of Aruba Networks, Inc. ("Aruba") in May 2015. Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 For fiscal 2014, total net revenue decreased 0.8 percentage points. From a segment perspective, the primary factors contributing to the change in net revenue are summarized as follows: ES net revenue declined due primarily to revenue runoff in key accounts, weak growth in new and existing accounts, particularly in EMEA, and contractual price declines; Printing net revenue decreased due primarily to a decline in Supplies; EG net revenue decreased due to net revenue declines in TS, BCS and Storage; 58 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Software net revenue decreased due to lower net revenue from licenses, support and professional services; HPFS net revenue decreased due primarily to lower portfolio revenue from lower average portfolio assets and lower asset management activity, primarily in customer buyouts; Corporate Investments net revenue increased due to the sale of IP; and Personal Systems net revenue increased due to growth in commercial PCs, particularly notebooks, along with growth in consumer notebooks. A more detailed discussion of segment revenue is included under "Segment Information" below. Gross Margin Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 HP's gross margin increased by 0.1 percentage points for fiscal year 2015 compared with fiscal 2014. From a segment perspective, the primary factors impacting gross margin performance are summarized as follows: ES gross margin increased due primarily to service delivery efficiencies and improving profit performance in underperforming contracts; HPFS gross margin decreased due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, lower margin in customer buyouts, and lower portfolio margin due to competitive pricing; EG gross margin decreased due primarily to a higher revenue mix of ISS products, unfavorable currency impacts, and competitive pricing; Printing gross margin decreased due primarily to a competitive pricing environment in hardware and unfavorable currency impacts; Personal Systems gross margin decreased due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and a lower mix of commercial products, partially offset by favorable component costs and operational cost improvements; and Software gross margin decreased due to a lower mix of license revenue. Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 HP's gross margin increased by 0.8 percentage points for fiscal year 2014 compared with fiscal 2013. From a segment perspective, the primary factors impacting gross margin performance are summarized as follows: ES gross margin increased due primarily to our continued focus on service delivery efficiencies, improving profit performance in under-performing contracts and labor savings as a result of restructuring; Printing gross margin increased due primarily to favorable currency impacts from the Japanese yen, continued cost structure improvements and a favorable mix from a higher proportion of graphics and ink supplies; Corporate Investments gross margin increased due to the sale of IP; 59 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Software gross margin increased due to the shift to more profitable contracts and improved workforce utilization in professional services; HPFS gross margin increased due to a higher portfolio margin, primarily from lower bad debt expense, a lower cost of funds and improved margins in remarketing sales; Personal Systems gross margin increased due primarily to operational cost improvements, a favorable mix of commercial products and the sale of IP; and EG gross margin decreased due primarily to the impact of a higher mix of ISS products, lower mix of BCS products and competitive pricing pressure in ISS and Networking. A more detailed discussion of segment gross margins and operating margins is included under "Segment Information" below. Operating Expenses Research and Development R&D expense increased 2% in fiscal 2015 as compared to fiscal 2014 due primarily to expenses from the acquisition of Aruba and increases in Technology Services, cloud and HP Labs, partially offset by favorable currency impacts. R&D expense increased 10% in fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 with increases across each of our segments as we made investments in our strategic focus areas of cloud, security, big data and mobility. Selling, General and Administrative SG&A expense decreased 9% in fiscal 2015 as compared to fiscal 2014 due primarily to favorable currency impacts and declines in go-to-market costs as a result of lower commissions and productivity initiatives. SG&A expense increased 1% in fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 due primarily to higher compensation costs, litigation expenses and higher selling costs from investments in the areas of cloud, networking and storage, partially offset by gains from sales of real estate and lower program spending in marketing. Amortization of Intangible Assets Amortization expense decreased in fiscal 2015 and in fiscal 2014 due primarily to certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions reaching the end of their respective amortization periods, partially offset by amortization expense from intangible assets resulting from the acquisition of Aruba in fiscal 2015. Restructuring Charges Restructuring charges decreased 37% in fiscal 2015 due primarily to lower charges from the multi-year restructuring plan initially announced in May 2012 (the "2012 Plan"). On September 14, 2015, our Board of Directors approved a restructuring plan (the "2015 Plan") in connection with the Separation which will be implemented through fiscal 2018. As a result, HP recognized $391 million of charges related to the 2015 Plan during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2015. 60 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Restructuring charges increased in fiscal 2014 due primarily to higher charges in connection with the 2012 Plan and from increases to the 2012 Plan announced in fiscal 2014. During fiscal 2014, HP increased the total for positions expected to be eliminated under the 2012 Plan from 34,000 to 55,000 positions. In fiscal 2015, HP recognized restructuring charges of $640 million in connection with the 2012 Plan. Acquisition and Other Related Charges Acquisition and other related charges increased for fiscal 2015, due primarily to the acquisition of Aruba resulting in a non-cash inventory fair value adjustment charge and professional services and legal fees associated with the acquisition. Separation Costs Separation costs for fiscal 2015 were primarily comprised of third-party consulting, contractor fees and other related costs. Defined Benefit Plan Settlement Charges Defined benefit plan settlement charges for fiscal 2015 were related to U.S. defined benefit plan settlement expense and net periodic benefit cost resulting from the voluntary lump sum program announced in January 2015. Impairment of Data Center Assets Impairment of data center assets for fiscal 2015 was related to our exit from several ES data centers. Interest and Other, Net Interest and other, net expense increased by $111 million in fiscal 2015. The increase was in connection with $167 million of early debt settlement costs and higher foreign currency transaction losses, partially offset by lower interest expense due to lower weighted average interest rates and a decrease in miscellaneous other expenses. Interest and other, net expense increased by $7 million in fiscal 2014. The increase was due primarily to higher currency transaction losses partially offset by lower interest expense from a lower average debt balance. Provision for Taxes Our effective tax rates were 3.8%, 23.5% and 21.5% in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Our effective tax rate generally differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% due to favorable tax rates associated with certain earnings from our operations in lower tax jurisdictions throughout the world. The jurisdictions with favorable tax rates that had the most significant impact on HP's effective tax rate in the periods presented were Puerto Rico, Singapore, China, Malaysia, Ireland and Netherlands. HP plans to reinvest certain earnings of these jurisdictions indefinitely outside the U.S. and therefore has not provided U.S. taxes on those indefinitely reinvested earnings. 61 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) For a reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and further explanation of our provision for taxes, see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. In fiscal 2015, we recorded $1.6 billion of net income tax benefits related to items unique to the year. These amounts included $1.8 billion tax benefit due to a release of valuation allowances pertaining to certain U.S. deferred tax assets and $486 million tax charge to record valuation allowances on certain foreign deferred tax assets, both related to legal entities within the ES business, $394 million of tax charges for adjustments to uncertain tax positions and the settlement of tax audit matters, inclusive of $449 million of tax charges related to pension transfers, and $3 million of tax charges for various provision to return adjustments and other adjustments. In addition, we recorded $639 million of net tax benefits on restructuring, separation-related and other charges and a tax benefit of $47 million arising from the retroactive research and development credit resulting from the Tax Increase Prevention Act of 2014, which was signed into law in December 2014. We recorded gross deferred tax assets of $12.5 billion, $14.0 billion and $13.6 billion at October 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 which were reduced by valuation allowances of $9.9 billion, $11.9 billion and $11.4 billion respectively. Total valuation allowances decreased by $2 billion in fiscal 2015 associated with the release of a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in the U.S., and increased by $525 million in fiscal 2014, associated primarily with foreign net operating losses. In fiscal 2014, we recorded $53 million of net income tax charges related to items unique to the year. In fiscal 2013, we recorded $471 million of net income tax charges related to items unique to the year. These amounts included $214 million of net increases to valuation allowances, $406 million of tax charges for adjustments to uncertain tax positions and the settlement of tax audit matters and $47 million of tax charges for various prior period adjustments. In addition, we recorded $146 million of tax benefits from adjustments to prior year foreign income tax accruals and a tax benefit of $50 million arising from the retroactive research and development credit resulting from the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012, which was signed into law in January 2013. Segment Information A description of the products and services for each segment can be found in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Future changes to this organizational structure may result in changes to the segments disclosed. Effective at the beginning of its first quarter of fiscal 2015, we implemented an organizational change to align our segment financial reporting more closely with its current business structure. This organizational change resulted in the transfer of third-party multi-vendor support arrangements from the TS business unit within the EG segment to the ITO business unit within the ES segment. We have reflected this change to our segment information retrospectively to the earliest period presented, which has resulted in the removal of intersegment revenue from the TS business unit within the EG segment and the related corporate intersegment revenue eliminations, and the transfer of operating profit from the TS business unit within the EG segment to the ITO business unit within the ES segment. In connection with the Separation, effective at the beginning of its fourth quarter of fiscal 2015, we implemented an organizational change which resulted in the transfer of marketing optimization solutions business from the Software segment to the Commercial Hardware business unit within the 62 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Printing segment. We have reflected this change to our segment information in prior reporting periods on an as-if basis, which resulted in the transfer of net revenue from the Software segment to the Commercial Hardware business unit within the Printing segment. This change also resulted in the transfer of operating profit from the Software segment to the Commercial Hardware business unit within the Printing segment. In addition, this change resulted in the reclassification of $512 million of goodwill from the Software segment to the Printing segment. These changes had no impact on our previously reported consolidated net revenue, earnings from operations, net earnings or net earnings per share. Printing and Personal Systems Group The Personal Systems segment and the Printing segment are structured beneath a broader Printing and Personal Systems Group ("PPS"). We describe the results of the business segments within PPS below. Personal Systems For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 31,469 $ 34,303 $ 32,179 Earnings from operations $ 1,064 $ 1,270 $ 980 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 3.4 % 3.7 % 3.0 % The components of net revenue and the weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows: Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points Net Revenue 2015 2014 Dollars in millions Desktop PCs $ 10,941 $ 13,197 (6.6 ) Notebook PCs 17,271 17,540 (0.8 ) Workstations 2,018 2,218 (0.6 ) Other 1,239 1,348 (0.3 ) Total Personal Systems $ 31,469 $ 34,303 (8.3 ) Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points Net Revenue 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Desktop PCs $ 13,197 $ 12,844 1.1 Notebook PCs 17,540 16,029 4.7 Workstations 2,218 2,147 0.2 Other 1,348 1,159 0.6 Total Personal Systems $ 34,303 $ 32,179 6.6 63 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 Personal Systems net revenue decreased 8.3% (decreased 3.1% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2015. The net revenue decline in Personal Systems was due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, particularly in EMEA, and weakening market demand. Personal Systems net revenue decreased as a result of a 5% decline in average selling prices ("ASPs") and a 3% decline in unit volume. The decline in ASPs was due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, a shift in consumer PCs to low end products and a lower mix of commercial PCs within Personal Systems. The unit volume decline was due primarily to a unit volume decline in desktops, partially offset by a unit volume growth in notebooks, both consumer and commercial. Net revenue for commercial clients decreased 8% due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, a decline in commercial desktops as a result of weak market demand and higher net revenue in the prior-year period resulting from the replacement of the Windows XP operating system. Net revenue for consumer clients decreased 8% due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and a decline in consumer desktops. Net revenue declined 17% in Desktop PCs, 2% in Notebook PCs, 9% in Workstations and 8% in Other. The net revenue decline in Other was due primarily to a decline in consumer tablets, the sale of IP in the prior-year period, and unfavorable currency impacts, the effects of which were partially offset by increased sales of extended warranties. Personal Systems earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.3 percentage points for fiscal 2015 as a result of a decline in gross margin combined with an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The decline in gross margin was due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and a lower mix of commercial products, partially offset by favorable component costs and operational cost improvements. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased due primarily to the size of the net revenue decline, higher administrative expenses as a result of lower bad debt recoveries as compared to the prior-year period and higher R&D investments in commercial, mobility and immersive computing products, the effects of which were partially offset by a decline in field selling costs as a result of favorable currency impacts and operational cost improvements. Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 Personal Systems net revenue increased 6.6% (increased 7.2% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2014. While the Personal Systems business continued to be challenged by the market shift towards mobility products, the pace of the PC market decline slowed with signs of stabilization driven by growth in commercial PCs, the effects of which were partially offset by weakness in consumer PCs. The revenue increase in Personal Systems was due to growth in commercial PCs, particularly notebooks, along with growth in consumer notebooks. Personal Systems experienced revenue growth across all regions led by double digit revenue growth in EMEA, which experienced improved demand. The revenue increase was driven by an 8.2% increase in unit volume, the effects of which were partially offset by a 1.5% decline in ASPs. The unit volume increase was primarily led by growth in commercial notebooks as well as strength in commercial desktops, consumer notebooks and thin client products. The decline in ASPs was due primarily to a competitive pricing environment and unfavorable currency impacts, the effects of which were partially offset by a favorable mix of commercial PCs. Net revenue for commercial clients increased 10% due primarily to the benefits from the delayed installed base refresh cycle, the effects of customers migrating from the Windows XP operating system and growth in all product categories partly driven by new product introductions, including the HP Elite 64 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) products. Net revenue for consumer clients remained flat as growth in consumer notebooks, partly driven by our new product lineup including Chromebooks and hybrid products, was offset by a decline in consumer desktops. For fiscal 2014, net revenue for Notebook PCs increased 9%, Desktop PCs increased 3%, Workstations increased 3% and Other net revenue increased 16%. The net revenue increase in Other was due to the sale of IP and growth in mobility products, primarily consumer tablets which were introduced in the second half of fiscal 2013. Personal Systems earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 0.7 percentage points for fiscal 2014. The increase was driven by an increase in gross margin and a decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin was due primarily to operational cost improvements, a favorable commercial mix and the sale of IP, the effects of which were partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased due primarily to our cost structure optimization efforts, the effects of which were partially offset by increased research and development investments for commercial, mobility and immersive computing products, as well as higher administrative expenses driven by lower bad debt recoveries as compared to fiscal 2013. Printing For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 21,232 $ 23,211 $ 24,128 Earnings from operations $ 3,865 $ 4,229 $ 3,953 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 18.2 % 18.2 % 16.4 % The components of the net revenue and weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points Net Revenue 2015 2014 Dollars in millions Supplies $ 13,979 $ 14,917 (4.0 ) Commercial Hardware 5,378 5,949 (2.5 ) Consumer Hardware 1,875 2,345 (2.0 ) Total Printing $ 21,232 $ 23,211 (8.5 ) 65 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) For the fiscal years ended October 31 Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points Net Revenue 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Supplies $ 14,917 $ 15,716 (3.3 ) Consumer Hardware 2,345 2,436 (0.4 ) Commercial Hardware 5,949 5,976 (0.1 ) Total Printing $ 23,211 $ 24,128 (3.8 ) Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 Printing net revenue decreased 8.5% (decreased 5.1% on a constant currency basis) for fiscal 2015. The decline in net revenue was due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, decline in Supplies, weak market demand and competitive pricing pressures, the effects of which were partially offset by growth in graphics products. From a regional perspective, Printing experienced a net revenue decline across all regions, primarily in EMEA and particularly in Russia as a result of challenges in those markets. Net revenue for Supplies decreased 6% due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and demand weakness in toner and ink, partially offset by growth in graphics supplies. The demand weakness in toner was particularly in EMEA, led by a net revenue decline in Russia. Printer unit volumes declined 7% while average revenue per unit ("ARU") decreased 7%. Printer unit volume declined due primarily to a decline in LaserJet and home printer units, the effects of which were partially offset by growth in graphics printer units. The ARU for printers decreased due primarily to a highly competitive pricing environment and unfavorable currency impacts on Inkjet and LaserJet printers. Net revenue for Commercial Hardware decreased 10% driven by a 7% decline in printer unit volume and a 4% decline in ARU, partially offset by a net revenue increase in other peripheral solutions. In Commercial Hardware, the decline in unit volume was due primarily to an overall decline in LaserJet printer units, partially offset by growth in graphics printer units. The ARU decline in Commercial Hardware was due primarily to a competitive pricing environment and unfavorable currency impacts. Net revenue for Consumer Hardware decreased 20% driven by a 13% decline in ARU and a 7% decline in unit volume. The ARU decline in Consumer Hardware was due primarily to a competitive pricing environment and unfavorable currency impacts. The unit volume decline in Consumer Hardware was due primarily to lower sales of home and SMB printer units. Printing earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue remained flat for fiscal 2015 due to a decline in gross margin, offset by lower operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The decline in gross margin was due primarily to a competitive pricing environment in hardware and unfavorable currency impacts, the effects of which were partially offset by a favorable mix of ink and graphics supplies and favorable currency impacts from the Japanese yen. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased due primarily to our cost saving initiatives, lower marketing expenses, the impact of the divestiture of our photo printing service Snapfish and favorable currency impacts. 66 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 In fiscal 2014, Printing experienced a decline in revenue and an increase in operating profit as we continued to push our print strategies, which includes driving high value printer unit placements and expanding our graphics products and managed print services portfolio. Printing net revenue decreased 3.8% (decreased 3.3% on a constant currency basis) for fiscal 2014. The decline in net revenue was primarily driven by a decline in Supplies, the effects of which were partially offset by growth in graphics products and managed print services. Net revenue for Supplies decreased 5% driven by demand weakness in toner and ink, and a reduction in channel inventory in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2014, the effects of which were partially offset by growth in graphics supplies. Printer unit volume remained flat while ARU decreased 1%. Printer unit volume was flat due primarily to our continued efforts to target high value areas of the market, which resulted in a decline in home printer units and low value LaserJet printer units, the effects of which were offset by increased units in SMB, multifunction laser and graphics printers. The decline in ARU was due primarily to increased discounting driven by competitive pricing pressures. Net revenue for Commercial Hardware was flat as a 3% increase in printer unit volume was offset by a 3% decline in printer ARU. The unit volume in Commercial Hardware increased due primarily to growth in our multifunction laser printers and graphics printers. The ARU decline in Commercial Hardware was due primarily to a decline in LaserJet and graphics printers driven by a competitive pricing environment. Net revenue for Consumer Hardware decreased 4% driven by a 1% decline in printer unit volume and a 1% decline in ARU, along with a decline in other peripheral printing solutions. The unit volume decline in Consumer Hardware was due to lower sales of home printers, the effects of which were partially offset by growth in SMB printers. The ARU decline in Consumer Hardware was due primarily to increased discounting for SMB printers due to a competitive pricing environment, the effects of which were partially offset by a favorable mix of high value home printers. Printing earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.8 percentage points for fiscal 2014 as an increase in gross margin more than offset an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin increase was due to favorable currency impacts primarily driven by the Japanese yen, continued cost structure improvements and a favorable mix from a higher proportion of graphics and ink supplies, the effects of which were partially offset by a competitive pricing environment. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased due primarily to higher R&D expenses as a result of our investments in enterprise products and 3-D printing, the effects of which were partially offset by reduced marketing expenses. Enterprise Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 27,907 $ 27,723 $ 28,003 Earnings from operations $ 3,981 $ 3,995 $ 4,245 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 14.3 % 14.4 % 15.2 % 67 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of the net revenue and weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points Net Revenue 2015 2014 Dollars in millions Technology Services $ 7,662 $ 8,375 (2.6 ) Storage 3,180 3,316 (0.5 ) Business Critical Systems 807 929 (0.4 ) Networking 2,846 2,629 0.8 Industry Standard Servers 13,412 12,474 3.4 Total Enterprise Group $ 27,907 $ 27,723 0.7 For the fiscal years ended October 31 Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points Net Revenue 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Technology Services $ 8,375 $ 8,710 (1.2 ) Storage 3,316 3,475 (0.6 ) Business Critical Systems 929 1,190 (0.9 ) Networking 2,629 2,526 0.4 Industry Standard Servers 12,474 12,102 1.3 Total Enterprise Group $ 27,723 $ 28,803 (1.0 ) Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 EG net revenue increased 0.7% (increased 6.3% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2015. The increase in EG net revenue was due primarily to growth in ISS and from our acquisition of Aruba in May 2015, partially offset primarily by unfavorable currency impacts led by the euro and a net revenue decline in TS. However, we continued to experience challenges due to market trends, including the transition to cloud computing, as well as product and technology transitions, along with a highly competitive pricing environment. ISS net revenue increased 8% as a result of higher average unit prices ("AUPs) and unit volume growth. The increase in AUP's was across the server portfolio, primarily driven by higher option attach rates for memory, processors and hard drives and a mix shift to high-end new generation HP ProLiant servers. The unit volume growth was primarily due to shipment increases in rack and density optimized server products. Networking net revenue increased 8% due primarily to revenue from Aruba, which resulted in higher revenue from wireless local area network ("WLAN") products, the effect of which was partially offset by competitive pricing pressures, particularly in the China market. Storage net revenue decreased 4% as a result of a decline in traditional storage products, the effect of which was partially offset by growth in Converged Storage solutions from the 3PAR StoreServ products, 68 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) particularly All-flash arrays, and StoreOnce. BCS net revenue decreased 13% largely as a result of contraction in the overall UNIX market. TS net revenue decreased 9% due primarily to a reduction in support for BCS and traditional storage products along with lower revenue from consulting services, the effects of which were partially offset by growth in HP Data Center Care and HP Proactive Care support solutions. In fiscal 2015, EG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.1 percentage point due to a decrease in gross margin partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The decrease in gross margin was due primarily to a higher revenue mix of ISS products, unfavorable currency impacts and competitive pricing, the effects of which were partially offset by improved cost management, improved pricing in Storage and a higher gross margin contribution in Networking from Aruba. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due primarily to favorable currency impacts, partially offset by expenses during the period from Aruba. Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 EG net revenue decreased 1.0% (decreased 0.6% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2014. In EG, we continued to experience revenue challenges due to market trends, including the transition to cloud computing, as well as product and technology transitions, along with a highly competitive pricing environment. The decline in EG net revenue was due to net revenue declines in TS, BCS and Storage partially offset by net revenue growth in ISS and Networking. TS net revenue decreased 4% due primarily to a continued reduction in support for BCS, traditional storage products and lower support in networking services, partially offset by growth in support solutions for Converged Storage solutions and ISS. BCS net revenue decreased 22% as a result of ongoing pressures from the overall UNIX market contraction. Storage net revenue decreased by 5% as we continue to experience multiple challenges including product transitions from traditional storage products which include our tape, storage networking and legacy external disk products, to converged solutions, which include our 3PAR StoreServ, StoreOnce, and StoreVirtual products, other challenges include market weakness in high-end converged solutions and sales execution challenges, the effects of which were partially offset by revenue growth in our Converged Storage solutions. Networking net revenue increased 4% due to higher switching product revenue as a result of growth in our data center products, partially offset by lower revenue from WLAN products. ISS net revenue increased by 3% due primarily to higher volume and higher average unit prices in rack and blade server products driven by higher option attach rates for memory, processors and hard drives. EG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.8 percentage points in fiscal 2014 due to a decrease in gross margin coupled with an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decline was due primarily to a higher mix of ISS products, a lower mix of BCS products and competitive pricing pressure in ISS and Networking, partially offset by supply chain cost optimization and improved cost management in TS. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was driven by higher R&D investments in storage, networking and ISS, partially offset by continued cost savings associated with our ongoing restructuring efforts. 69 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Enterprise Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 19,806 $ 22,398 $ 24,061 Earnings from operations $ 1,051 $ 816 $ 693 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 5.3 % 3.6 % 2.9 % The components of the net revenue and weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points Net Revenue 2015 2014 Dollars in millions Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing $ 12,107 $ 14,038 (8.6 ) Application and Business Services 7,699 8,360 (3.0 ) Total Enterprise Services $ 19,806 $ 22,398 (11.6 ) For the fiscal years ended October 31 Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points Net Revenue 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing $ 14,038 $ 15,223 (4.9 ) Application and Business Services 8,360 8,838 (2.0 ) Total Enterprise Services $ 22,398 $ 24,061 (6.9 ) Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 ES net revenue decreased 11.6% (decreased 5.7% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2015. Performance in ES remained challenged by the impact of several large contracts winding down. The net revenue decrease in ES was due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, revenue runoff in key accounts and weak growth in new and existing accounts, partially offset by growth in our SES portfolio which includes analytics and data management, security and cloud services. Net revenue in ITO decreased by 14% in fiscal 2015 due to unfavorable currency impacts, revenue runoff in key accounts and weak growth in new and existing accounts, particularly in EMEA in the first half of fiscal 2015, partially offset by growth in SES revenue in the second half of fiscal 2015. Net revenue in Application and Business Services ("ABS") declined by 8% in fiscal 2015, due to unfavorable currency impacts and weak growth in new and existing accounts particularly in the first half of fiscal 2015, partially offset by growth in SES net revenue in the second half of fiscal 2015. ES earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 1.7 percentage points in fiscal 2015. The increase in operating margin was due to an increase in gross margin and a decrease in 70 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. Gross margin increased due primarily to service delivery efficiencies and improving profit performance in underperforming contracts. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was primarily driven by lower field selling costs, which was due to favorable currency impacts and our sales transformation initiatives. Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 ES net revenue decreased 6.9% (decreased 6.8% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2014. Performance in ES remained challenged by the impact of several large contracts winding down and lower public sector spending in EMEA, particularly in the United Kingdom, and several other countries in EMEA. The net revenue decrease in ES was due primarily to revenue runoff in key accounts, weak growth in new and existing accounts, particularly in EMEA, and contractual price declines. These effects were partially offset by net revenue growth in our SES portfolio, which includes information management and analytics, security and cloud services. Net revenue in Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing ("ITO") decreased by 8% in fiscal 2014 due to revenue runoff in key accounts, weak growth in new and existing accounts, particularly in EMEA, and contractual price declines in ongoing contracts partially offset by growth in cloud and security revenue and favorable currency impacts. Net revenue in ABS decreased by 5% in fiscal 2014, due to revenue runoff in a key account, weak growth in new and existing accounts, particularly in EMEA, and unfavorable currency impacts, partially offset by growth in information management and analytics and cloud revenue. ES earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 0.7 percentage points in fiscal 2014. The increase in operating margin was due to an increase in gross margin, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. Gross margin increased due primarily to our continued focus on service delivery efficiencies, improving profit performance in under-performing contracts and labor savings as a result of restructuring, partially offset by unfavorable impacts from revenue runoff in key accounts and weak growth in new and existing accounts. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was primarily driven by the size of the revenue decline and higher administrative expenses and field selling costs. The increase in administrative expenses was due to the prior-year period containing higher bad debt recoveries and insurance recoveries. The increase in selling costs was the result of expanding the sales force coverage as we transition from a reactive sales model to a more proactive approach. Software For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 3,458 $ 3,701 $ 3,789 Earnings from operations $ 760 $ 828 $ 848 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 22.0 % 22.4 % 22.4 % Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 Software net revenue decreased 6.6% (decreased 2.7% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2015. Revenue growth in Software is being challenged by the overall market shift to SaaS solutions and related go-to-market sales execution challenges. Additionally, these challenges are impacting growth in 71 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) license and support revenue. In fiscal 2015, net revenue growth was negatively impacted by foreign currency fluctuations across all regions, led primarily by weakness in the euro. In fiscal 2015, net revenue from licenses, professional services, SaaS and support decreased by 13%, 8%, 3% and 3%, respectively. The decrease in license revenue was due primarily to the market shift to SaaS solutions and sales execution challenges and, as a result, we experienced lower revenue in IT Operations Management. Professional services net revenue decreased due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts, our continued focus on higher-margin engagements, and, as a result, we experienced a net revenue decrease in big data solutions, partially offset by net revenue growth in security products. SaaS net revenue decreased due primarily to sales execution challenges, which resulted in lower revenue from big data solutions, partially offset by net revenue growth in IT Operations Management. The decrease in support revenue was due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and past declines in license revenue, partially offset by growth in revenue for security products. In fiscal 2015, Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.4 percentage points due to a decrease in gross margin and an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The decrease in gross margin was due primarily to a lower mix of license revenue. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due to the size of the revenue decline. During the period, operating expense declined due primarily to favorable currency impacts and lower SG&A expenses as a result of lower field selling costs driven by expense management. Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 Software net revenue decreased 2.3% (decreased 2.2% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2014. Revenue growth in Software was challenged by the overall market and customer shift to SaaS solutions, which is impacting growth in license and support revenue. In fiscal 2014, net revenue from licenses, support and professional services decreased by 3%, 2% and 6% respectively, while SaaS net revenue increased by 5%. The decline in license net revenue was due to the market and customer shift to SaaS solutions, which resulted in lower revenue from IT/cloud management and information management products, partially offset by strength in some of our key focus areas of big data analytics and security. The decrease in support net revenue was due to past declines in license revenue. Professional services net revenue decreased as we continued our focus on higher-margin engagements. These declines were partially offset by higher SaaS revenue due to improving demand for our SaaS solutions in IT/cloud management products and security products. In fiscal 2014, Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue remained flat in percentage points. There was an increase in gross margin, the effect of which was offset by an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin was due to the shift to more profitable contracts and improved workforce utilization in professional services. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due primarily to investments in R&D partially offset by lower SG&A expenses due to cost savings associated with our ongoing restructuring efforts and improved operational expense management. 72 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HP Financial Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 3,216 $ 3,498 $ 3,629 Earnings from operations $ 349 $ 389 $ 399 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 10.9 % 11.1 % 11.0 % Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 HPFS net revenue decreased by 8.1% (decreased 1.5% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2015 due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts led by weakness in the euro and lower asset management activity in customer buyouts. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.2 percentage points in fiscal 2015 due primarily to decrease in gross margin while operating expense as a percentage of net revenue was flat in fiscal 2015 as compared to fiscal 2014. The decrease in gross margin was due to unfavorable currency impacts, lower margins in customer buyouts, and lower portfolio margin due to competitive pricing, the effects of which were partially offset by higher margins from asset recovery services. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was flat as a result of lower SG&A expenses due primarily to lower field selling costs the effects of which were offset by size of the revenue decline. Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 HPFS net revenue decreased by 3.6% (decreased 3.3% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2014 due primarily to lower portfolio revenue from lower average portfolio assets and lower asset management activity, primarily in customer buyouts. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.1 percentage points in fiscal 2014. The increase was due primarily to an increase in gross margin, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin was the result of a higher portfolio margin, primarily from lower bad debt expense and a lower cost of funds and improved margins in remarketing sales. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due primarily to higher go-to-market investments. Financing Volume For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Total financing volume $ 6,504 $ 6,425 $ 5,603 New financing volume, which represent the amount of financing provided to customers for equipment and related software and services, including intercompany activity, increased 1.2% in fiscal 2015 and 14.7% in fiscal 2014, respectively. The increase in both fiscal 2015 and 2014 was driven by higher financing associated with product sales and related services offerings. The increase in fiscal 2015 was partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts led by weakness in the euro. 73 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Portfolio Assets and Ratios The HPFS business model is asset intensive and uses certain internal metrics to measure its performance against other financial services companies, including a segment balance sheet that is derived from our internal management reporting system. The accounting policies used to derive HPFS amounts are substantially the same as those used by HP. However, intercompany loans and certain accounts that are reflected in the segment balances are eliminated in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The portfolio assets and ratios derived from the segment balance sheet for HPFS were as follows: As of October 31 2015 2014 Dollars in millions Financing receivables, gross $ 6,689 $ 6,670 Net equipment under operating leases 2,710 2,595 Capitalized profit on intercompany equipment transactions (1) 873 783 Intercompany leases (1) 2,195 2,199 Gross portfolio assets 12,467 12,247 Allowance for doubtful accounts (2) 95 111 Operating lease equipment reserve 58 68 Total reserves 153 179 Net portfolio assets $ 12,314 $ 12,068 Reserve coverage 1.2 % 1.5 % Debt-to-equity ratio (3) 7.0x 7.0x (1) Intercompany activity is eliminated in consolidation. (2) Allowance for doubtful accounts for financing receivables includes both the short- and long-term portions. (3) Debt attributable to HPFS consists of intercompany equity that is treated as debt for segment reporting purposes, intercompany debt, and borrowing- and funding-related activity associated with HPFS and its subsidiaries. Debt attributable to HPFS totaled $10.7 billion at both October 31, 2015 and October 31, 2014. HPFS equity at both October 31, 2015 and October 31, 2014 was $1.5 billion. We believe the HPFS debt-to-equity ratio is comparable to that of other similar financing companies. At October 31, 2015 and October 31, 2014, HPFS cash and cash equivalents and short term investments were $589 million and $952 million, respectively. Net portfolio assets at October 31, 2015 increased 2% from October 31, 2014. The increase generally resulted from new financing volume partially offset by portfolio runoff and unfavorable currency impacts. HPFS recorded net bad debt expense and operating lease equipment reserves of $46 million, $40 million, and $50 million in fiscal 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. 74 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Corporate Investments For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 27 $ 302 $ 24 Loss from operations $ (565 ) $ (199 ) $ (316 ) Loss from operations as a % of net revenue (1) NM (66.0 )% NM (1) "NM" represents not meaningful. Fiscal 2015 compared with Fiscal 2014 The revenue decrease for fiscal 2015 was due primarily to the sale of IP related to the Palm acquisition in the prior-year period. The increase in the loss from operations for fiscal 2015 was due primarily to the sale of IP in the prior-year period and higher expenses from enterprise-related business incubation activities and HP Labs. Fiscal 2014 compared with Fiscal 2013 The revenue increase for fiscal 2014 was due primarily to the sale of IP related to the Palm acquisition. The decrease in the loss from operations for fiscal 2014 was due primarily to the sale of IP, the benefits of which were partially offset by higher expenses associated with enterprise-related business incubation activities, corporate strategy, HP Labs and global alliances. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES We use cash generated by operations as our primary source of liquidity. We believe that internally generated cash flows are generally sufficient to support our operating businesses, capital expenditures, restructuring activities, principal and interest payment of debt, income tax payments and the payment of stockholder dividends, in addition to investments and share repurchases. We are able to supplement this short-term liquidity, if necessary, with broad access to capital markets and credit facilities made available by various domestic and foreign financial institutions. Our access to capital markets may be constrained and our cost of borrowing may increase under certain business, market and economic conditions; however, our access to a variety of funding sources to meet our liquidity needs is designed to facilitate continued access to capital resources under all such conditions. Our liquidity is subject to various risks including the risks identified in the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A and market risks identified in the section entitled "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk" in Item 7A, which is incorporated herein by reference. Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, with substantially all of those amounts held outside of the U.S. We utilize a variety of planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available when and where it is needed. Our cash position remains strong, and we expect that our cash balances, anticipated cash flow generated from operations and access to capital markets will be sufficient to cover our expected near-term cash outlays. 75 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Amounts held outside of the U.S. are generally utilized to support non-U.S. liquidity needs, although a portion of those amounts may from time to time be subject to short-term intercompany loans into the U.S. Most of the amounts held outside of the U.S. could be repatriated to the U.S. but, under current law, some would be subject to U.S. federal income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Repatriation of some foreign earnings is restricted by local law. Except for foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the U.S., we have provided for the U.S. federal tax liability on these earnings for financial statement purposes. Repatriation could result in additional income tax payments in future years. Where local restrictions prevent an efficient intercompany transfer of funds, our intent is that cash balances would remain outside of the U.S. and we would meet liquidity needs through ongoing cash flows, external borrowings, or both. We do not expect restrictions or potential taxes incurred on repatriation of amounts held outside of the U.S. to have a material effect on our overall liquidity, financial condition or results of operations. In connection with the Separation, we reviewed our capital structure during fiscal 2015 to ensure that each company, HP Inc. and Hewlett Packard Enterprise, would be well capitalized after the Separation. In October 2015, prior to the Separation, Hewlett Packard Enterprise completed its offering of $14.6 billion senior unsecured notes and we redeemed and paid $6.6 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes as a result of early extinguishment of debt. In connection with our ongoing operations and in part due to the Separation, we repaid a short-term loan of $3.5 billion, issued $18.2 billion and repaid $18.4 billion of commercial paper in fiscal 2015. On November 4, 2015, we incrementally redeemed and paid $2.1 billion U.S. Dollar Global Notes as part of the final settlement of the debt redemption issued as a part of the Separation. Liquidity Our cash and cash equivalents, total debt and available borrowing resources were as follows: As of October 31 2015 2014 2013 In billions Cash and cash equivalents $ 17.4 $ 15.1 $ 12.2 Total debt $ 24.7 $ 19.5 $ 22.6 Available borrowing resources (1) $ 19.0 $ 17.8 $ 17.8 (1) For more information on our available borrowing resources, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Our key cash flow metrics were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2015 2014 2013 In millions Net cash provided by operating activities $ 6,490 $ 12,333 $ 11,608 Net cash used in investing activities (5,534 ) (2,792 ) (2,803 ) Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities 1,344 (6,571 ) (7,943 ) Net increase in cash and cash equivalents $ 2,300 $ 2,970 $ 862 76 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by approximately $5.8 billion for fiscal 2015 as compared to fiscal 2014. The decrease was due primarily to lower cash generated from working capital management activities, payments for separation costs, lower cash receipts from contract manufacturers and financing receivables, lower net earnings in the current period, unfavorable currency impacts, as well as higher cash payments for prepaids and employee benefits. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $0.7 billion for fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013, due primarily to improvements in working capital management. Our key working capital metrics were as follows: As of October 31 2015 2014 2013 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable 47 44 49 Days of supply in inventory 30 27 24 Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable (74 ) (67 ) (56 ) Cash conversion cycle 3 4 17 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable ("DSO") measures the average number of days our receivables are outstanding. DSO is calculated by dividing ending accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, by a 90-day average of net revenue. For fiscal 2015, the increase in DSO was due primarily to lower usage of cash discounts by our customers and longer standard payment terms for Aruba. For fiscal 2014, the decrease in DSO was due primarily to the impact of currency and the expansion of our factoring programs. Days of supply in inventory ("DOS") measures the average number of days from procurement to sale of our product. DOS is calculated by dividing ending inventory by a 90-day average of cost of goods sold. For fiscal 2015, the increase in DOS was due to higher inventory balance to support future sales levels. For fiscal 2014, the increase in DOS was due to a higher inventory balance in Personal Systems due in part to strategic and advanced buys. Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable ("DPO") measures the average number of days our accounts payable balances are outstanding. DPO is calculated by dividing ending accounts payable by a 90-day average of cost of goods sold. For fiscal 2015, the increase in DPO was primarily the result of purchasing linearity and an extension of payment terms with our product suppliers. For fiscal 2014, the increase in DPO was primarily the result of an extension of payment terms with our product suppliers. The cash conversion cycle is the sum of DSO and DOS less DPO. Items which may cause the cash conversion cycle in a particular period to differ from a long-term sustainable rate include, but are not limited to, changes in business mix, changes in payment terms, extent of receivables factoring, seasonal trends and the timing of revenue recognition and inventory purchases within the period. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by approximately $2.7 billion for fiscal 2015 as compared to fiscal 2014, due primarily to the acquisition of Aruba. Net cash used in investing activities 77 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) was flat for fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013, due primarily to higher cash utilization for purchases of property, plant and equipment offset by cash generated from sales of available-for-sale securities. Financing Activities Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.3 billion in fiscal 2015 as compared to net cash used in financing activities of $6.6 billion in fiscal 2014. The change was due primarily to proceeds from the issuance of senior unsecured notes in October 2015 by Hewlett Packard Enterprise in principal amount of $14.6 billion and higher proceeds from issuance of commercial paper, partially offset by the repayment as a result of early debt extinguishment of $6.6 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes and higher repayment of commercial paper as compared to fiscal 2014. Net cash used in financing activities decreased by approximately $1.4 billion for fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013 due primarily to proceeds from the issuance of U.S. Dollar Global Notes in January 2014, partially offset by higher debt repayments and repurchases of common stock. For more information on our share repurchase programs, see Item 5 and Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Capital Resources Debt Levels As of October 31 2015 2014 2013 Dollars in millions Short-term debt $ 2,885 $ 3,486 $ 5,979 Long-term debt $ 21,780 $ 16,039 $ 16,608 Debt-to-equity ratio 0.88x 0.72x 0.82x Weighted-average interest rate 3.4 % 2.7 % 3.0 % We maintain debt levels that we establish through consideration of a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for operations, investment plans (including acquisitions), share repurchase activities, our cost of capital and targeted capital structure. Short-term debt decreased by $601 million and long-term debt increased by approximately $5.7 billion for fiscal 2015 as compared to fiscal 2014. The net increase in total debt was due primarily to issuance of senior unsecured notes in October 2015 by Hewlett Packard Enterprise in principal amount of $14.6 billion which includes of $14.0 billion fixed rate notes and $600 million of floating rate notes, partially offset by the payment as a result of early debt extinguishment of $6.6 billion in connection with the Separation, maturities of $2.5 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes and repayment of $3.5 billion of short-term loan. We also issued $18.2 billion and repaid $18.4 billion of commercial paper in fiscal 2015. On November 4, 2015, we paid $2.1 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes as part of the final settlement of the debt redemption issued as a part of the Separation. Short-term debt and long-term debt decreased by approximately $2.5 billion and $0.6 billion, respectively, for fiscal 2014 as compared to fiscal 2013. The net decrease in total debt was due primarily to maturities of debt. During fiscal 2014, we issued $2.0 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes under the 2012 Shelf Registration Statement which mature in 2019 and repaid $4.9 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes. We also issued $11.6 billion and repaid $11.5 billion of commercial paper in fiscal 2014. 78 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Our debt-to-equity ratio is calculated as the carrying amount of debt divided by total stockholders' equity. Our debt-to-equity ratio increased by 0.16x in fiscal 2015, due to an increase in total debt balances of $5.1 billion partially offset by an increase in stockholders' equity by $1.0 billion at the end of fiscal 2015. Our debt-to-equity ratio decreased by 0.10x in fiscal 2014, due to a decrease in total debt balances of $3.1 billion partially offset by a decrease in stockholders' equity by $0.5 billion at the end of fiscal 2014. Our weighted-average interest rate reflects the effective interest rate on our borrowings prevailing during the period and reflects the effect of interest rate swaps. For more information on our interest rate swaps, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Available Borrowing Resources We had the following resources available to obtain short- or long-term financing if we need additional liquidity: As of October 31, 2015 In millions Commercial paper programs $ 16,461 Uncommitted lines of credit $ 2,524 For more information on our available borrowings resources, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Credit Ratings Our credit risk is evaluated by major independent rating agencies based upon publicly available information as well as information obtained in our ongoing discussions with them. While we do not have any rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity of a material amount of our debt, previous downgrades have increased the cost of borrowing under our credit facilities, have reduced market capacity for our commercial paper and have required the posting of additional collateral under some of our derivative contracts. In addition, any further downgrade to our credit ratings by any rating agencies may further impact us in a similar manner, and, depending on the extent of any such downgrade, could have a negative impact on our liquidity and capital position. We can rely on alternative sources of funding, including drawdowns under our credit facilities, if necessary, to offset potential reductions in the market capacity for our commercial paper. 79 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) CONTRACTUAL AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS The contractual and other obligations for HP (including Hewlett Packard Enterprise) as of October 31, 2015, were as follows: Payments Due by Period Total 1 Year or Less 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years In millions Principal payments on debt (1) $ 24,538 $ 2,860 $ 5,635 $ 3,409 $ 12,634 Interest payments on debt (2) 8,445 721 1,344 1,147 5,233 Operating lease obligations (3) 2,791 603 870 527 791 Purchase obligations (4) 2,654 1,126 944 451 133 Capital lease obligations 104 28 51 8 17 Total (5)(6)(7)(8) $ 38,532 $ 5,338 $ 8,844 $ 5,542 $ 18,808 (1) Amounts represent the principal cash payments relating to our short-term and long-term debt and do not include any fair value adjustments, discounts or premiums. Subsequent to the Separation, HP Inc. expects the total future principal payments on debt to be approximately $8.7 billion. (2) Amounts represent the expected interest payments relating to our short-term and long-term debt. We have outstanding interest rate swap agreements accounted for as fair value hedges that have the economic effect of changing fixed interest rates associated with some of our U.S. Dollar Global Notes to variable interest rates. The impact of our outstanding interest rate swaps at October 31, 2015 was factored into the calculation of the future interest payments on debt. Subsequent to the Separation, HP Inc. expects the total future interest payments on debt to be approximately $2.9 billion. (3) Amounts represent the operating lease obligations net of total sublease income of $77 million. Subsequent to the Separation, HP Inc. expects the total remaining future minimum operating lease commitments to be approximately $367 million, net of sublease income of $118 million. (4) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. These purchase obligations are related principally to inventory and other items. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancelable without penalty. Purchase obligations also exclude open purchase orders that are routine arrangements entered into in the ordinary course of business as they are difficult to quantify in a meaningful way. Even though open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust terms based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. Subsequent to the Separation, HP Inc. expects the total remaining future unconditional purchase obligations to be approximately $915 million. (5) Retirement and Post-Retirement Benefit Plan Contributions. As of October 31, 2015, HP (including Hewlett Packard Enterprise) expects to contribute approximately $384 million to its non-U.S. pension plans, approximately $37 million to cover benefit payments to U.S. non-qualified plan participants and approximately $46 million to cover benefit claims for HP's post-retirement benefit plans in fiscal 2016. Subsequent to the Separation, HP Inc. expects to contribute approximately 80 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) $18 million to its non-U.S. pension plans, approximately $36 million to cover benefit payments to U.S. non-qualified plan participants and approximately $43 million to cover benefit claims for HP's post-retirement benefit plans. Our policy is to fund our pension plans so that we meet at least the minimum contribution requirements, as established by local government, funding and taxing authorities. Expected contributions and payments to our pension and post-retirement benefit plans are excluded from the contractual obligations table because they do not represent contractual cash outflows as they are dependent on numerous factors which may result in a wide range of outcomes. For more information on our retirement and post-retirement benefit plans, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. (6) Restructuring Plans. As of October 31, 2015, HP (including Hewlett Packard Enterprise) expects future cash payments of approximately $3.2 billion in connection with our approved restructuring plans which includes $1.3 billion expected to be paid in fiscal 2016 with the remaining approximately $1.9 billion cash payments to be made through fiscal 2025. Subsequent to the Separation, HP Inc. expects future cash payments of approximately $280 million in connection with our approved restructuring plans which includes $90 million expected to be paid in fiscal 2016 with the remaining approximately $190 million cash payments to be made through fiscal 2025. Payments for restructuring have been excluded from the contractual obligations table, because they do not represent contractual cash outflows and there is uncertainty as to the timing of these payments. For more information on our restructuring activities, see Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. (7) Separation Costs. As of October 31, 2015, HP (including Hewlett Packard Enterprise) expects future cash payments of approximately $750 million in connection with our separation charges and net foreign tax payments, which are expected to be paid in fiscal 2016, with subsequent tax credit amounts expected over later years. As of October 31, 2015, we also expect separation-related capital expenditures of approximately $60 million in fiscal 2016. Subsequent to the Separation, HP Inc. expects future cash payments of approximately $180 million in connection with our separation charges and net foreign tax payments, which are expected to be paid in fiscal 2016, with subsequent tax credit amounts expected over later years. As of October 31, 2015, HP Inc. also expects separation-related capital expenditures of approximately $30 million in fiscal 2016. Payments for separation costs have been excluded from the contractual obligations table, because they do not represent contractual cash outflows and there is uncertainty as to the timing of these payments. (8) Uncertain Tax Positions. As of October 31, 2015, we had approximately $3.7 billion of recorded liabilities and related interest and penalties pertaining to uncertain tax positions. These liabilities and related interest and penalties include $15 million expected to be paid within one year. For the remaining amount, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when cash settlement with the tax authorities might occur due to the uncertainties related to these tax matters. Payments of these obligations would result from settlements with taxing authorities. For more information on our uncertain tax positions, see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS As part of our ongoing business, we have not participated in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as 81 Table of Contents HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) structured finance or special purpose entities, established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. We have third-party short-term financing arrangements intended to facilitate the working capital requirements of certain customers. The total aggregate maximum capacity of the financing arrangements was $3.3 billion as of October 31, 2015, including an aggregate maximum capacity of $1.4 billion in non-recourse financing arrangements and an aggregate maximum capacity of $1.9 billion in partial-recourse facilities. For more information on our third-party revolving short-term financing arrangements, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. 82 Table of Contents 
