CIK: 47217
Company Name: HP INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2018-12-13


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. This Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ( MD&A ) is organized as follows: Overview. A discussion of our business and other highlights affecting the company to provide context for the remainder of this MD&A. Separation Transaction. A discussion of the separation of Hewlett Packard Enterprise Company, HP Inc. former enterprise technology infrastructure, software, services and financing businesses. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. A discussion of accounting policies and estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results. Results of Operations. An analysis of our continuing financial results comparing fiscal year 2018 to fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2017 to fiscal year 2016. A discussion of the results of continuing operations is followed by a more detailed discussion of the results of operations by segment. Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our cash flows and a discussion of our liquidity and financial condition. Contractual and Other Obligations. An overview of contractual obligations, retirement and post-retirement benefit plan contributions, cost-saving plans, uncertain tax positions and off-balance sheet arrangements. The discussion of financial condition and results of our continuing operations that follows provides information that will assist the reader in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. 31 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) OVERVIEW We are a leading global provider of personal computing and other access devices, imaging and printing products, and related technologies, solutions, and services. We sell to individual consumers, SMBs and large enterprises, including customers in the government, health, and education sectors. We have three reportable segments: Personal Systems, Printing and Corporate Investments. The Personal Systems segment offers Commercial and Consumer desktop and notebook PCs, workstations, thin clients, Commercial mobility devices, retail POS systems, displays and other related accessories, software, support, and services. The Printing segment provides Consumer and Commercial printer hardware, Supplies, solutions and services, as well as scanning devices. Corporate Investments include HP Labs and certain business incubation projects. In Personal Systems, our strategic focus is on profitable growth through hyper market segmentation with respect to enhanced innovation in multi-operating systems, multi-architecture, geography, customer segments and other key attributes. Additionally, we are investing in premium form factors such as convertible notebooks to meet customer preference for mobile, thinner and lighter devices. We have increased our focus on Device as a Service as the market begins to shift to contractual solutions. We believe that we are well positioned due to our competitive product lineup. In Printing, our strategic growth focus is on shifting to contractual solutions and Graphics, as well as expanding our footprint in the 3D printing marketplace. Business printing includes delivering solutions to SMBs and enterprise customers, such as multi-function and PageWide printers, including our JetIntelligence lineup of LaserJet printers. The shift to contractual solutions includes an increased focus on Managed Print Services and Instant Ink, which presents strong after-market supplies opportunities. In the Graphics space, we are focused on innovations such as our Indigo and Latex product offerings. We plan to continue to focus on shifting the mix in the installed base to higher value units and expanding our innovative Ink, Laser, Graphics and 3D printing programs. We continue to execute on our key initiatives of focusing on high-value products targeted at high usage categories and introducing new revenue delivery models. Our focus is on placing higher value printer units which offer strong annuity of toner and ink, the design and deployment of A3 products and solutions, accelerating growth in Graphic solutions and 3D printing. We continue to experience challenges that are representative of trends and uncertainties that may affect our business and results of operations. One set of challenges relates to dynamic market trends, such as forecasted declining PC Client markets and flat home printing markets. A second set of challenges relates to changes in the competitive landscape. Our primary competitors are exerting competitive pressure in targeted areas and are entering new markets, our emerging competitors are introducing new technologies and business models, and our alliance partners in some businesses are increasingly becoming our competitors in others. A third set of challenges relates to business model changes and our go-to-market execution. In Personal Systems, we face challenges with industry component availability. In Printing, we are seeing signs of stabilization of demand in consumer and commercial markets, but are still experiencing an overall competitive pricing environment. We obtain many components from single sources due to technology, availability, price, quality or other considerations. For instance, we source the majority of our A4 and a portion of our A3 portfolio of laser printer engines and laser toner cartridges from Canon. Any decision by either party to not renew our agreement with Canon or to limit or reduce the scope of the agreement could adversely affect our net revenue from LaserJet products; however, we have a long-standing business relationship with Canon and anticipate renewal of this agreement. We are also seeing increases in commodity costs impacting our bill of materials. Our business and financial performance also depend significantly on worldwide economic conditions. Accordingly, we face global macroeconomic challenges, tariff-driven headwinds, uncertainty in the markets, volatility in exchange rates, weaker macroeconomic conditions and evolving dynamics in the global trade environment. The impact of these and other global macroeconomic challenges on our business cannot be known at this time. To address these challenges, we continue to pursue innovation with a view towards developing new products and services aligned with generating market demand and meeting the needs of our customers and partners. In addition, we continue to work on improving our operations, with a particular focus on enhancing our end-to-end processes and efficiencies. We also continue to work on optimizing our sales coverage models, align our sales incentives with our strategic goals, improve channel execution, strengthen our capabilities in our areas of strategic focus, and develop and capitalize on market opportunities. We typically experience higher net revenues in our fourth quarter compared to other quarters in our fiscal year due in part to seasonal holiday demand. Historical seasonal patterns should not be considered reliable indicators of our future net revenues or financial performance. For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our continuing operating results, see the section entitled Risk Factors in Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. 32 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) SEPARATION TRANSACTION On November 1, 2015, we completed the separation of Hewlett Packard Enterprise, Hewlett-Packard Company former enterprise technology infrastructure, software, services and financing businesses and entered into a separation and distribution agreement as well as various other agreements that provide a framework for the relationships between HP and Hewlett Packard Enterprise going forward, including among others a tax matters agreement, an employee matters agreement, a real estate matters agreement and a master commercial agreement. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES General The Consolidated Financial Statements of HP are prepared in accordance with United States ( U.S. ) generally accepted accounting principles ( GAAP ), which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying amount of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of HP Board of Directors. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting amounts are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates. Making estimates and judgments about future events is inherently unpredictable and is subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. A summary of significant accounting policies is included in Note 1, Overview and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or services are rendered, the sales price or fee is fixed or determinable and collectability is reasonably assured, as well as when other revenue recognition principles are met, including industry-specific revenue recognition guidance. We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and while many of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements which contain non-standard terms and conditions. Further, many of our arrangements include multiple elements. As a result, significant contract interpretation may be required to determine the appropriate accounting, including the identification of deliverables considered to be separate units of accounting, the allocation of the transaction price among elements in the arrangement and the timing of revenue recognition for each of those elements. We recognize revenue for delivered elements as separate units of accounting when the delivered elements have standalone value to the customer. For elements with no standalone value, we recognize revenue consistent with the pattern of the delivery of the final deliverable. If the arrangement includes a customer-negotiated refund or return right or other contingency relative to the delivered items and the delivery and performance of the undelivered items is considered probable and substantially within our control, the delivered element constitutes a separate unit of accounting. In arrangements with combined units of accounting, changes in the allocation of the transaction price among elements may impact the timing of revenue recognition for the contract but will not change the total revenue recognized for the contract. We establish the selling prices used for each deliverable based on vendor specific objective evidence ( VSOE ) of selling price, if available, third-party evidence ( TPE ), if VSOE of selling price is not available, or estimated selling price ( ESP ), if neither VSOE of selling price nor TPE is available. We establish VSOE of selling price using the price charged for a deliverable when sold separately and, in rare instances, using the price established by management having the relevant authority. We evaluate TPE of selling price by reviewing largely similar and interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone sales to similarly situated customers. ESP is established based on management judgment considering internal factors such as margin objectives, pricing practices and controls, customer segment pricing strategies and the product life cycle. Consideration is also given to market conditions such as competitor pricing strategies and industry technology life cycles. We may modify or 33 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) develop new go-to-market practices in the future, which may result in changes in selling prices, impacting both VSOE of selling price and ESP. In most arrangements with multiple elements, the transaction price is allocated to the individual units of accounting at the inception of the arrangement based on their relative selling price. However, the aforementioned factors may result in a different allocation of the transaction price to deliverables in multiple element arrangements entered into in future periods. This may change the pattern and timing of revenue recognition for identical arrangements executed in future periods, but will not change the total revenue recognized for any given arrangement. We reduce revenue for customer and distributor programs and incentive offerings, including price protection, rebates, promotions, other volume-based incentives and expected returns. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered. For certain incentive programs, we estimate the number of customers expected to redeem the incentive based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of the incentive. For hardware products, we recognize revenue generated from direct sales to end customers and indirect sales to channel partners (including resellers, distributors and value-added solution providers) when the revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. For indirect sales to channel partners, we recognize revenue at the time of delivery when the channel partner has economic substance apart from HP and HP has completed its obligations related to the sale. We recognize revenue from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts ratably over the contract period. Warranty We accrue the estimated cost of product warranties at the time we recognize revenue. We evaluate our warranty obligations on a product group basis. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, we base our estimated warranty obligation on contractual warranty terms, repair costs, product call rates, average cost per call, current period product shipments and ongoing product failure rates, as well as specific product class failure outside of our baseline experience. Warranty terms generally range from 90 days to three years for parts, labor and onsite services, depending upon the product. Over the last three fiscal years, the annual warranty expense and actual warranty costs have averaged approximately 1.8% and 2.0% of annual net revenue, respectively. Restructuring and Other Charges We have engaged in restructuring actions which require management to estimate the timing and amount of severance and other employee separation costs for workforce reduction programs, fair value of assets made redundant or obsolete, and the fair value of lease cancellation and other exit costs. We accrue for severance and other employee separation costs under these actions when it is probable that benefits will be paid and the amount is reasonably estimable. The rates used in determining severance accruals are based on existing plans, historical experiences and negotiated settlements. Other charges include non-recurring costs that are distinct from ongoing operational costs such as information technology costs incurred in connection with the Separation. For a full description of our restructuring actions, refer to our discussions of restructuring in Results of Operations below and in Note 3, Restructuring and Other Charges to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Retirement and Post-Retirement Benefits Our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations depend on various assumptions. Our major assumptions relate primarily to discount rates, mortality rates, expected increases in compensation levels and the expected long-term return on plan assets. The discount rate assumption is based on current investment yields of high-quality fixed-income securities with maturities similar to the expected benefits payment period. Mortality rates help predict the expected life of plan participants and are based on a historical demographic study of the plan. The expected increase in the compensation levels assumption reflects our long-term actual experience and future expectations. The expected long-term return on plan assets is determined based on asset allocations, historical portfolio results, historical asset correlations and management expected returns for each asset class. We evaluate our expected return assumptions annually including reviewing current capital market assumptions to assess the reasonableness of the expected long-term return on plan assets. We update the expected long-term return on assets when we observe a sufficient level of evidence that would suggest the long-term expected return has changed. In any fiscal year, significant differences may arise between the actual return and the expected long-term return on plan assets. Historically, differences between the actual return and expected long-term return on plan assets have resulted from changes in target or actual asset allocation, short-term performance relative to expected long-term performance, and to a lesser extent, differences between target and actual investment allocations, the timing of benefit payments compared to expectations, and the use of derivatives intended to effect asset allocation changes or hedge certain investment or liability exposures. For the 34 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) recognition of net periodic benefit cost, the calculation of the expected long-term return on plan assets uses the fair value of plan assets as of the beginning of the fiscal year unless updated as a result of interim re-measurement. Our major assumptions vary by plan, and the weighted-average rates used are set forth in Note 4, Retirement and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. The following table provides the impact a change of 25 basis points in each of the weighted-average assumptions of the discount rate, expected increase in compensation levels and expected long-term return on plan assets would have had on our net periodic benefit cost for fiscal year 2018 : Change in Net Periodic Benefit Cost in millions Assumptions: Discount rate $ 8 Expected increase in compensation levels $ 2 Expected long-term return on plan assets $ 30 Taxes on Earnings The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( the TCJA ) made significant changes to the U.S. tax law. The TCJA lowered our U.S. statutory federal income tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018, while also imposing a one-time transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded a provisional tax benefit of $760 million as a provisional estimate under the SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin ( SAB ) No. 118. In December 2017, the SEC staff issued SAB No. 118, which addresses how a company recognizes provisional estimates when a company does not have the necessary information available, prepared or analyzed (including computations) in reasonable detail to complete its accounting for the effect of the changes in the TCJA. The measurement period ends when a company has obtained, prepared, and analyzed the information necessary to finalize its accounting, but cannot extend beyond one year. The final impact of the TCJA may differ from the provisional estimates due to changes in interpretations of the TCJA, legislative action to address questions that arise because of the TCJA, changes in accounting standard for income taxes and related interpretations in response to the TCJA, and updates or changes to estimates used in the provisional amounts. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded a provisional tax benefit of $760 million related to the $5.6 billion net benefit for the decrease in our deferred tax liability on unremitted foreign earnings, partially offset by a $3.3 billion net expense for the deemed repatriation tax payable in installments over eight years, a $1.2 billion net expense for the remeasurement of our deferred tax assets and liabilities to the new U.S. statutory tax rate and a $317 million net expense related to realization on U.S. deferred taxes that are expected to be realized at a lower rate. Resolution of the provisional estimates of the TCJA effects that are different from the assumptions made by us could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results. Prior to the enactment of the TCJA, our effective tax rate included the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. federal taxes because we had planned to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the United States. We plan distributions of foreign earnings based on projected cash flow needs as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we expect to indefinitely invest outside the United States and the amounts we expect to distribute to the United States and provide the U.S. federal taxes due on amounts expected to be distributed to the United States. Further, as a result of certain employment actions and capital investments we have undertaken, income from manufacturing activities in certain jurisdictions is subject to reduced tax rates and, in some cases, is wholly exempt from taxes for fiscal years through 2027. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact how future earnings are repatriated to the United States, and our related future effective tax rate. The effects of the TCJA related to these policies are referenced and discussed in detail in Note 6, Taxes on Earnings to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. We calculate our current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the final positions reflected in our income tax returns. We adjust our current and deferred tax provisions based on income tax returns which are generally filed in the third or fourth quarters of the subsequent fiscal year. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. 35 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that we are more likely than not to realize. In determining the need for a valuation allowance, we consider future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we were to determine that it is more likely than not that we will be unable to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and recognize a corresponding charge to earnings or other comprehensive income in the period in which we make such a determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously recognized valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets, we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and approximately 60 other countries, and we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that positions taken on our tax returns are fully supported, but tax authorities may challenge these positions, which may not be fully sustained on examination by the relevant tax authorities. Accordingly, our income tax provision includes amounts intended to satisfy assessments that may result from these challenges. Determining the income tax provision for these potential assessments and recording the related effects requires management judgments and estimates. The amounts ultimately paid on resolution of an audit could be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax provision and, therefore, could have a material impact on our income tax provision, net income and cash flows. Our accrual for uncertain tax positions is attributable primarily to uncertainties concerning the tax treatment of our international operations, including the allocation of income among different jurisdictions, intercompany transactions, pension and related interest. For a further discussion on taxes on earnings, refer to Note 6, Taxes on Earnings to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Inventory We state our inventory at the lower of cost or market on a first-in, first-out basis. We make adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value at the product group level for estimated excess or obsolescence. Factors influencing these adjustments include changes in demand, technological changes, product life cycle and development plans, component cost trends, product pricing, physical deterioration and quality issues. Business Combinations We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests in the acquiree generally based on their fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair value of these assets acquired, liabilities assumed and non-controlling interests in the acquiree is recorded as goodwill and may involve engaging independent third-parties to perform an appraisal. When determining the fair values of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests in the acquiree, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, expected future cash flows, which includes consideration of future growth rates and margins, attrition rates, future changes in technology and brand awareness, loyalty and position, and discount rates. Fair value estimates are based on the assumptions management believes a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability. Amounts recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions existing at the acquisition date becomes available. Goodwill We review goodwill for impairment annually during our fourth quarter and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. We can elect to perform a qualitative assessment to test a reporting unit goodwill for impairment or perform a quantitative impairment test. Based on a qualitative assessment, if we determine that the fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50 percent) to be less than its carrying amount, the quantitative impairment test will be performed. In the quantitative impairment test, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying amount with the fair values derived most significantly from the income approach, and to a lesser extent, the market approach. Under the income approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. We base cash flow projections on management estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins, taking into consideration industry and market conditions. We base the discount rate on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit ability to execute on the projected cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate fair value based on market multiples of revenue and earnings derived from comparable publicly-traded companies with similar operating and investment characteristics as the reporting unit. We weight the fair value derived from the market approach depending on the level of comparability of these publicly-traded 36 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) companies to the reporting unit. When market comparables are not meaningful or not available, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using only the income approach. If the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds the carrying amount of the net assets assigned to that reporting unit, goodwill is not impaired. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, goodwill is impaired and the excess of the reporting unit carrying value over the fair value is recognized as an impairment loss. Our annual goodwill impairment analysis, performed using the qualitative assessment option as of the first day of the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2018 , resulted in a conclusion that it was more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units exceeded their respective carrying values. As a result, we concluded that a quantitative impairment test was not necessary. Fair Value of Derivative Instruments We use derivative instruments to manage a variety of risks, including risks related to foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates. We use forwards, swaps and at times, options to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures. We do not use derivative instruments for speculative purposes. As of October 31, 2018 , the gross notional value of our derivative portfolio was $24 billion . Assets and liabilities related to derivative instruments are measured at fair value and were $515 million and $195 million , respectively, as of October 31, 2018 . Fair value is the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the absence of active markets for the identical assets or liabilities, such measurements involve developing assumptions based on market observable data and, in the absence of such data, internal information that is consistent with what market participants would use in a hypothetical transaction that occurs at the measurement date. The determination of fair value often involves significant judgments about assumptions such as determining an appropriate discount rate that factors in both risk and liquidity premiums, identifying the similarities and differences in market transactions, weighting those differences accordingly and then making the appropriate adjustments to those market transactions to reflect the risks specific to the asset or liability being valued. We generally use industry standard valuation models to measure the fair value of our derivative positions. When prices in active markets are not available for the identical asset or liability, we use industry standard valuation models to measure fair value. Where applicable, these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to present value using market-based observable inputs, including interest rate curves, HP and counterparty credit risk, foreign currency exchange rates, and forward and spot prices. For a further discussion on fair value measurements and derivative instruments, refer to Note 9, Fair Value and Note 10, Financial Instruments , respectively, to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Loss Contingencies We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations and proceedings including those consisting of intellectual property ( IP ), commercial, securities, employment, employee benefits and environmental matters that arise in the ordinary course of business. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both the probability of having incurred a liability and the estimated amount of the liability. We review these matters at least quarterly and adjust these liabilities to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel and other updated information and events, pertaining to a particular case. Pursuant to the separation and distribution agreement, we share responsibility with Hewlett Packard Enterprise for certain matters, as discussed in Note 14, Litigation and Contingencies to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, and Hewlett Packard Enterprise has agreed to indemnify us in whole or in part with respect to certain matters. Based on our experience, we believe that any damage amounts claimed in the specific litigation and contingencies matters further discussed in Note 14, Litigation and Contingencies , are not a meaningful indicator of HP potential liability. Litigation is inherently unpredictable. However, we believe we have valid defenses with respect to legal matters pending against us. Nevertheless, cash flows or results of operations could be materially affected in any particular period by the resolution of one or more of these contingencies. We believe we have recorded adequate provisions for any such matters and, as of October 31, 2018 , it was not reasonably possible that a material loss had been incurred in excess of the amounts recognized in our financial statements. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements see Note 1, Overview and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. 37 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Revenue from our international operations has historically represented, and we expect will continue to represent, a majority of our overall net revenue. As a result, our net revenue growth has been impacted, and we expect it will continue to be impacted, by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. In order to provide a framework for assessing performance excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, we supplement the year-over-year percentage change in net revenue with the year-over-year percentage change in net revenue on a constant currency basis, which excludes the effect of foreign currency exchange fluctuations calculated by translating current period revenues using monthly average exchange rates from the comparative period and hedging activities from the prior-year period and does not adjust for any repricing or demand impacts from changes in foreign currency exchange rates. This information is provided so that net revenue can be viewed with and without the effect of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, which is consistent with how management evaluates our net revenue results and trends, as management does not believe that the excluded items are reflective of ongoing operating results. The constant currency measures are provided in addition to, and not as a substitute for, the year-over-year percentage change in net revenue on a GAAP basis. Other companies may calculate and define similarly labeled items differently, which may limit the usefulness of this measure for comparative purposes. Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2018 2017 2016 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 58,472 100.0 % $ 52,056 100.0 % $ 48,238 100.0 % Cost of revenue 47,803 81.8 % 42,478 81.6 % 39,240 81.3 % Gross profit 10,669 18.2 % 9,578 18.4 % 8,998 18.7 % Research and development 1,404 2.4 % 1,190 2.3 % 1,209 2.5 % Selling, general and administrative 4,859 8.3 % 4,376 8.4 % 3,833 8.0 % Restructuring and other charges 132 0.2 % 362 0.7 % 205 0.4 % Acquisition-related charges 123 0.2 % 125 0.2 % 7 0.0% Amortization of intangible assets 80 0.1 % 1 0.0% 16 0.0% Defined benefit plan settlement charges 7 0.0% 5 0.0% 179 0.4 % Earnings from continuing operations 4,064 7.0 % 3,519 6.8 % 3,549 7.4 % Interest and other, net (1,051 ) (1.8 )% (243 ) (0.5 )% 212 0.4 % Earnings from continuing operations before taxes 3,013 5.2 % 3,276 6.3 % 3,761 7.8 % Benefit from (provision for) taxes 2,314 3.9 % (750 ) (1.4 )% (1,095 ) (2.3 )% Net earnings from continuing operations 5,327 9.1 % 2,526 4.9 % 2,666 5.5 % Net loss from discontinued operations, net of taxes (170 ) Net earnings $ 5,327 $ 2,526 $ 2,496 Net Revenue In fiscal year 2018, total net revenue increased 12.3% (increased 10.1% on a constant currency basis) as compared with fiscal year 2017. Net revenue from the United States increased 6.6% to $20.6 billion and net revenue from outside of the United States increased 15.7% to $37.9 billion. The increase in net revenue was primarily driven by growth in Notebooks, Desktops, Supplies, Commercial Printing Hardware revenue and favorable foreign currency impacts. In fiscal year 2017, total net revenue increased 7.9% (increased 8.7% on a constant currency basis) as compared with fiscal year 2016. Net revenue from the United States increased 7.1% to $19.3 billion and net revenue from outside of the United States increased 8.4% to $32.8 billion. The increase in net revenue was primarily driven by growth in Notebooks, Desktops and Supplies revenue, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency impacts. A detailed discussion of the factors contributing to the changes in segment net revenue is included under Segment Information below. Gross Margin 38 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Our gross margin was 18.2% for fiscal year 2018 compared with 18.4% for fiscal year 2017. The decrease was primarily due to higher Commercial Hardware unit placements in Printing and an increase in commodity and logistics costs in Personal Systems, partially offset by higher pricing in Personal Systems and favorable foreign currency impacts. Our gross margin was 18.4% for fiscal year 2017 compared with 18.7% for fiscal year 2016. The primary factors impacting the gross margin decrease were lower Personal System gross margin driven by higher commodity costs, unfavorable foreign currency impacts and a higher mix of Personal Systems revenue, partially offset by productivity improvements in Printing. A detailed discussion of the factors contributing to the changes in segment gross margins is included under Segment Information below. Operating Expenses Research and Development ( R&D ) R&D expense increased 18% in fiscal year 2018 compared to fiscal year 2017, primarily due to continuing investment in Printing, including the acquisition of Samsung printer business. R&D expense decreased 2% in fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016, primarily due to lower spend as a result of the launch of A3 products in fiscal year 2016, partially offset by continuing investment in Printing. Selling, General and Administrative ( SG&A ) SG&A expense increased 11% in fiscal year 2018 as compared to fiscal year 2017, primarily driven by incremental go-to-market investments to support revenue growth, including the acquisition of Samsung printer business. SG&A expense increased 14% in fiscal year 2017 as compared to fiscal year 2016, primarily due to a gain from the divestiture of marketing optimization assets in fiscal year 2016 and an increase in field selling costs. Restructuring and other Charges Restructuring and other charges decreased by $230 million in fiscal year 2018 compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to lower charges from our restructuring plan announced in October 2016 (the Fiscal 2017 Plan ) and amended in May 2018. Restructuring and other charges increased by $157 million in fiscal year 2017 compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to the Fiscal 2017 Plan and certain non-recurring costs, including those as a result of the Separation. Acquisition-related Charges Acquisition-related charges for the fiscal years 2018, 2017 and 2016 relate primarily to third-party professional and legal fees, and integration-related costs, as well as fair value adjustments of certain acquired assets such as inventory. Amortization of Intangible Assets Amortization expense increased by $79 million in fiscal year 2018 compared to the prior-year period, due to intangible assets resulting primarily from the acquisition of Samsung printer business. Amortization expense decreased by $15 million in fiscal year 2017 compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to assets from prior acquisitions reaching the end of their respective amortization periods. Interest and Other, Net Interest and other, net expense increased by $808 million in fiscal year 2018 compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to the reversal of indemnification receivables from Hewlett Packard Enterprise pertaining to various income tax audit settlements, and loss on extinguishment of debt. Interest and other, net expense increased by $455 million in fiscal year 2017 compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to lower tax indemnification income in fiscal year 2017 from Hewlett Packard Enterprise for certain tax liabilities that HP is jointly and severally liable for, but for which it is indemnified by Hewlett Packard Enterprise under the tax matters agreement. Benefit from (Provision for) Taxes As a result of U.S. tax reform, a blended U.S. federal statutory rate of 23% was computed for the fiscal year ending October 31, 2018. Our effective tax rates were (76.8%), 22.9% and 29.1% in fiscal years 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively. In fiscal year 2018, our effective tax rate generally differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 23.3% primarily due to transitional impacts of U.S. tax reform and resolution of various audits and tax litigation. In fiscal years 2017 and 2016, our effective tax rate generally differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% due to favorable tax rates associated with certain earnings from our operations in lower-tax jurisdictions throughout the world. The jurisdictions with favorable tax rates that had the most significant impact on our effective tax rate in the periods presented were Puerto Rico, Singapore, China, Malaysia and 39 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Ireland. The gross income tax benefits related to these favorable tax rates are in addition to transitional impacts of U.S. tax reform and resolution of various audits and tax litigation. Additionally, the overall effective tax rate in fiscal year 2017 was impacted by adjustments to valuation allowances and state income taxes, and the overall effective tax rate in fiscal year 2016 was impacted by adjustments to valuation allowances and uncertain tax positions. For a reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 23.3% in fiscal year 2018 and 35% in fiscal years 2017 and 2016 and further explanation of our provision for taxes, see Note 6, Taxes on Earnings to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. In fiscal year 2018, we recorded $2.8 billion of net income tax benefit related to discrete items in the provision for taxes which include impacts of the TCJA. As discussed in the Note 6 Taxes on Earnings to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this report, we have not yet completed our analysis of the full impact of the TCJA. However, as of October 31, 2018, we recorded a provisional tax benefit of $760 million related to $5.6 billion net benefit for the decrease in our deferred tax liability on unremitted foreign earnings, partially offset by $3.3 billion net expense for the deemed repatriation tax payable in installments over eight years, a $1.2 billion net expense for the remeasurement of our deferred assets and liabilities to the new U.S. statutory tax rate and a $317 million net expense related to realization on U.S. deferred taxes that are expected to be realized at a lower rate. Fiscal year 2018 also included tax benefits related to audit settlements of $1.5 billion and valuation allowance releases of $601 million pertaining to a change in our ability to utilize certain foreign and U.S. deferred tax assets due to a change in our geographic earnings mix. These benefits were partially offset by other net tax charges of $34 million. In fiscal year 2018, in addition to the discrete items mentioned above, we recorded excess tax benefits of $42 million on stock options, restricted stock units and performance-adjusted restricted stock units. In fiscal year 2017, we recorded $72 million of net income tax benefit related to discrete items in the provision for taxes. These amounts primarily include tax benefits of $84 million related to restructuring and other charges, $12 million related to U.S. federal provision to return adjustments, $45 million related to Samsung acquisition-related charges, and $13 million of other net tax benefits. In addition, we recorded tax charges of $11 million related to changes in state valuation allowances, $22 million of state provision to return adjustments, and $49 million related to uncertain tax positions. In fiscal year 2016, we recorded $301 million of net income tax charges related to discrete items in the provision for taxes for continuing operations. These amounts primarily include uncertain tax position charges of $525 million related to pre-Separation tax matters. In addition, we recorded $62 million of net tax benefits on restructuring charges, $52 million of net tax benefits related to the release of foreign valuation allowances and $41 million of net tax benefits arising from the retroactive research and development credit provided by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016 signed into law in December 2015 and $70 million of other tax benefit. Segment Information A description of the products and services for each segment can be found in Note 2, Segment Information, to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Future changes to this organizational structure may result in changes to the segments disclosed. Realignment Effective at the beginning of its first quarter of fiscal year 2018, HP implemented an organizational change to align its segment and business unit financial reporting more closely with its current business structure. The organizational change resulted in the transfer of long-life consumables from Commercial to Supplies within the Printing segment. Certain revenues related to service arrangements, which are being eliminated for the purposes of reporting HP consolidated net revenue, have now been reclassified from Other to segments. HP has reflected this change to its segment and business unit information in prior reporting periods on an as-if basis. The reporting change had no impact on previously reported consolidated net revenue, earnings from operations, net earnings or net EPS. Personal Systems For the fiscal years ended October 31 2018 2017 2016 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 37,661 $ 33,321 $ 29,946 Earnings from operations $ 1,411 $ 1,210 $ 1,150 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 3.7 % 3.6 % 3.8 % 40 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of net revenue and the weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 Net Revenue Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points 2018 2017 In millions Notebooks $ 22,547 $ 19,782 8.3 Desktops 11,567 10,298 3.8 Workstations 2,246 2,042 0.6 Other 1,301 1,199 0.3 Total Personal Systems $ 37,661 $ 33,321 13.0 For the fiscal years ended October 31 Net Revenue Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points 2017 2016 In millions Notebooks $ 19,782 $ 16,982 9.4 Desktops 10,298 9,956 1.1 Workstations 2,042 1,870 0.6 Other 1,199 1,138 0.2 Total Personal Systems $ 33,321 $ 29,946 11.3 Fiscal Year 2018 compared with Fiscal Year 2017 Personal Systems net revenue increased 13.0% (increased 10.5% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal year 2018 as compared to the prior-year period. The net revenue increase was primarily due to growth in Notebooks and Desktops and favorable foreign currency impacts. The net revenue increase was driven by a 6.6% and 6.0% increase in unit volume and average selling prices ( ASPs ), respectively, as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in unit volume was primarily due to growth in Notebooks and Desktops. The increase in ASPs was primarily due to higher pricing driven by increased commodity and logistics costs, favorable foreign currency impacts and positive mix shifts. Consumer and Commercial revenue increased 11% and 14%, respectively, in fiscal year 2018 as compared to the prior-year period, driven by growth in Notebooks, Desktops and Workstations as a result of higher unit volume combined with higher ASPs. Net revenue increased 14% in Notebooks, 12% in Desktops and 10% in Workstations in fiscal year 2018. Personal Systems earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.1 percentage points in fiscal year 2018. The increase was primarily due to higher ASPs, partially offset by an increase in commodity and logistics costs. Fiscal Year 2017 compared with Fiscal Year 2016 Personal Systems net revenue increased 11.3% (increased 12.2% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal year 2017. The net revenue increase was primarily due to growth in Notebooks, Desktops and Workstations partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency impacts. The net revenue increase was driven by a 6.7% and 4.3% increase in unit volume and ASPs, respectively, as compared to fiscal year 2016. The increase in unit volume was primarily due to growth in Notebooks and Workstations. The increase in ASPs was primarily due to favorable pricing partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency impacts. Consumer revenue increased 16% in fiscal year 2017, driven by growth in Notebooks and Desktops as a result of higher unit volume combined with higher ASPs. Commercial revenue increased 9% in fiscal year 2017, driven by growth in Notebooks and Workstations. Net revenue increased 16% in Notebooks, 9% in Workstations and 3% in Desktops in fiscal year 2017. Personal Systems earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.2 percentage points in fiscal year 2017. The decrease was primarily due to a decline in gross margin partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to an increase in commodity cost and unfavorable foreign currency impacts 41 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) partially offset by higher ASPs. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased primarily due to operating expense management. Printing For the fiscal years ended October 31 2018 2017 2016 Dollars in millions Net revenue $ 20,805 $ 18,728 $ 18,123 Earnings from operations $ 3,323 $ 3,146 $ 3,114 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 16.0 % 16.8 % 17.2 % The components of the net revenue and weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 Net Revenue Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points 2018 2017 In millions Supplies $ 13,575 $ 12,524 5.6 Commercial Hardware 4,674 3,792 4.7 Consumer Hardware 2,556 2,412 0.8 Total Printing $ 20,805 $ 18,728 11.1 For the fiscal years ended October 31 Net Revenue Weighted Net Revenue Change Percentage Points 2017 2016 In millions Supplies $ 12,524 $ 11,981 3.0 Commercial Hardware 3,792 3,792 Consumer Hardware 2,412 2,350 0.3 Total Printing $ 18,728 $ 18,123 3.3 Fiscal Year 2018 compared with Fiscal Year 2017 Printing net revenue increased 11.1% (increased 9.5% on a constant currency basis) for fiscal year 2018. The increase in net revenue was primarily driven by the increase in Supplies and Hardware revenue and favorable foreign currency impacts. Net revenue for Supplies increased 8.4% as compared to the prior-year period, including the acquisition of Samsung printer business. Printer unit volume increased 12.7% while ASPs increased 1.6% as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in Printer unit volume was primarily driven by unit increases in Commercial and Consumer Hardware, including the Samsung-branded printers. Printer ASPs increased primarily due to favorable foreign currency impacts, partially offset by the dilution impact from Samsung-branded low-end A4 products. Net revenue for Commercial Hardware increased 23.3% as compared to the prior-year period, including revenue from Samsung branded printers, LaserJet and PageWide printers. The unit volume increased by 84.5% while the ASPs decreased by 34.2%. The unit volume increased primarily due to Samsung-branded printers. The decrease in ASPs was primarily due to the dilution impact from Samsung-branded low-end A4 products. Net revenue for Consumer Hardware increased 6.0% as compared to the prior-year period due to a 3.8% increase in printer unit volume and a 2.4% increase in ASPs. The unit volume increase was driven by InkJet and LaserJet Home business. The increase in ASPs was primarily due to favorable foreign currency impacts. Printing earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.8 percentage points for the fiscal year 2018 as compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to an increase in operating expenses and lower gross margin. The 42 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) gross margin decreased primarily due to lower Supplies mix and the dilution impact of Samsung-branded low-end products, partially offset by favorable foreign currency impacts and operational improvements. Operating expenses increased primarily driven by the acquisition of Samsung printer business and increases in investments in key growth initiatives and go-to-market. Fiscal Year 2017 compared with Fiscal Year 2016 Printing net revenue increased 3.3% (increased 3.9% on a constant currency basis) for fiscal year 2017. The increase in net revenue was primarily driven by the increase in Supplies revenue. Net revenue for Supplies increased 4.5% as compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to the change in the Supplies sales model in the prior-year period and better discount management, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency impacts. Printer unit volume increased 3.4% while ASPs decreased 0.9% as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in Printer unit volume was primarily driven by unit increases in Consumer Hardware and larger opportunity to place incremental units with positive net present value. Printer ASPs decreased primarily due to unfavorable foreign currency impacts. Net revenue for Commercial Hardware is flat as compared to the prior-year period, driven by a decline in other printing solutions largely due to the divestiture of marketing optimization assets in the prior-year period, offset by revenue from Managed Print Services and 3D Printing in fiscal year 2017. ASPs decreased by 0.1% while unit volume increased by 2.0%. The unit volume increased primarily due to a larger opportunity to place incremental units with positive net present value. The decrease in ASPs was primarily due to unfavorable foreign currency impacts, partially offset by a mix shift to higher-end printers. Net revenue for Consumer Hardware increased 2.6% as compared to the prior-year period due to a 3.5% increase in printer unit volume, partially offset by a 0.4% decrease in ASPs. The unit volume increase was driven by the Home business. The decrease in ASPs was primarily due to unfavorable foreign currency impacts, partially offset by better discount management. Printing earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.4 percentage points for the fiscal year 2017 as compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to an increase in operating expenses, partially offset by an improved gross margin. The gross margin increased due to operational improvements, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency impacts. Operating expenses increased primarily due to a gain from the divestiture of marketing optimization assets in the prior-year period and an increase in marketing investments. Corporate Investments The loss from operations in Corporate Investments for the fiscal years 2018, 2017 and 2016 was primarily due to expenses associated with HP Labs and our incubation projects. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES We use cash generated by operations as our primary source of liquidity. We believe that internally generated cash flows are generally sufficient to support our operating businesses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, restructuring activities, maturing debt, income tax payments and the payment of stockholder dividends, in addition to investments and share repurchases. We are able to supplement this short-term liquidity, if necessary, with broad access to capital markets and credit facilities made available by various domestic and foreign financial institutions. While our access to capital markets may be constrained and our cost of borrowing may increase under certain business, market and economic conditions, our access to a variety of funding sources to meet our liquidity needs is designed to facilitate continued access to capital resources under all such conditions. Our liquidity is subject to various risks including the risks identified in the section entitled Risk Factors in Item 1A and market risks identified in the section entitled Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk in Item 7A, which are incorporated herein by reference. Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, with the majority of those amounts held outside of the United States. We utilize a variety of planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available when and where it is needed. Our cash position remains strong, and we expect that our cash balances, anticipated cash flow generated from operations and access to capital markets will be sufficient to cover our expected near-term cash outlays. On November 1, 2018, we made a cash payment of $422 million in connection with the acquisition of the Apogee group, a U.K. based office equipment dealer ( OED ) and provider of print, outsourced services, and document and process technology. The cash payment is subject to customary closing and other adjustments and would be finalized in future periods. Amounts held outside of the United States are generally utilized to support non-U.S. liquidity needs, and may from time to time be distributed to the United States. The TCJA made significant changes to the U.S. tax law, including a one-time transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings. The payments associated with this one-time transition tax will be paid over eight years beginning 2019. We expect a significant portion of the cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries will no longer be subject to U.S. income tax consequences upon a subsequent repatriation to the United States as a result of the 43 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings. However, a portion of this cash may still be subject to foreign income tax or withholding tax consequences upon repatriation. As we evaluate the impact of the TCJA and the future cash needs of our operations, we may revise the amount of foreign earnings considered to be permanently reinvested in our foreign subsidiaries and how to utilize such funds, including reducing our gross debt level, or other uses. Liquidity Our cash and cash equivalents, marketable debt securities and total debt were as follows: As of October 31 2018 2017 2016 In billions Cash and cash equivalents $ 5.2 $ 7.0 $ 6.3 Marketable debt securities (1) $ 0.7 $ 1.1 $ Total debt $ 6.0 $ 7.8 $ 6.8 (1) Includes highly liquid U.S. treasury notes, U.S. agency securities, non-U.S. government bonds, corporate debt securities, money market and other funds. We classify these investments within Other current assets in Consolidated Balance Sheets, including those with maturity dates beyond one year, based on their highly liquid nature and availability for use in current operations. Our key cash flow metrics were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2018 2017 2016 In millions Net cash provided by operating activities $ 4,528 $ 3,677 $ 3,252 Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities (716 ) (1,717 ) 48 Net cash used in financing activities (5,643 ) (1,251 ) (14,445 ) Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents $ (1,831 ) $ 709 $ (11,145 ) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $0.9 billion for fiscal year 2018 as compared to fiscal year 2017. The increase was primarily due to higher earnings from operations and cash generated from working capital management activities. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $0.4 billion for fiscal year 2017 as compared to fiscal year 2016. The increase was primarily due to higher cash generated from working capital management activities. Working Capital Metrics Management utilizes current cash conversion cycle information to manage our working capital level. The table below presents the cash conversion cycle: As of October 31 2018 2017 2016 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable ( DSO ) 30 29 30 Days of supply in inventory ( DOS ) 43 46 39 Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable ( DPO ) (105 ) (105 ) (98 ) Cash conversion cycle (32 ) (30 ) (29 ) The cash conversion cycle is the sum of days of DSO and DOS less DPO. Items which may cause the cash conversion cycle in a particular period to differ from a long-term sustainable rate include, but are not limited to, changes in business mix, changes in payment terms, extent of receivables factoring, seasonal trends and the timing of revenue recognition and inventory purchases within the period. DSO measures the average number of days our receivables are outstanding. DSO is calculated by dividing ending accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, by a 90-day average of net revenue. For fiscal year 2018, the 44 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) increase in DSO compared to fiscal year 2017 was primarily due to unfavorable revenue linearity. For fiscal year 2017, the decrease in DSO compared to fiscal year 2016 was primarily due to strong collections. DOS measures the average number of days from procurement to sale of our product. DOS is calculated by dividing ending inventory by a 90-day average of cost of goods sold. For fiscal year 2018, the DOS was lower primarily due to a focus on inventory management. For fiscal year 2017, the DOS was higher primarily due to leveraging our balance sheet, particularly through higher strategic buys and sea shipments to better assure supply of commodities in short supply. DPO measures the average number of days our accounts payable balances are outstanding. DPO is calculated by dividing ending accounts payable by a 90-day average of cost of goods sold. For fiscal year 2018, the DPO remained flat compared to fiscal year 2017. For fiscal year 2017, the DPO was higher primarily due to increased inventory purchases and an extension of payment terms with our product suppliers. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $1.0 billion for fiscal year 2018 as compared to fiscal year 2017, primarily due to a decrease in investments classified as available-for-sale investments within Other current assets by $1.6 billion and collateral related to our derivatives of $0.4 billion , partially offset by the payment of $1.0 billion for the acquisition of Samsung printer business. Net cash used in investing activities increased by $1.8 billion for fiscal year 2017 as compared to fiscal year 2016, primarily due to net investment activity of $1.1 billion , classified as available-for-sale investments within Other current assets, collateral of $0.2 billion related to our derivatives and proceeds from a business divestiture of $0.5 billion in fiscal year 2016. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities increased by $4.4 billion in fiscal year 2018 compared to fiscal year 2017, primarily due to the payment to repurchase approximately $1.85 billion of debt, higher share repurchase amount of $1.1 billion and higher outstanding commercial paper of $0.9 billion in fiscal year 2017. Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $13.2 billion in fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016, as the net cash used in financing activities for the fiscal year 2016 included the cash transfer of $10.4 billion to Hewlett Packard Enterprise in connection with the Separation and the redemption of $2.1 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes, and fiscal year 2017 included a higher outstanding commercial paper of $0.9 billion . Capital Resources Debt Levels As of October 31 2018 2017 2016 Dollars in millions Short-term debt $ 1,463 $ 1,072 $ 78 Long-term debt $ 4,524 $ 6,747 $ 6,735 Debt-to-equity ratio (9.36)x (2.29)x (1.75)x Weighted-average interest rate 4.3 % 4.0 % 4.2 % We maintain debt levels that we establish through consideration of a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for operations, investment plans (including acquisitions), share repurchase activities, our cost of capital and targeted capital structure. Short-term debt increased by $0.4 billion and long-term debt decreased by $2.2 billion for fiscal year 2018 as compared to fiscal year 2017. The net decrease in total debt was primarily due to the payment to repurchase approximately $1.85 billion in aggregate principal amount of U.S. Dollar Global Notes. Short-term debt increased by $1.0 billion for fiscal year 2017 as compared to fiscal year 2016. The net increase in total debt was primarily due to a higher outstanding of commercial paper of $0.9 billion . Our debt-to-equity ratio is calculated as the carrying amount of debt divided by total stockholders deficit. Our debt-to-equity ratio changed by 7.07x in fiscal year 2018 compared to fiscal year 2017, primarily due to a decrease in stockholders deficit balance of $2.8 billion . Our debt-to-equity ratio changed by 0.54x in fiscal year 2017 compared to fiscal year 2016, due to an increase in total debt balances of $1.0 billion . 45 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Our weighted-average interest rate reflects the effective interest rate on our borrowings prevailing during the period and reflects the effect of interest rate swaps. For more information on our interest rate swaps, see Note 10, Financial Instruments in the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data . Available Borrowing Resources We had the following resources available to obtain short or long-term financing: As of October 31, 2018 In millions 2016 Shelf Registration Statement Unspecified Uncommitted lines of credit $ 667 As of October 31, 2018, we maintain a senior unsecured committed revolving credit facility with aggregate lending commitments of $4.0 billion, which will be available until March 30, 2023 and is primarily to support the issuance of commercial paper. Funds borrowed under this revolving credit facility may also be used for general corporate purposes. As of October 31, 2018, we had $0.9 billion of commercial paper outstanding. We increased our issuance authorization under our commercial paper program from $4.0 billion to $6.0 billion in November 2017. In December 2017, we also entered into an additional revolving credit facility with certain institutional lenders that provided us with $1.5 billion of available borrowings until November 30, 2018. We elected to terminate this $1.5 billion revolving credit facility early, effective August 17, 2018. For more information on our borrowings, see Note 11, Borrowings , to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Credit Ratings Our credit risk is evaluated by major independent rating agencies based on publicly available information as well as information obtained in our ongoing discussions with them. While we do not have any rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity of a material amount of our debt, previous downgrades have increased the cost of borrowing under our credit facilities, have reduced market capacity for our commercial paper and have required the posting of additional collateral under some of our derivative contracts. In addition, any further downgrade to our credit ratings by any rating agencies may further impact us in a similar manner, and, depending on the extent of any such downgrade, could have a negative impact on our liquidity and capital position. We can access alternative sources of funding, including drawdowns under our credit facilities, if necessary, to offset potential reductions in the market capacity for our commercial paper. 46 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) CONTRACTUAL AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS Our contractual and other obligations as of October 31, 2018 , were as follows: Payments Due by Period Total 1 Year or Less 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years In millions Principal payments on debt (1) $ 5,573 $ 1,308 $ 1,860 $ 1,205 $ 1,200 Interest payments on debt (2) 2,034 208 372 166 1,288 Purchase obligations (3) 704 434 244 26 Operating lease obligations (4) 1,358 294 423 279 362 Capital lease obligations (5) 520 173 272 69 6 Total (6)(7)(8)(9) $ 10,189 $ 2,417 $ 3,171 $ 1,745 $ 2,856 (1) Amounts represent the principal cash payments relating to our short-term and long-term debt and do not include any fair value adjustments, discounts or premiums. (2) Amounts represent the expected interest payments relating to our short-term and long-term debt. We have outstanding interest rate swap agreements accounted for as fair value hedges that have the economic effect of changing fixed interest rates associated with some of our U.S. Dollar Global Notes to variable interest rates. The impact of our outstanding interest rate swaps at October 31, 2018 was factored into the calculation of the future interest payments on debt. (3) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. These purchase obligations are related principally to inventory and other items. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancelable without penalty. Purchase obligations also exclude open purchase orders that are routine arrangements entered into in the ordinary course of business as they are difficult to quantify in a meaningful way. Even though open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust terms based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. (4) Amounts represent the operating lease obligations, net of total sublease income of $129 million . (5) Amounts represent the capital lease obligations, including total capital lease interest obligations of $58 million . (6) Retirement and Post-Retirement Benefit Plan Contributions. In fiscal year 2019 , we anticipate making contributions of approximately $46 million to non-U.S. pension plans, $32 million to cover benefit payments to U.S. non-qualified pension plan participants and $6 million to cover benefit claims for our post-retirement benefit plans. Our policy is to fund our pension plans so that we meet at least the minimum contribution requirements, as established by local government, funding and taxing authorities. Expected contributions and payments to our pension and post-retirement benefit plans are excluded from the contractual obligations table because they do not represent contractual cash outflows as they are dependent on numerous factors which may result in a wide range of outcomes. For more information on our retirement and post-retirement benefit plans, see Note 4, Retirement and Post-Retirement Benefit Plans , to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. (7) Cost Savings Plans. We expect to make future cash payments of approximately $286 million in connection with our cost savings plans through fiscal year 2019. These payments have been excluded from the contractual obligations table because they do not represent contractual cash outflows and there is uncertainty as to the timing of these payments. For more information on our restructuring activities that are part of our cost improvements, see Note 3, Restructuring and Other Charges , to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. (8) Uncertain Tax Positions. As of October 31, 2018 , we had approximately $1.3 billion of recorded liabilities and related interest and penalties pertaining to uncertain tax positions. We are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when cash settlement with the tax authorities might occur due to the uncertainties related to these tax matters. Payments of these obligations would result from settlements with taxing authorities. For more information on our uncertain tax positions, see Note 6, Taxes on Earnings , to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. (9) Payment of one-time transition taxes under the TCJA. The TCJA made significant changes to U.S. tax law resulting in a one-time deemed repatriation transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings of approximately $3.3 billion. We expect the 47 HP INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) actual cash payments for the tax to be much lower as we expect to reduce the overall liability by more than half once tax credits and other balance sheet tax attributes are used. OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS As part of our ongoing business, we have not participated in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. We have third-party short-term financing arrangements intended to facilitate the working capital requirements of certain customers. For more information on our third-party short-term financing arrangements, see Note 7 Supplementary Financial Information to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. 48 
