CIK: 47217
Company Name: HEWLETT PACKARD CO
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-12-15


ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. OVERVIEW We are a leading global provider of products, technologies, software, solutions and services to individual consumers, small- and medium-sized businesses, and large enterprises, including customers in the government, health and education sectors. Our offerings span: multi-vendor customer services, including infrastructure technology and business process outsourcing, technology support and maintenance, application development and support services, and consulting and integration services; enterprise information technology infrastructure, including enterprise storage and server technology, networking products and solutions, information management software and software that optimizes business technology investments; personal computing and other access devices; and imaging and printing-related products and services. We have seven business segments for financial reporting purposes: Services, Enterprise Storage and Servers ("ESS"), HP Software, the Personal Systems Group ("PSG"), the Imaging and Printing Group ("IPG"), HP Financial Services ("HPFS"), and Corporate Investments. Services, ESS and HP Software are reported collectively as a broader HP Enterprise Business. While the HP Enterprise Business is not an operating segment, we sometimes provide financial data aggregating the segments within it in order to provide a supplementary view of our business. Our strategy and operations are currently focused on the following initiatives: Competitive Positioning We are positioning our businesses to take advantage of important trends in the markets for our products and services. For example, we are aligning our printing business to capitalize on key market trends such as the shift from analog to digital printing and the growth in printable content by developing innovative products for consumers such as the first web-connected home printer, working to enable web and mobile printing, expanding our presence in high-usage annuity businesses including graphics and retail publishing printing, and growing our managed print services business. We are also positioning our enterprise business to capitalize on the trend towards converged infrastructure products that integrate storage, networking, servers and management software, while also delivering services for that converged infrastructure in a manner that best fits each client's needs, be it at a client site, as an outsourced service via the Internet or via a hybrid approach. In addition, we have developed IT management software offerings that seek to satisfy the increasing demand for virtualization management and increased automation. Driving Operational Efficiency We are working to optimize efficiency across the company. As part of those efforts, we are continuing to execute on our multi-year program to consolidate real estate locations worldwide to fewer 36 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) core sites in order to reduce our IT spending and real estate costs. We are also continuing to implement the restructuring plan announced in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 to optimize the cost structure of our Services business and the restructuring plan announced in May 2009 to structurally change and improve the effectiveness of several of our product businesses. In June 2010, we announced and started implementing a new restructuring plan that will consolidate data centers, systems and tools to better position for growth our enterprise services business, which includes our infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services, and business process outsourcing business units. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of these restructuring plans and the associated restructuring charges. Investing for Growth We are investing for growth by strengthening our position in our core markets and accelerating growth in adjacent markets in anticipation of market trends, such as data center consolidation and automation, cloud computing and virtualization, digitization, IT security, and mobility and connectivity. For example, we are increasing our sales coverage and investing in our sales channels to better address the markets we cover, including further expansion in emerging markets. We are creating innovative new products and developing new channels to connect with our customers. In addition, we have been making focused investments in innovation to strengthen our portfolio of products and services that we can offer to our customers, both through acquisitions and through organic growth. A critical component of this strategy was our acquisition of Electronic Data Systems Corporation ("EDS") in August 2008, which has increased the size and breadth of our services business and enabled us to provide comprehensive IT product and services solutions to our customers. In addition, with the completion of the acquisition of 3Com Corporation ("3Com") in April 2010, we are accelerating our investments in networking. In July 2010, we completed the acquisition of Palm, Inc. ("Palm"), which enhances our ability to participate more aggressively in the growing smartphone and connected mobile device markets. In September 2010, we completed the acquisition of 3PAR Inc. ("3PAR"), which expands our storage portfolio into enterprise-class public and private cloud computing environments. In October 2010, we completed the acquisition of ArcSight, Inc. ("ArcSight"), which enables us to offer customers an integrated security platform with a holistic approach to securing their networks, applications and sensitive data. These acquisitions have enabled us to expand in high-margin and high-growth industry segments and have further strengthened our portfolio of hardware, software and services. Leveraging our Portfolio and Scale We now offer one of the IT industry's broadest portfolios of products and services, and we leverage that portfolio to our strategic advantage. For example, in our enterprise business, we are able to provide servers, storage and networking products packaged with services that can be delivered to customers in the manner of their choosing, be it in-house, outsourced as a service via the Internet or via a hybrid environment. Our portfolio of management software completes the package by allowing our customers to manage their IT operations in an efficient and cost-effective manner. In addition, we are working to optimize our supply chain by eliminating complexity, reducing fixed costs, and leveraging our scale to ensure the availability of components at favorable prices even during shortages. We are also expanding our use of industry standard components in our enterprise products to further leverage our scale. 37 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The following provides an overview of our key fiscal 2010 financial metrics and demonstrates how our execution has translated into financial performance: HP Enterprise Business HP (1) Consolidated Services ESS HP Software Total PSG IPG HPFS In millions, except per share amounts Net revenue $ 126,033 $ 34,935 $ 18,651 $ 3,586 $ 57,172 $ 40,741 $ 25,764 $ 3,047 Year-over-year net revenue % increase 10.0 % 0.7 % 21.4 % 0.4 % 6.6 % 15.4 % 7.3 % 14.0 % Earnings from operations $ 11,479 $ 5,609 $ 2,402 $ 759 $ 8,770 $ 2,032 $ 4,412 $ 281 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 9.1 % 16.1 % 12.9 % 21.2 % 15.3 % 5.0 % 17.1 % 9.2 % Net earnings $ 8,761 Net earnings per share Basic $ 3.78 Diluted $ 3.69 (1) Includes Corporate Investments and eliminations. Cash and cash equivalents at October 31, 2010 totaled $10.9 billion, a decrease of $2.4 billion from the October 31, 2009 balance of $13.3 billion. The decrease for fiscal 2010 was due primarily to $11.0 billion of cash used to repurchase common stock, $8.1 billion of net cash paid for business acquisitions, and $3.5 billion net investment in property, plant and equipment, all of which were partially offset by $11.9 billion of cash provided from operations, $6.0 billion of increased net borrowings, and $2.6 billion of proceeds related to issuance of common stock under employee stock plans. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. The discussion of results of operations at the consolidated level is followed by a more detailed discussion of results of operations by segment. For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our operating results, see the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A, which is incorporated herein by reference. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES General The Consolidated Financial Statements of HP are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Senior management has discussed the 38 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of HP's Board of Directors. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The summary of significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Revenue Recognition We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and, while the majority of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain multiple elements or non-standard terms and conditions. As a result, significant contract interpretation is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple element arrangement should be treated as separate units of accounting for revenue recognition purposes, and, if so, how the price should be allocated among the elements and when to recognize revenue for each element. We recognize revenue for delivered elements only when the delivered elements have standalone value, uncertainties regarding customer acceptance are resolved and there are no customer-negotiated refund or return rights for the delivered elements. If the arrangement includes a customer-negotiated refund or return right relative to the delivered item and the delivery and performance of the undelivered item is considered probable and substantially in our control, the delivered element constitutes a separate unit of accounting. Changes in the allocation of the sales price between elements may impact the timing of revenue recognition but will not change the total revenue recognized on the contract. We recognize revenue as work progresses on certain fixed price contracts, such as consulting arrangements. Using a proportional performance method, we estimate the total expected labor costs in order to determine the amount of revenue earned to date. We follow this basis because reasonably dependable estimates of the labor costs applicable to various stages of a contract can be made. Total contract profit is subject to revisions throughout the life of the contract. We record changes in revenue to income, as a result of revisions to cost estimates, in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. We recognize revenue on certain design and build (design, development and/or constructions of software and/or systems) projects using the percentage-of-completion method. We use the cost-to-cost method of measurement towards completion as determined by the percentage of cost incurred to date to the total estimated costs of the project. In circumstances when reasonable and reliable cost estimates for a project cannot be made, we recognize revenue using the completed contract method. We record estimated reductions to revenue for customer and distributor programs and incentive offerings, including price protection, promotions, other volume-based incentives and expected returns. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered. Additionally, certain incentive programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience 39 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) and the specific terms and conditions of the incentive, the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. Under our current revenue recognition policies, which were applied in fiscal 2010 and 2009, we establish vendor-specific objective evidence ("VSOE") of selling price using the price charged for a deliverable when sold separately and, in rare instances, using the price established by management having the relevant authority. Third-party evidence of selling price is established by evaluating largely similar and interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone sales to similarly situated customers. The best estimate of selling price ("ESP") is established considering internal factors such as margin objectives, pricing practices and controls, customer segment pricing strategies and the product life cycle. Consideration is also given to market conditions such as competitor pricing strategies and industry technology life cycles. When determining our best estimate of selling price, we apply management judgment when establishing margin objectives and pricing strategies and evaluating market conditions and product life cycles. We may modify or develop new go-to-market practices in the future. As these go-to-market strategies evolve, we may modify our pricing practices in the future, which may result in changes in selling prices, impacting both VSOE and ESP. The aforementioned factors may result in a different allocation of revenue to the deliverables in multiple element arrangements from the current fiscal year, which may change the pattern and timing of revenue recognition for these elements but will not change the total revenue recognized for the arrangement. For 2008, pursuant to the previous guidance for revenue arrangements with multiple deliverables, HP allocated revenue to each element based on relative fair value, or, for software, based on VSOE of fair value. Warranty Provision We provide for the estimated cost of product warranties at the time we recognize revenue. We evaluate our warranty obligations on a product group basis. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period of time. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, we base our estimated warranty obligation upon warranty terms, ongoing product failure rates, repair costs, product call rates, average cost per call, and current period product shipments. If actual product failure rates, repair rates or any other post sales support costs were to differ from our estimates, we would be required to make revisions to the estimated warranty liability. Warranty terms generally range from 90 days to three years for parts and labor, depending upon the product. Over the last three fiscal years, the annual warranty provision has averaged approximately 3.5% of annual net product revenue, while actual annual warranty costs have experienced favorable trends and averaged approximately 3.3% of annual net product revenue. Business Combinations We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development ("IPR&D"), based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over these fair values is recorded as goodwill. We engage independent third-party appraisal firms to assist us in determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. 40 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from customer contracts, customer lists, distribution agreements, and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop IPR&D into commercially viable products and estimating cash flows from projects when completed; brand awareness and market position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the brand will continue to be used in our product portfolio; and discount rates. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Other estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as additional information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as more fully discussed in Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Valuation of Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets We review goodwill and purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. The provisions of the accounting standard for goodwill and other intangibles require that we perform a two-step impairment test on goodwill. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. In general, our reporting units are consistent with the reportable segments identified in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. However, for certain businesses within Corporate Investments, the reporting unit is one step below the segment level. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a weighting of income and market approaches. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on market multiples of revenue or earnings for comparable companies. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not impaired and we are not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we must perform the second step of the impairment test in order to determine the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill. If the carrying value of a reporting unit's goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then we record an impairment loss equal to the difference. We also compare the fair value of purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives to their carrying value. We estimate the fair value of these intangible assets using an income approach. We recognize an impairment loss when the estimated fair value of the intangible asset is less than the carrying value. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit or an indefinite-lived purchased intangible asset is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, assumed royalty rates, future economic and market conditions and determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units. Our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which we performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010, did not result in an impairment charge. The excess of fair value over carrying value for each of HP's reporting units as of August 1, 2010, the annual testing date, ranged from approximately 41 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) $760 million to approximately $33 billion. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the fair value calculations on the goodwill impairment test, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair values of each reporting unit. This hypothetical 10% decrease would result in excess fair value over carrying value ranging from approximately $360 million to approximately $29 billion for each of HP's reporting units. Restructuring We have engaged, and may continue to engage, in restructuring actions, which require management to utilize significant estimates related to the timing and the expenses for severance and other employee separation costs, realizable values of assets made redundant or obsolete, lease cancellation and other exit costs. If the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of the restructuring charges could be materially impacted. For a full description of our restructuring actions, refer to our discussions of restructuring in the Results of Operations section and Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Stock-Based Compensation Expense We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payment awards, net of an estimated forfeiture rate. We recognize compensation cost for only those shares expected to vest on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards requires subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the share-based payment awards and stock price volatility. We utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value the stock options granted under our principal option plans. To implement this model, we examined our historical pattern of option exercises to determine if there were any discernable activity patterns based on certain employee populations. From this analysis, we identified three employee populations to which to apply the Black-Scholes model. We determined that implied volatility calculated based on actively traded options on HP common stock is a better indicator of expected volatility and future stock price trends than historical volatility. We issue performance-based restricted units ("PRUs") representing hypothetical shares of HP common stock. Each PRU award reflects a target number of shares that may be issued to the award recipient. We determine the actual number of shares the recipient receives at the end of a three-year performance period based on results achieved versus goals based on our annual cash flow from operations as a percentage of revenue and total shareholder return ("TSR") relative to the S&P 500 over the performance period. We use historic volatility for PRU awards as implied volatility cannot be used when simulating multivariate prices for companies in the S&P 500. We estimate the fair value of PRUs using the Monte Carlo simulation model, as the TSR modifier contains a market condition. We update the estimated expense, net of forfeitures, for the cash flow performance against the goal for that year at the end of each reporting period. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management's best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation 42 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion on stock-based compensation. Taxes on Earnings We calculate our current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the final positions reflected in our income tax returns filed during the subsequent year. We record adjustments based on filed returns when we have identified and finalized them, which is generally in the third and fourth quarters of the subsequent year for U.S. federal and state provisions, respectively. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that we are more likely than not to realize. We have considered future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and make a corresponding charge to earnings in the period in which we make such determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the net deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets, we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the tax jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located. Our effective tax rate includes the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. taxes because we plan to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the United States. We plan foreign earnings remittance amounts based on projected cash flow needs as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we will distribute to the United States and provide the U.S. federal taxes due on these amounts. Further, as a result of certain employment actions and capital investments we have undertaken, income from manufacturing activities in certain countries is subject to reduced tax rates, and in some cases is wholly exempt from taxes, for fiscal years through 2024. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact our effective tax rate. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and approximately eighty foreign countries, and we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that our tax return positions are fully supported, but tax authorities are likely to challenge certain positions, which may not be fully sustained. However, our income tax expense includes amounts intended to satisfy income tax assessments that result from these challenges. Determining the income tax expense for these potential assessments and recording the related assets and liabilities requires management judgments and estimates. We evaluate our uncertain tax positions in accordance with the guidance for accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. We believe that our reserve for uncertain tax positions, including related interest, is adequate. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of audits could be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax expense and therefore could have a material impact on our tax provision, net income and cash flows. Our reserve 43 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) for uncertain tax positions is attributable primarily to uncertainties concerning the tax treatment of our international operations, including the allocation of income among different jurisdictions, and related interest. We review our reserves quarterly, and we may adjust such reserves because of proposed assessments by tax authorities, changes in facts and circumstances, issuance of new regulations or new case law, previously unavailable information obtained during the course of an examination, negotiations between tax authorities of different countries concerning our transfer prices, execution of Advanced Pricing Agreements, resolution with respect to individual audit issues, the resolution of entire audits, or the expiration of statutes of limitations. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion on taxes on earnings. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We determine our allowance for doubtful accounts using a combination of factors to ensure that we have not overstated our trade and financing receivables balances due to uncollectibility. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for all customers based on a variety of factors, including the use of third-party credit risk models that generate quantitative measures of default probabilities based on market factors, the financial condition of customers, the length of time receivables are past due, trends in overall weighted-average risk rating of the total portfolio, macroeconomic conditions, significant one-time events and historical experience. Also, we record specific provisions for individual accounts when we become aware of specific customer circumstances, such as in the case of bankruptcy filings or deterioration in the customer's operating results or financial position. If circumstances related to customers change, we would further adjust our estimates of the recoverability of receivables either upward or downward. The annual provision for doubtful accounts has averaged approximately 0.03% of net revenue over the last three fiscal years. Using our third-party credit risk model at October 31, 2010, a 50-basis-point deterioration in the weighted-average default probabilities of our significant customers would have resulted in an approximately $64 million increase to our trade allowance at the end of fiscal year 2010. Inventory We state our inventory at the lower of cost or market. We make adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, at the product group level for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired balances. Factors influencing these adjustments include changes in demand, rapid technological changes, product life cycle and development plans, component cost trends, product pricing, physical deterioration and quality issues. Revisions to these adjustments would be required if these factors differ from our estimates. Fair Value of Financial Instruments We measure certain financial assets and liabilities at fair value based on valuation techniques using the best information available, which may include quoted market prices, market comparables, and discounted cash flow projections. Financial instruments are primarily comprised of time deposits, money market funds, commercial paper, corporate and other debt securities, equity securities and other investments in common stock and common stock equivalents and derivative instruments. Cash Equivalents and Investments: We hold time deposits, money market funds, commercial paper, other debt securities primarily consisting of corporate and foreign government notes and bonds, and 44 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) common stock and equivalents. In general, and where applicable, we use quoted prices in active markets for identical assets to determine fair value. If quoted prices in active markets for identical assets are not available to determine fair value, then we use quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities or inputs that are observable either directly or indirectly. If quoted prices for identical or similar assets are not available, we use internally developed valuation models, whose inputs include bid prices, and third party valuations utilizing underlying asset assumptions. Derivative Instruments: As discussed in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, we mainly hold non-speculative forwards, swaps and options to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures. When active market quotes are not available, we use industry standard valuation models. Where applicable, these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to a present value using market-based observable inputs including interest rate curves, credit risk, foreign exchange rates, and forward and spot prices for currencies. In certain cases, market-based observable inputs are not available and, in those cases, we use management judgment to develop assumptions which are used to determine fair value. Retirement Benefits Our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations are dependent on various assumptions. Our major assumptions relate primarily to discount rates, salary growth, long-term return on plan assets and medical cost trend rates. We base the discount rate assumption on current investment yields of high quality fixed income investments during the retirement benefits maturity period. The salary growth assumptions reflect our long-term actual experience and future and near-term outlook. Long-term return on plan assets is determined based on historical portfolio results and management's expectation of the future economic environment, as well as target asset allocations. Our medical cost trend assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends. Actual results that differ from our assumptions are accumulated and are amortized generally over the estimated future working life of the plan participants. Our major assumptions vary by plan and the weighted-average rates used are set forth in Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Each assumption has different sensitivity characteristics, and, in general, changes, if any, have moved in the same direction over the last several years. For fiscal 2010, changes in the weighted-average rates for the HP benefit plans would have had the following impact on our net periodic benefit cost: A decrease of 25 basis points in the long-term rate of return would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $50 million; A decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $65 million; and An increase of 25 basis points in the future compensation rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $24 million. Loss Contingencies We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations and proceedings that arise in the ordinary course of business. We record a provision for a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Significant 45 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount. We review these provisions at least quarterly and adjust these provisions to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information. Litigation is inherently unpredictable and is subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion of litigation and contingencies. ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS In June 2009, the FASB issued a new accounting standard related to the consolidation of variable interest entities. It eliminates the quantitative approach previously required for determining the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity and requires ongoing qualitative reassessments of whether an enterprise is the primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity. This new standard also requires additional disclosures about an enterprise's involvement in variable interest entities. We will adopt this new accounting standard in the first quarter of fiscal 2011. We do not expect the adoption of this standard will have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements. CONSTANT CURRENCY PRESENTATION Revenue from our international operations has historically represented, and we expect will continue to represent, a majority of our overall net revenue. As a result, our revenue growth has been impacted, and we expect will continue to be impacted, by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. In order to provide a framework for assessing how each of our business segments performed excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, we present the year-over-year percentage change in revenue performance on a constant currency basis, which assumes no change in the exchange rate from the prior-year period. This constant currency disclosure is provided in addition to, and not as a substitute for, the year-over-year percentage change in revenue on an as-reported basis. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion compares the historical results of operations on a GAAP basis for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2010, 2009, and 2008. Unless otherwise noted, all comparative performance data included below reflect year-over-year comparisons. 46 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net revenue $ 126,033 100.0 % $ 114,552 100.0 % $ 118,364 100.0 % Cost of sales (1) 96,089 76.2 % 87,524 76.4 % 89,699 75.8 % Gross profit 29,944 23.8 % 27,028 23.6 % 28,665 24.2 % Research and development 2,959 2.3 % 2,819 2.5 % 3,543 3.0 % Selling, general and administrative 12,585 10.1 % 11,613 10.1 % 13,326 11.3 % Amortization of purchased intangible assets 1,484 1.1 % 1,578 1.4 % 1,012 0.9 % Restructuring charges 1,144 1.0 % 640 0.6 % 270 0.2 % Acquisition-related charges 293 0.2 % 242 0.2 % 41 Earnings from operations 11,479 9.1 % 10,136 8.8 % 10,473 8.8 % Interest and other, net (505 ) (0.4 )% (721 ) (0.6 )% Earnings before taxes 10,974 8.7 % 9,415 8.2 % 10,473 8.8 % Provision for taxes 2,213 1.7 % 1,755 1.5 % 2,144 1.8 % Net earnings $ 8,761 7.0 % $ 7,660 6.7 % $ 8,329 7.0 % (1) Cost of products, cost of services and financing interest. Net Revenue The components of the weighted net revenue change were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2010 2009 Percentage Points Personal Systems Group 4.8 (5.9 ) Enterprise Storage and Servers 2.9 (3.4 ) Imaging and Printing Group 1.5 (4.7 ) HP Financial Services 0.3 Corporate Investments/Other 0.3 (0.2 ) Services 0.2 11.6 HP Software (0.6 ) Total HP 10.0 (3.2 ) Fiscal 2010 In fiscal 2010, total HP net revenue increased 10% (8.3% on a constant currency basis). U.S. net revenue increased 7.8% to $44.5 billion, while net revenue from outside of the United States increased 11.3% to $81.5 billion. As reflected in the table above, the PSG segment was the largest contributor to HP net revenue growth as a result of balanced growth across the regions. An analysis of the change in net revenue for each business segment is included under "Segment Information" below. 47 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Fiscal 2009 In fiscal 2009, the global slowdown of IT and consumer spending impacted each of our segments. Net revenue decreased 3.2% in fiscal 2009 (increased 1.3% on a constant currency basis). The unfavorable currency impact for fiscal 2009 was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. For fiscal 2009, the Services segment contributed favorably to the total HP net revenue change primarily as a result of the EDS acquisition. U.S. net revenue increased 12% to $41.3 billion for fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008, while net revenue from outside of the United States decreased 10% to $73.2 billion. The increase in U.S. net revenue in fiscal 2009 was primarily a result of the acquisition of EDS. An analysis of the change in net revenue for each business segment is included under "Segment Information" below. Gross Margin Fiscal 2010 In fiscal 2010, total HP gross margin increased by 0.2 percentage points. The increase was a result of an increased mix in networking products and rate increase in Services, the effect of which was partially offset by strong revenue growth in personal computers and printer hardware that have lower gross margins. Services gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 due primarily to the continued focus on operating improvements, including delivery efficiencies and cost controls in our technology services business, and EDS-related acquisition synergies. ESS gross margin declined in fiscal 2010 due primarily to a product mix shift resulting from the strength in industry standard servers ("ISS"), the effect of which was partially offset by lower product costs and strong volume. HP Software gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 primarily as a result of a higher license and support mix, the effect of which was partially offset by a reduced services gross margin rate. PSG gross margin declined in fiscal 2010 primarily as a result of higher component costs, the effect of which was partially offset by lower warranty and logistics expenses. IPG gross margin declined in fiscal 2010 due primarily to a higher mix of hardware and a correspondingly lower mix of supplies, the effect of which was partially offset by cost savings associated with our ongoing efforts to optimize our supply chain. HPFS gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 primarily as a result of higher portfolio margins due to favorable financing conditions and higher remarketing margin, the effect of which was partially offset by higher bad debt. Corporate Investments gross margin increased in fiscal 2010 primarily as a result of the impact from the 3Com acquisition along with lower product costs for our network infrastructure products. Fiscal 2009 Total HP gross margin decreased by 0.6 percentage points in fiscal 2009. From a segment perspective and on a weighted basis, ESS had the largest impact to the total company gross margin decline due to product mix shift and rate declines. 48 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Services gross margin increased in fiscal 2009 due primarily to the continued focus on cost structure improvements, including delivery efficiencies and cost controls in our technology services business, and EDS-related acquisition synergies. This was partially offset by the mix effect from the acquisition of the EDS business, which has lower gross margins. ESS gross margin decreased in fiscal 2009 due primarily to competitive pricing across each of the segment business units and product mix shifts. HP Software gross margin increased in fiscal 2009 primarily as a result of favorable support and services revenue mix and improved services margins, the effect of which was partially offset by an unfavorable license revenue mix. PSG gross margin declined in fiscal 2009, resulting from average selling prices ("ASPs") declining at a faster pace than component costs combined with a mix shift towards lower-end products, the effects of which were partially offset by lower warranty and supply chain costs and improvements in the option attach rate. IPG gross margin improved in fiscal 2009 primarily as a result of an increase in the supplies mix and supplies pricing, the effect of which was partially offset by hardware margin declines. HPFS gross margin declined in fiscal 2009 primarily as a result of unfavorable currency impacts, lower margins relating to end-of-lease activities, higher bad debt expenses and lower margins for remarketing and buyout activities, the effect of which was partially offset by higher portfolio margins. Corporate Investments gross margin declined in fiscal 2009 primarily as a result of a unit volume decline in the sale of network infrastructure products and competitive pricing pressures. Operating Expenses Research and Development Total research and development ("R&D") expense increased in fiscal 2010 due primarily to additional expenses from acquired companies. In fiscal 2010, R&D expense as a percentage of net revenue increased for Corporate Investments, HP Software and Services, decreased for ESS, PSG, and IPG and was flat for HPFS. Total R&D expense decreased in fiscal 2009 due primarily to favorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro, as well as effective cost controls, the effect of which was partially offset by additional expenses related primarily to Services. In fiscal 2009, R&D expense as a percentage of net revenue decreased for ESS, PSG, and IPG, and increased for HP Software, Services and Corporate Investments. Selling, General and Administrative Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expense increased in fiscal 2010 due primarily to higher field selling and marketing costs as a result of our investments in sales resources to grow revenue. In fiscal 2010, SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue increased for Corporate Investments and IPG, and decreased for ESS, HP Software, PSG, HPFS and Services even as we invested in incremental sales resources across the segments. Total SG&A expense decreased in fiscal 2009 due primarily to favorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro, lower compensation expense as well as effective cost 49 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) management, the impact of which was partially offset by additional expenses related to the EDS acquisition. In fiscal 2009, SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue decreased for each of our segments, except for Corporate Investments. Amortization of Purchased Intangible Assets The decrease in amortization expense in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions reaching the end of their amortization periods, the effect of which was partially offset by increased amortization of purchased intangible assets from acquisitions completed during fiscal 2010. The increase in amortization expense in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to amortization expenses related to the intangible assets purchased as part of the EDS acquisition. For more information on our amortization of purchased intangibles assets, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Restructuring Restructuring charges for fiscal 2010 were $1.1 billion. These charges included $650 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2010 enterprise services restructuring plan, $429 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2008 restructuring plan, $46 million and $18 million associated with the Palm and 3Com restructuring plans, respectively, and an increase of $1 million related to adjustments to other restructuring plans. Restructuring charges for fiscal 2009 were $640 million. These charges included $346 million of severance and facility costs related to our fiscal 2008 restructuring plan, $297 million of severance costs associated with our fiscal 2009 restructuring plan, and a reduction of $3 million related to adjustments to other restructuring plans. Restructuring charges for fiscal 2008 were $270 million, which included $246 million of charges due primarily to severance and facility costs related to the EDS acquisition and a net charge of $24 million relating to adjustments for existing restructuring programs. For more information on our restructuring charges, see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. As part of our ongoing business operations, we incurred workforce rebalancing charges for severance and related costs within certain business segments in fiscal 2010. Workforce rebalancing activities are considered part of normal operations as we continue to optimize our cost structure. Workforce rebalancing costs are included in our business segment results, and we expect to incur additional workforce rebalancing costs in the future. Acquisition-Related Charges In fiscal 2010, we recorded acquisition-related charges of $293 million primarily for consulting and integration costs, acquisition costs and retention bonuses associated with the EDS, 3Com, Palm, 3PAR and ArcSight acquisitions. In fiscal 2009, we recorded acquisition-related charges of $242 million primarily for consulting and integration costs as well as retention bonuses associated with the EDS acquisition. 50 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Interest and Other, Net Interest and other, net improved by $216 million in fiscal 2010. The improvement was driven primarily by lower currency losses on balance sheet remeasurement items, lower interest expenses on debt balances due to lower interest rates, and a value-added tax refund, the effect of which was partially offset by an increase to our litigation accruals. Interest and other, net decreased by $721 million in fiscal 2009. The decrease was driven primarily by higher interest expenses due to higher average debt balances principally related to the EDS acquisition, lower interest income as a result of lower interest rates, and higher currency losses on balance sheet remeasurement items. Additionally, there were higher gains from the sale of real estate in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2009. Provision for Taxes Our effective tax rates were 20.2%, 18.6% and 20.5% in fiscal 2010, 2009 and 2008, respectively. HP's effective tax rate generally differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% due to favorable tax rates associated with certain earnings from HP's operations in lower-tax jurisdictions throughout the world. HP has not provided U.S. taxes for all of its international earnings because HP plans to reinvest some of those earnings indefinitely outside the United States. The increase in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to a decrease in the income tax benefits related to foreign earnings. The decrease in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to the net income tax benefits recorded for fiscal 2009 which were related to foreign net operating losses, adjustments to estimated fiscal 2008 tax accruals upon filing the 2008 income tax returns, valuation allowance reversals for state and foreign net operating losses, and other miscellaneous items. For a full reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and further explanation of our provision for taxes, see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Segment Information A description of the products and services, as well as financial data, for each segment can be found in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. We have realigned segment financial data for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2009 and 2008 to reflect changes in HP's organizational structure that occurred at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We describe these changes more fully in Note 19. We have presented the business segments in this Annual Report on Form 10-K based on the distinct nature of various businesses such as customer base, homogeneity of products and technology. The discussions below include the results of each of our segments. HP Enterprise Business Services, ESS and HP Software are reported collectively as a broader HP Enterprise Business. We describe the results of the business segments of the HP Enterprise Business in more detail below. 51 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Services For fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net revenue $ 34,935 $ 34,693 $ 20,977 Earnings from operations $ 5,609 $ 5,044 $ 2,518 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 16.1 % 14.5 % 12.0 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2010 2009 Percentage Points Infrastructure technology outsourcing 1.2 37.1 Other 0.1 0.9 Technology services (0.1 ) (1.4 ) Application services (0.2 ) 18.0 Business process outsourcing (0.3 ) 10.8 Total Services 0.7 65.4 Services net revenue increased 0.7% (decreased 1.7% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2010. Net revenue in infrastructure technology outsourcing increased by 2.6% in fiscal 2010. The revenue increase was due to favorable currency impact and growth in data center services and networking services. Net revenue in technology services declined by 0.4% in fiscal 2010. The revenue decline was due primarily to lower contract revenue tied to reduced levels of enterprise hardware sales in the prior-year period and market conditions in the current-year period, the effect of which was partially offset by a favorable currency impact. Net revenue in application services decreased by 1.1% in fiscal 2010. The revenue decrease was driven primarily by market conditions and existing contract completion, the effect of which was partially offset by new business and a favorable currency impact. Net revenue in business process outsourcing decreased by 3.5% in fiscal 2010. The revenue decrease was due primarily to a divestiture completed at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2010 and economic conditions in certain industries with key clients, the effect of which was partially offset by a favorable currency impact. Services earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.6 percentage points in fiscal 2010. Operating margin increased primarily due to continued focus on operating improvements and cost initiatives that favorably impacted the cost structure of our enterprise services business, delivery efficiencies and cost controls in our technology services business, as well as EDS-related acquisition synergies. Services net revenue increased 65.4% (71.6% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009. The increase in revenues is due primarily to the acquisition of EDS on August 26, 2008. Net revenue in infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services and business process outsourcing increased due to the EDS acquisition. The net revenue increase in infrastructure technology outsourcing, application services, and business process outsourcing was partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts and a decline in spending from existing customers not being offset with new growth due to slowing demand in the current economic environment. Application services and business process outsourcing were impacted to a greater degree than infrastructure technology outsourcing. Net revenue 52 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) in technology services declined due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and weak economic conditions, the effect of which was partially offset by growth in extended warranty. Services earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 2.5 percentage points in fiscal 2009. The operating margin increased due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue. There was also an increase in gross margin for fiscal 2009. Operating expense declined as a result of a continued focus on cost structure improvements from overall cost controls. The gross margin in our Services segment increased for fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008 due primarily to the continued focus on cost structure improvements, including delivery efficiencies and cost controls in our technology services business, and EDS-related acquisition synergies. This was partially offset by the mix effect from the acquisition of the EDS business, which has lower gross margins. Enterprise Storage and Servers For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net revenue $ 18,651 $ 15,359 $ 19,400 Earnings from operations $ 2,402 $ 1,518 $ 2,577 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 12.9 % 9.9 % 13.3 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2010 2009 Percentage Points Industry standard servers 21.3 (12.1 ) Storage 2.0 (3.8 ) Business critical systems (1.9 ) (4.9 ) Total ESS 21.4 (20.8 ) ESS net revenue increased 21.4% (18.9% when adjusted for currency) for fiscal 2010. ESS blades revenue increased by 37% in fiscal 2010. ISS net revenue increased by 35% in fiscal 2010, driven primarily by unit volume growth coupled with increased average unit prices due to improving market conditions and demand for the latest generation of ISS products. Storage net revenue increased by 9% in fiscal 2010, driven primarily by strong performance in products related to our acquisition of Lefthand Networks, and growth in high-end disk products and storage networking products. Business critical systems ("BCS") net revenue decreased 12%, due primarily to market conditions and competitive pressures, the effect of which was partially offset by new product introductions in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. ESS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 3.0 percentage points in fiscal 2010, driven by decreases in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue, the effect of which was partially offset by declines in gross margin. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased as a result of operating leverage benefits from increased volume and cost controls. The gross margin decline in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to a product mix shift resulting from the strength in ISS, the effect of which was partially offset by lower product costs and strong volume. 53 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) ESS net revenue decreased 20.8% (16.0% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009. The revenue decline was due primarily to the economic slowdown and overall weak demand environment. ISS net revenue declined 20% in fiscal 2009 due to declines in unit volume. ISS average unit prices declined in fiscal 2009 while improving in the second half of fiscal 2009 as a result of a new product ramp up. Total ESS blades revenue declined by 2% in fiscal 2009. BCS net revenue decreased 27% in fiscal 2009 driven by a decline in Integrity server revenue due to weaker market conditions and by the planned phase-out of the PA-RISC and Alpha Server product lines. Storage net revenue declined 17% in fiscal 2009 due to a decline in disk and tape products as a result of a weaker demand environment, the effects of which were partially offset by revenue resulting from the acquisition of Lefthand Networks, which was completed in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. In fiscal 2009, ESS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 3.4 percentage points, due primarily to a decline in gross margin. Gross margin in fiscal 2009 decreased due primarily to competitive pricing across each of the segment business units and product mix shifts. Operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2009 was generally consistent with the fiscal 2008. HP Software For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net revenue $ 3,586 $ 3,572 $ 4,220 Earnings from operations $ 759 $ 684 $ 499 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 21.2 % 19.1 % 11.8 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2010 2009 Percentage Points Business technology optimization 1.5 (9.7 ) Other software (1.1 ) (5.7 ) Total HP Software 0.4 (15.4 ) HP Software net revenue increased 0.4% (decreased 1.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2010, due to growth in business technology optimization ("BTO"), information management and business intelligence, the effect of which was offset by weakness in sales of communication and media solutions. In fiscal 2010, support and license revenue increased while services revenue declined. Net revenue from business technology optimization increased 2% in fiscal 2010, due to growth in support and license renewals. Net revenue from our other software businesses decreased 3% in fiscal 2010, due to a decline in revenue from sales of communication and media solutions resulting from market conditions in the Asia Pacific region and EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa). The revenue increase in information management was due primarily to increases in license and support revenue. The revenue increase in business intelligence solutions was primarily a result of increases in support and services. HP Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 2.1 percentage points in fiscal 2010. The operating margin improvement in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to an increase 54 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin in fiscal 2010 was primarily a result of a higher license and support mix, the effect of which was partially offset by a reduced services gross margin rate. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to lower field selling, administrative and acquisition integration costs. HP Software net revenue decreased 15.4% (10.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009, due to softening in enterprise spending and declines in large deals. For fiscal 2009, revenue from licenses and services declined, the effect of which was partially offset by increased support revenue as a result of renewal rate increases. Net revenue from BTO decreased 15% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. Net revenue from other software decreased 17% in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008, due to declines in revenues for communication and media solutions, business intelligence solutions and information management. HP Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 7.3 percentage points in fiscal 2009. The operating margin improvement in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to increased gross margin coupled with decreased operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin in fiscal 2009 resulted primarily from a favorable support and services revenue mix and improved services margins, the effect of which was partially offset by an unfavorable license revenue mix. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to continued cost controls. Personal Systems Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net revenue $ 40,741 $ 35,305 $ 42,295 Earnings from operations $ 2,032 $ 1,661 $ 2,375 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 5.0 % 4.7 % 5.6 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2010 2009 Percentage Points Desktop PCs 7.4 (8.9 ) Notebook PCs 6.6 (5.8 ) Workstations 1.5 (1.5 ) Handhelds (0.2 ) (0.4 ) Other 0.1 0.1 Total PSG 15.4 (16.5 ) PSG revenue increased 15.4% (12.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2010. The revenue increase resulted from balanced growth across all regions. PSG unit volume and net revenue increased across all business units except the handhelds business unit in fiscal 2010. Unit volume was up 14% as the commercial refresh cycle and continued demand for consumer notebooks drove an increase in shipments. In fiscal 2010, net revenue from notebook PCs increased 12% while desktop PCs revenue increased 20%. Workstations revenue increased 42% while handhelds revenue declined 49%. In fiscal 55 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) 2010, net revenue for consumer clients increased 12% while commercial client revenue increased 20%. Net revenue in Other increased 6% due primarily to increased sales of calculators, home servers and warranty extensions. For fiscal 2010, the favorable impact on PSG net revenue from unit increases was accompanied by a 1% increase in ASPs. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 0.3 percentage points in fiscal 2010. The increase was driven by improvements in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue, the effect of which was offset partially by a slight decline in gross margins. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due to effective cost controls and operating leverage benefits from increased volume. The decrease in gross margins was a result of higher component costs, the effect of which was partially offset by lower warranty and logistics expenses. PSG net revenue decreased 16.5% (11.6% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009. The revenue decline was primarily the result of the overall slowdown in the global economy. Despite the overall regional declines, revenue in China increased for fiscal 2009. PSG net revenue decreased across all businesses in fiscal 2009. Unit volume increased slightly in fiscal 2009, as an increase in notebook PC volume was offset by a decline in desktop PCs, workstations, and handheld devices. The unit volume increase in notebook PCs was due in part to growth of the HP and Compaq mini notebooks. In fiscal 2009, net revenue for notebook PCs decreased 11%, while net revenue for desktop PCs decreased 23%. Workstations and handheld revenues declined 33% and 52%, respectively, in fiscal 2009. In fiscal 2009, net revenue for consumer clients decreased 14%, while net revenue for commercial clients decreased 19%. The net revenue increase in Other PSG was related primarily to increased sales of extended warranties, support services and third-party branded options. In fiscal 2009, PSG net revenue was also impacted by ASP declines. ASPs in consumer clients declined 21%, while ASPs in commercial clients declined 16%. ASPs declined due primarily to a competitive pricing environment, component cost reductions and the impact of currency combined with a mix shift toward lower-end models. The ASP decline in fiscal 2009 was offset slightly by an increase in the option and monitor attach rates. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.9 percentage points in fiscal 2009. The decrease was due primarily to a gross margin decline resulting from ASPs declining at a faster pace than component costs combined with a mix shift toward lower-end products, the effects of which were partially offset by lower warranty and supply chain costs and improvements in the option attach rate. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2009 was the result of effective cost controls. Imaging and Printing Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net revenue $ 25,764 $ 24,011 $ 29,614 Earnings from operations $ 4,412 $ 4,310 $ 4,559 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 17.1 % 18.0 % 15.4 % 56 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of the weighted net revenue change by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2010 2009 Percentage Points Commercial hardware 3.3 (8.9 ) Supplies 3.0 (6.6 ) Consumer hardware 1.0 (3.4 ) Total IPG 7.3 (18.9 ) IPG net revenue increased 7.3% (8.4% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2010, reflecting a continued improvement in market conditions. Net revenue for commercial hardware increased 17% in fiscal 2010, due primarily to unit volume growth of 19% driven by improved product availability. Supplies net revenue increased 4% in fiscal 2010, due primarily to increased printing, which resulted in stronger supply usage. Net revenue for consumer hardware increased 9% in fiscal 2010, driven primarily by unit volume growth of 11%. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.9 percentage points in fiscal 2010, due primarily to a decline in gross margin and increases in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decline in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to a higher mix of hardware and a correspondingly lower mix of supplies, the effect of which was partially offset by cost savings associated with our ongoing efforts to optimize our supply chain. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2010 was due primarily to increased marketing activities, the effect of which was partially offset by reduced administrative expenses. IPG net revenue decreased 18.9% (16.5% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2009, reflecting the impact of the global economic slowdown. Net revenue for commercial hardware declined 36% in fiscal 2009. The net revenue decline in commercial hardware was driven by a unit volume decline of 38% in fiscal 2009, due primarily to worldwide market weaknesses impacting both our laser and our graphics businesses. Supplies net revenue declined 11% in fiscal 2009. The supplies net revenue decline in fiscal 2009 was across all platforms and was the result of reductions in channel inventory and unfavorable currency impacts, the effect of which was partially moderated by supplies pricing. Net revenue for consumer hardware declined 27% in fiscal 2009. The net revenue decline in consumer hardware was driven by a unit volume decline of 24% in fiscal 2009, reflecting the weak demand environment and channel inventory reductions. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased 2.6 percentage points in fiscal 2009. Operating margin improvement in fiscal 2009 was a combination of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The improvement in gross margin in fiscal 2009 resulted primarily from an increase in the supplies mix and supplies pricing, the effect of which was partially offset by hardware margin declines due to unfavorable currency impacts and declines in average revenue per unit. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2009 was due primarily to effective cost controls. 57 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HP Financial Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net revenue $ 3,047 $ 2,673 $ 2,698 Earnings from operations $ 281 $ 206 $ 192 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 9.2 % 7.7 % 7.1 % HPFS net revenue increased by 14% in fiscal 2010. The net revenue increase was due to portfolio growth as a result of higher customer demand, a higher operating lease mix due to higher service-led financing volume, and higher end-of-lease rental, buyout and remarketing activity, along with favorable currency movements. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.5 percentage points in fiscal 2010 due primarily to an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue. The increase in gross margin was the result of higher portfolio margins due to favorable financing conditions and higher remarketing margin, the effect of which was partially offset by higher bad debt and lower buyout margins. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of revenue was driven primarily by improved cost efficiencies. HPFS net revenue decreased by 0.9% in fiscal 2009. The net revenue decrease was due to unfavorable currency movements. On a constant currency basis, fiscal 2009 net revenue increased due primarily to portfolio growth, increased operating lease mix and higher buyout activities, the effect of which was partially offset by lower levels of remarketing and end-of-lease activity. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.6 percentage points in fiscal 2009 due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses, the effect of which was partially offset by a decline in gross margin. The operating expense decrease was due to continued cost controls. The decline in gross margin was driven by an unfavorable currency impact, lower margins relating to end of lease activity, higher bad debt expenses, and lower remarketing and buyout margins, the effect of which was partially offset by higher portfolio margins. Financing Originations For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Total financing originations $ 5,987 $ 5,210 $ 4,872 New financing originations, which represent the amount of financing provided to customers for equipment and related software and services including intercompany activity, increased 14.9% in fiscal 2010 from fiscal 2009 and 6.9% in fiscal 2009 from fiscal 2008. The increases reflect higher financing associated with HP product sales and services offerings resulting from improved integration and engagement with HP's sales efforts and a favorable currency impact. Portfolio Assets and Ratios HPFS maintains a strategy to generate a competitive return on equity by effectively leveraging its portfolio against the risks associated with interest rates and credit. The HPFS business model is 58 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) asset-intensive and uses certain internal metrics to measure its performance against other financial services companies, including a segment balance sheet that is derived from our internal management reporting system. The accounting policies used to derive these amounts are substantially the same as those used by the consolidated company. However, certain intercompany loans and accounts that are reflected in the segment balances are eliminated in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The portfolio assets and ratios derived from the segment balance sheet for HPFS were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2010 2009 In millions Portfolio assets (1) $ 11,418 $ 10,017 Allowance for doubtful accounts (2) 140 108 Operating lease equipment reserve 83 71 Total reserves 223 179 Net portfolio assets $ 11,195 $ 9,838 Reserve coverage 2.0 % 1.8 % Debt to equity ratio (3) 7.0x 7.0x (1) Portfolio assets include gross financing receivables of approximately $6.7 billion and $6.1 billion at October 31, 2010 and October 31, 2009, respectively, and net equipment under operating leases of $2.5 billion and $2.2 billion at October 31, 2010 and October 31, 2009, respectively, as disclosed in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Portfolio assets also include capitalized profit on intercompany equipment transactions of approximately $800 million and $700 million at October 31, 2010 and October 31, 2009, respectively, and intercompany leases of approximately $1.3 billion and $1.0 billion at October 31, 2010 and October 31, 2009, respectively, both of which are eliminated in consolidation. (2) Allowance for doubtful accounts includes both the short-term and the long-term portions of the allowance on financing receivables. (3) HPFS debt consists of intercompany equity that is treated as debt for segment reporting purposes, intercompany debt and debt issued directly by HPFS. Net portfolio assets at October 31, 2010 increased 13.8% from October 31, 2009. The increase resulted from higher levels of financing originations in fiscal 2010 and a favorable currency impact. The overall reserve coverage ratio increased as a percentage of the portfolio assets. HPFS funds its operations mainly through a combination of intercompany debt and equity. HPFS recorded net bad debt expenses of $75 million and $50 million in fiscal 2010 and fiscal 2009, respectively. 59 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Corporate Investments For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net revenue $ 1,863 $ 768 $ 965 Earnings (loss) from operations $ 132 $ (56 ) $ 49 Earnings (loss) from operations as a % of net revenue 7.1 % (7.3 )% 5.1 % Net revenue in Corporate Investments relates primarily to network infrastructure products sold under the "ProCurve Networking," "3Com" and "TippingPoint" brands. In fiscal 2010, revenue from ProCurve Networking increased 33.9%, driven by improved market demand and continued investment in sales coverage. The revenue increase in Corporate Investments was also due to revenues resulting from the acquisitions of 3Com and Palm, which HP completed in April 2010 and July 2010, respectively. Corporate Investments reported positive earnings from operations in fiscal 2010 due primarily to higher earnings from operations generated by network infrastructure products. Gross margin rate in Corporate Investments for fiscal 2010 increased primarily as a result of the impact from the 3Com acquisition along with lower product costs in the sale of network infrastructure products. The earnings from operations in Corporate Investments were also impacted by expenses carried in the segment associated with corporate development, global alliances and HP Labs; such expenses declined from fiscal 2009. In fiscal 2009, net revenue in Corporate Investments related primarily to network infrastructure products sold under the brand "ProCurve Networking." Revenue from network infrastructure products decreased 19.6%, resulting from the slowdown in the networking market and a resulting decrease in sales of enterprise ethernet switch products. Partially offsetting the revenue decline was revenue resulting from the acquisition of Colubris Networks, Inc. ("Colubris"), which HP acquired in October 2008. Corporate Investments reported a loss from operations in fiscal 2009 as compared to the positive earnings from operations reported in fiscal 2008 due primarily to lower earnings from operations generated by network infrastructure products. Gross margin in Corporate Investments declined for fiscal 2009 as the result of a unit volume decline in the sale of network infrastructure products and competitive pricing pressure. The loss from operations in Corporate Investments was also impacted by expenses carried in the segment associated with corporate development, global alliances and HP Labs, which declined from fiscal 2008. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, including substantial amounts held outside of the United States. Most of the amounts held outside of the United States could be repatriated to the United States but, under current law, would be subject to United States federal income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Repatriation of some foreign balances is restricted by local laws. We have provided for the United States federal tax liability on these amounts for financial statement purposes, except for foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the United States. Repatriation could result in additional United States federal income tax payments in future years. Where local restrictions prevent an efficient intercompany transfer of funds, 60 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) our intent is that cash balances would remain outside of the United States and we would meet United States liquidity needs through ongoing cash flows, external borrowings, or both. We utilize a variety of tax planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. LIQUIDITY We use cash generated by operations as our primary source of liquidity; we believe that internally generated cash flows are generally sufficient to support business operations, capital expenditures and the payment of stockholder dividends, in addition to a level of discretionary investments and share repurchases. We are able to supplement this near-term liquidity, if necessary, with broad access to capital markets and credit line facilities made available by various foreign and domestic financial institutions. Our liquidity is subject to various risks including the market risks identified in the section entitled "Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures about Market Risk" in Item 7A. For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In billions Cash and cash equivalents $ 10.9 $ 13.3 $ 10.2 Total debt $ 22.3 $ 15.8 $ 17.9 Available borrowing resources (1) $ 13.8 $ 18.1 $ 11.7 (1) In addition to these available borrowing resources, we are able to offer for sale, from time to time, in one or more offerings, an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares and warrants under a shelf registration statement filed with the SEC in May 2009 (the "2009 Shelf Registration Statement"). Our cash position remains strong, and we believe our cash balances and anticipated cash flow generated from operations are sufficient to cover cash outlays expected in fiscal 2011. On December 2, 2010, HP issued $2.0 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes under the 2009 Shelf Registration Statement. The Global Notes were fixed rate notes at market rates with maturities of five and ten years from the date of issuance. Cash Flows The following table summarizes the key cash flow metrics from our consolidated statements of cash flow: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions Net cash provided by operating activities $ 11,922 $ 13,379 $ 14,591 Net cash used in investing activities (11,359 ) (3,580 ) (13,711 ) Net cash used in financing activities (2,913 ) (6,673 ) (2,020 ) Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ (2,350 ) $ 3,126 $ (1,140 ) 61 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by approximately $1.5 billion for fiscal 2010, as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease was due primarily to an increase in accounts and financing receivables resulting from higher revenues in the fourth quarter and higher payments for account payable activities, the impact of which was partially offset by the increase in net earnings. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by approximately $1.2 billion for fiscal 2009, as compared to fiscal 2008. The decrease was due primarily to increased utilization of cash resources for payment of operating liabilities such as accounts payable, other current liabilities and restructuring along with a decrease in net earnings, the impact of which was partially offset by the increased generation of cash resources through the utilization of operating assets such as inventory and other current assets along with increased amortization expense. Our key working capital metrics are as follows: October 31 2010 2009 2008 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable 50 48 45 Days of supply in inventory 23 23 27 Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable (52 ) (57 ) (52 ) Cash conversion cycle 21 14 20 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable ("DSO") measures the average number of days our receivables are outstanding. DSO is calculated by dividing ending accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, by a 90-day average net revenue. Our accounts receivable balance was $18.5 billion as of October 31, 2010. Days of supply in inventory ("DOS") measures the average number of days from procurement to sale of our product. DOS is calculated by dividing ending inventory by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our inventory balance was $6.5 billion as of October 31, 2010. Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable ("DPO") measures the average number of days our accounts payable balances are outstanding. DPO is calculated by dividing ending accounts payable by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our accounts payable balance was $14.4 billion as of October 31, 2010. Our working capital requirements depend upon our effective management of the cash conversion cycle, which represents effectively the number of days that elapse from the day we pay for the purchase of raw materials to the collection of cash from our customers. The cash conversion cycle is the sum of DSO and DOS less DPO. The cash conversion cycle for fiscal 2010 increased by 7 days as compared to fiscal 2009. The increase in DSO was due primarily to linearity and fewer cash discounts in the fourth quarter. DOS remained flat year over year. The decrease in DPO was due primarily to a change in purchasing linearity in the fourth quarter. The cash conversion cycle for fiscal 2009 decreased by 6 days as compared to fiscal 2008. The increase in DSO was due primarily to our improving penetration into the enterprise market which tends to have a higher DSO profile, optimizing terms to drive shareholder value as well as more sales in the month of October. The decrease in DOS was due to lower inventory levels driven primarily by 62 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) improved inventory management. The increase in DPO was due primarily to a change in purchasing linearity as business recovered through the fourth quarter. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by approximately $7.8 billion for fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 due primarily to higher cash payments made in connection with fiscal 2010 acquisitions and decreased by approximately $10.1 billion for fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 due primarily to higher cash payments made in connection with fiscal 2008 acquisitions. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities decreased by approximately $3.8 billion for fiscal 2010, as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease was due primarily to a higher net issuance of commercial paper, the impact of which was partially offset by increased repurchases of our common stock and lower global debt issuance. Net cash used in financing activities increased by approximately $4.7 billion for fiscal 2009, as compared to fiscal 2008. The increase was due primarily to higher net repayments of commercial paper and debt, the impact of which was partially offset by decreased repurchases of our common stock. For more information on our share repurchase programs, see Item 5 and Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. CAPITAL RESOURCES Debt Levels For the fiscal years ended October 31 2010 2009 2008 In millions, except interest rates and ratios Short-term debt $ 7,046 $ 1,850 $ 10,176 Long-term debt $ 15,258 $ 13,980 $ 7,676 Debt-equity ratio 0.55x 0.39x 0.46x Weighted-average interest rate 2.0 % 2.7 % 3.6 % We maintain debt levels that we establish through consideration of a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for operations, investment plans (including acquisitions), share repurchase activities, overall cost of capital, and targeted capital structure. Short-term debt and long-term debt increased by $5.2 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively, for fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. The net increase in total debt is due primarily to spending on acquisitions and share repurchases. In fiscal 2009, short-term debt decreased by $8.3 billion and long-term debt increased by $6.3 billion as compared to fiscal 2008. This was primarily due to the replacement of short-term debt with long-term debt as capital market conditions improved from the prior year, the impact of which was partially offset by a reclassification of $1 billion from long-term to short-term. Our debt-equity ratio is calculated as the carrying value of debt divided by the carrying value of equity. Our debt-equity ratio increased by 0.16x in fiscal 2010, due primarily to the issuance of $3.0 billion of U.S Dollar Global Notes in September and a $4 billion net increase in commercial paper 63 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) at the end of fiscal 2010. Our debt-equity ratio decreased by 0.07x in fiscal 2009 due primarily to the net repayment of $2.0 billion in debt. Our weighted-average interest rate reflects the average effective rate on our borrowings prevailing during the year; it factors in the impact of swapping some of our global notes with fixed interest rates for global notes with floating interest rates. For more information on our interest rate swaps, see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. The lower weighted-average interest rates over the past three years is a result of the combination of lower market interest rates and swapping some of our fixed interest obligations associated with some of our fixed global notes for variable rate obligations through interest rate swaps in a declining rates environment. For more information on our borrowings, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Available Borrowing Resources At October 31, 2010, we had the following resources available to obtain short-term or long-term financings if we need additional liquidity: At October 31, 2010 In millions 2009 Shelf Registration Statement (1) Unspecified Commercial paper programs (1) $12,100 Uncommitted lines of credit (1) $ 1,500 Revolving trade receivables-based facilities (2) $ 175 (1) For more information on our available borrowings resources, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. (2) For more information on our revolving trade receivables-based facilities, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Credit Ratings Our credit risk is evaluated by three independent rating agencies based upon publicly available information as well as information obtained in our ongoing discussions with them. The ratings for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2010 were: For the fiscal year ended October 31, 2010 Standard & Poor's Ratings Services Moody's Investors Service Fitch Ratings Services Short-term debt ratings A-1 Prime-1 F1 Long-term debt ratings A A2 A+ We do not have any rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity of a material amount of our debt. However, a downgrade in our credit rating would increase the cost of borrowings under our credit facilities. Also, a downgrade in our credit rating could limit our ability to issue commercial paper under our current programs. If this occurs, we would seek alternative sources of 64 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) funding, including drawdowns under our credit facilities or the issuance of notes under our existing shelf registration statement. CONTRACTUAL AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS The impact that we expect our contractual and other obligations as of October 31, 2010 to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods is as follows: Payments Due by Period Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years In millions Principal payments on long-term debt (1) $ 16,294 $ 2,111 $ 7,945 $ 4,600 $ 1,638 Interest payments on long-term debt (2) 1,489 386 570 173 360 Operating lease obligations 3,565 879 1,426 630 630 Purchase obligations (3) 2,644 1,973 609 62 Capital lease obligations 548 111 123 242 72 Total $ 24,540 $ 5,460 $ 10,673 $ 5,707 $ 2,700 (1) Amounts represent the expected principal cash payments relating to our long-term debt and do not include any fair value adjustments or discounts and premiums. (2) Amounts represent the expected interest cash payments relating to our long-term debt. We have outstanding interest rate swap agreements accounted for as fair value hedges that have the economic effect of modifying the fixed interest obligations associated with some of our fixed global notes for variable rate obligations. The impact of these interest rate swaps was factored into the calculation of the future interest payments on long-term debt. (3) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. These purchase obligations are related principally to inventory and other items. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancellable without penalty. Purchase obligations also exclude open purchase orders that are routine arrangements entered into in the ordinary course of business as they are difficult to quantify in a meaningful way. Even though open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business need prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. In addition to the above, at October 31, 2010, we had approximately $2.0 billion of recorded liabilities and related interest and penalties pertaining to uncertainty in income tax positions, which will be partially offset by $90 million of deferred tax assets and interest receivable. These liabilities and related interest and penalties include $55 million expected to be paid within one year. For the remaining amount, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when cash settlement with the tax authorities might occur due to the uncertainties related to these tax matters. See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on taxes. 65 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Funding Commitments In fiscal 2011, we expect to contribute approximately $817 million to our pension and post-retirement plan funding. Our funding policy is to contribute cash to our pension plans so that we meet at least the minimum contribution requirements, as established by local government, funding and taxing authorities. Funding for the years following 2011 would be based on the then current market conditions, actuarial estimates and plan funding status. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on pension activity. As a result of our approved restructuring plans, we expect future cash expenditures of approximately $2.1 billion. We expect to make cash payments of approximately $1.4 billion in fiscal 2011 with remaining cash payments through 2016. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on restructuring activities. Guarantees and Indemnifications See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on liabilities that may arise from guarantees and indemnifications. Litigation and Contingencies See Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on liabilities that may arise from litigation and contingencies. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As part of our ongoing business, we have not participated in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities ("SPEs"), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As of October 31, 2010, we are not involved in any material unconsolidated SPEs. 66 Table of Contents 
