CIK: 47217
Company Name: HEWLETT PACKARD CO
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-12-18


ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. OVERVIEW We are a leading global provider of products, technologies, software, solutions and services to individual consumers, small- and medium-sized businesses ("SMBs"), and large enterprises, including customers in the public and education sectors. Our offerings span: personal computing and other access devices; imaging and printing-related products and services; enterprise information technology infrastructure, including enterprise storage and server technology, and software that optimizes business technology investments; and multi-vendor customer services, including technology support and maintenance, consulting and integration and outsourcing services. We have seven business segments for financial reporting purposes: Enterprise Storage and Servers ("ESS"), HP Services ("HPS"), HP Software, the Personal Systems Group ("PSG"), the Imaging and Printing Group ("IPG"), HP Financial Services ("HPFS"), and Corporate Investments. ESS, HPS and HP Software are reported collectively as a broader Technology Solutions Group ("TSG"). While TSG is not an operating segment, we sometimes provide financial data aggregating the segments within TSG in order to provide a supplementary view of our business. The operating framework within which we manage our businesses and which guides our strategies is based on the disciplined management of three business levers: targeted growth, operational efficiency and strategic deployment of capital. Although we have made progress towards our goals in recent periods, there are still many areas in which we believe that we can improve. To implement this operating framework, we are focused on the following initiatives: We are engaged in a process of examining every function and every business in the company in order to optimize efficiency and reduce cost; We have substantially completed the consolidation of our 85 data centers worldwide in existence prior to our acquisition of Electronic Data Systems Corporation ("EDS") into six state-of-the-art centers in three U.S. cities; We are consolidating several hundred real estate locations worldwide to fewer core sites in order to reduce our IT spending and real estate costs; We are aligning our resources and reinvesting a portion of the cost savings from these initiatives to build our market share in emerging markets and to expand our sales coverage to drive growth in mature markets; We are developing training programs for our sales forces designed to enhance our ability to provide solutions to our customers and build customer loyalty; 37 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) We are building and expanding our services organization, which has been substantially augmented through our acquisition of EDS, to support our technology businesses and enable us to provide comprehensive solutions to our customers; We are developing a global delivery structure to take advantage of regions where advanced technical expertise is available at lower costs; and We are repurchasing shares of our common stock under an ongoing program to manage the dilution created by shares issued under employee stock plans as well as to repurchase shares opportunistically. On August 26, 2008, we completed our acquisition of EDS, a leading provider of information technology services for enterprise customers. Accordingly, we have included the results of the business operations acquired from EDS in our consolidated results of operations beginning on that date. Those business operations have been included as a business unit within HPS for financial reporting purposes. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information about the EDS acquisition. We believe the general strategic benefits from the EDS acquisition will both enhance our competitive position in a number of important industries by improving the breadth and depth of our service offerings and further increase our extensive experience in offering solutions to customers in the areas of government, healthcare, manufacturing, financial services, energy, transportation, communications, and consumer industries and retail. EDS's service offerings coupled with our existing service offerings provide broad capabilities in infrastructure technology outsourcing, including data center services, workplace services, networking services and managed security; business process outsourcing, including health claims, financial processing, CRM and HR outsourcing; and applications outsourcing, including development, modernization and management. In September 2008, we announced a restructuring plan to gain efficiencies following the EDS acquisition. The restructuring plan will be implemented over four years and includes a targeted reduction in headcount of approximately 24,700 employees over that period, with the majority of the reductions occurring by the end of fiscal 2009. Our plan includes replacing roughly half of these positions in order to optimize our global footprint. As part of this plan, we recorded $1.8 billion in restructuring costs in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, $1.5 billion of which was booked to goodwill and $0.3 billion of which was recorded as a restructuring charge. We continue to grow our business organically and through strategic acquisitions. During fiscal 2008, we acquired nine companies, the largest of which was EDS, and we expect to continue to make strategic acquisitions periodically in the future. 38 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) In terms of how our execution has translated into financial performance, the following provides an overview of our key fiscal 2008 financial metrics: TSG HP Consolidated ESS HPS (1) HP Software Total PSG IPG HPFS In millions, except per share amounts Net revenue $ 118,364 $ 19,400 $ 22,397 $ 3,029 $ 44,826 $ 42,295 $ 29,385 $ 2,698 Year-over-year net revenue % increase 13.5 % 4.1 % 35.2 % 19.7 % 18.8 % 16.2 % 3.2 % 15.5 % Earnings from operations $ 10,473 $ 2,577 $ 2,491 $ 461 $ 5,529 $ 2,375 $ 4,590 $ 192 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 8.8 % 13.3 % 11.1 % 15.2 % 12.3 % 5.6 % 15.6 % 7.1 % Net earnings $ 8,329 Net earnings per share Basic $ 3.35 Diluted $ 3.25 (1) Includes the results of the business operations acquired from EDS beginning on August 26, 2008. Cash and cash equivalents at October 31, 2008 totaled $10.2 billion, a decrease of $1.1 billion from the October 31, 2007 balance of $11.3 billion. The decrease for fiscal 2008 was related primarily to $11.2 billion of net cash paid for business acquisitions, $9.6 billion paid to repurchase our common stock, and $2.6 billion net investments in property, plant and equipment, all of which were partially offset by $14.6 billion in cash provided from operations, a $6.3 billion net increase in our outstanding debt and commercial paper and $1.8 billion in proceeds from the issuance of our common stock under employee stock plans. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. The discussion of results of operations at the consolidated level is followed by a more detailed discussion of results of operations by segment. For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our operating results, see the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A, which is incorporated herein by reference. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES General The Consolidated Financial Statements of HP are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are 39 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) not readily apparent from other sources. Senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of HP's Board of Directors. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Revenue Recognition We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and, while the majority of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain multiple elements or non-standard terms and conditions. As a result, significant contract interpretation is sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple element arrangement should be treated as separate units of accounting for revenue recognition purposes, and, if so, how the price should be allocated among the elements and when to recognize revenue for each element. We recognize revenue for delivered elements only when the delivered elements have standalone value, fair values of undelivered elements are known, uncertainties regarding customer acceptance are resolved and there are no customer-negotiated refund or return rights affecting the revenue recognized for delivered elements. Changes in the allocation of the sales price between elements may impact the timing of revenue recognition but will not change the total revenue recognized on the contract. We recognize revenue as work progresses on certain fixed-price contracts, such as consulting arrangements. Using a proportional performance method, we estimate the total expected labor costs in order to determine the amount of revenue earned to date. We follow this basis because reasonably dependable estimates of the labor costs applicable to various stages of a contract can be made. Total contract profit is subject to revisions throughout the life of the contract. We record changes in revenue to income, as a result of revisions to cost estimates, in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. We recognize revenue on certain design and build (design, development and/or construction of software and/or systems) projects using the percentage-of-completion method. We use the cost to cost method of measurement towards completion as determined by the percentage of cost incurred to date to the total estimated costs of the project. In circumstances when reasonable and reliable cost estimates for a project cannot be made, we recognize revenue using the completed contract method. We record estimated reductions to revenue for customer and distributor programs and incentive offerings, including price protection, promotions, other volume-based incentives and expected returns. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered. Additionally, certain incentive programs require us to estimate, based on historical experience, the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive. 40 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Business Combinations We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development ("IPR&D"), based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over these fair values is recorded as goodwill. We engage independent third-party appraisal firms to assist us in determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. The significant purchased intangible assets recorded by HP include customer contracts, developed and core technology and the Compaq trade name. The fair values assigned to the identified intangible assets are discussed in detail in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from customer contracts, customer lists, distribution agreements, and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop IPR&D into commercially viable products and estimating cash flows from projects when completed; Compaq brand awareness and market position, as well as assumptions about the period of time the brand will continue to be used in HP's product portfolio; and discount rates. Management's estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Other estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as additional information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as more fully discussed in Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Restructuring We have engaged, and may continue to engage, in restructuring actions, which require management to utilize significant estimates related to expenses for severance and other employee separation costs, realizable values of assets made redundant or obsolete, lease cancellation and other exit costs. If the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of the restructuring charges could be materially impacted. For a full description of our restructuring actions, refer to our discussions of restructuring in the Results of Operations section and Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Stock-Based Compensation Expense We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payment awards granted after November 1, 2005 and granted prior to but not yet vested as of November 1, 2005, in accordance with SFAS No. 123 (revised 2004) "Share-Based Payment" ("SFAS 123R"). Under the fair value recognition provisions of SFAS 123R, we recognize stock-based compensation expense net of an estimated forfeiture rate, recognizing compensation cost for only those shares expected to vest on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. Prior to SFAS 123R adoption, we accounted for share-based payment awards under Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, "Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees" ("APB 25") and, accordingly, generally recognized compensation expense only when we granted options with a discounted exercise price. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards require subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the share-based payment awards and stock price volatility. We utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value the stock 41 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) options granted under our principal option plans. To implement this model, we examined our historical pattern of option exercises in an effort to determine if there were any discernable activity patterns based on certain employee populations. From this analysis, we identified three employee populations on which to apply the Black-Scholes model. We determined that implied volatility calculated based on actively traded options on HP common stock is a better indicator of expected volatility and future stock price trends than historical volatility. Therefore, expected volatility used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model in fiscal years 2008, 2007 and 2006 was based on market-based implied volatility. We issue performance-based restricted units ("PRUs") representing hypothetical shares of HP common stock. Each PRU award reflects a target number of shares that may be issued to the award recipient. We determine the actual number of shares the recipient receives at the end of a three-year performance period based on results achieved versus goals based on our annual cash flow from operations as a percentage of revenue and average total shareholder return ("TSR") relative to the S&P 500 over the performance period. We estimate the fair value of PRUs using the Monte Carlo simulation model, as the TSR modifier contains a market condition. We update the estimated expense, net of forfeitures, for the cashflow performance against the goal for that year at the end of each reporting period. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based payment awards represent management's best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. In addition, we are required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest. If our actual forfeiture rate is materially different from our estimate, the stock-based compensation expense could be significantly different from what we have recorded in the current period. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for a further discussion on stock-based compensation. Taxes on Earnings We calculate our current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in our income tax returns filed during the subsequent year. We record adjustments based on filed returns when we have identified and finalized them, which is generally in the third and fourth quarters of the subsequent year for U.S. federal and state provisions, respectively. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax assets to the amount that we are more likely than not to realize. We have considered future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and make a corresponding charge to earnings in the period in which we make such determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the net deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the tax jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located. 42 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Our effective tax rate includes the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. taxes because we plan to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the United States. We plan foreign earnings remittance amounts based on projected cash flow needs as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we will distribute to the United States and provide the U.S. federal taxes due on these amounts. Further, as a result of certain employment actions and capital investments HP has undertaken, income from manufacturing activities in certain countries is subject to reduced tax rates, and in some cases is wholly exempt from taxes, for fiscal years through 2022. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact our effective tax rate. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and over sixty foreign countries, and we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that our tax return positions are fully supported, but tax authorities are likely to challenge certain positions, which may not be fully sustained. However, our income tax expense includes amounts intended to satisfy income tax assessments that result from these challenges in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Interpretation No. 48, "Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109" ("FIN 48"). Determining the income tax expense for these potential assessments and recording the related assets and liabilities requires management judgments and estimates. We evaluate our uncertain tax positions in accordance with FIN 48. We believe that our reserve for uncertain tax positions, including related interest, is adequate. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of audits could be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax expense and therefore could have a material impact on our tax provision, net income and cash flows. Our reserve for uncertain tax positions is attributable primarily to uncertainties concerning the tax treatment of our international operations, including the allocation of income among different jurisdictions, and related interest. We review our reserves quarterly, and we may adjust such reserves because of proposed assessments by tax authorities, changes in facts and circumstances, issuance of new regulations or new case law, previously unavailable information obtained during the course of an examination, negotiations between tax authorities of different countries concerning our transfer prices, execution of Advanced Pricing Agreements, resolution with respect to individual audit issues, the resolution of entire audits, or the expiration of statutes of limitations. In addition, our tax contingency reserve includes certain amounts for potential tax assessments for pre-acquisition tax years of acquired companies which, if released prior to the effective date of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 141 (revised 2007), "Business Combinations" ("SFAS 141(R)"), will impact the carrying value of goodwill attributable to the acquired company. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts We determine our allowance for doubtful accounts using a combination of factors to ensure that we have not overstated our trade and financing receivables balances due to uncollectibility. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for all customers based on a variety of factors, including the use of third-party credit risk models that generate quantitative measures of default probabilities based on market factors, the financial condition of customers, the length of time receivables are past due, trends in overall weighted-average risk rating of the total portfolio, macroeconomic conditions, significant one-time events and historical experience. Also, we record specific provisions for individual accounts when we become aware of a customer's inability to meet its financial obligations to us, such as in the case of bankruptcy filings or deterioration in the customer's operating results or financial position. If circumstances related to customers change, we would further adjust our estimates of the 43 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) recoverability of receivables either upward or downward. The annual general provision for doubtful accounts has averaged approximately 0.03% of net revenue over the last three fiscal years. Using our third-party credit risk model at October 31, 2008, a 50-basis-point deterioration in the weighted-average default probabilities of our significant customers would have resulted in an approximately $105 million increase to our trade allowance at the end of fiscal year 2008. Inventory We state our inventory at the lower of cost or market. We make adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, at the product group level for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired balances. Factors influencing these adjustments include changes in demand, rapid technological changes, product life cycle and development plans, component cost trends, product pricing, physical deterioration and quality issues. Revisions to these adjustments would be required if these factors differ from our estimates. Valuation of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Purchased Intangible Assets We review goodwill and purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable in accordance with SFAS No. 142, "Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets." The provisions of SFAS No. 142 require that we perform a two-step impairment test on goodwill. In the first step, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. Our reporting units are consistent with the reportable segments identified in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. We determine the fair value of our reporting units based on a weighting of income and market approaches. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate the fair value based on market multiples of revenue or earnings for comparable companies. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit, goodwill is not impaired and we are not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, then we must perform the second step of the impairment test in order to determine the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill. If the carrying value of a reporting unit's goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then we record an impairment loss equal to the difference. SFAS No. 142 also requires that the fair value of the purchased intangible assets with indefinite lives be estimated and compared to the carrying value. We estimate the fair value of these intangible assets using an income approach. We recognize an impairment loss when the estimated fair value of the intangible asset is less than the carrying value. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit or an indefinite-lived purchased intangible asset is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, assumed royalty rates, future economic and market conditions and determination of appropriate market comparables. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of our reporting units. Our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which we performed during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, did not result in an impairment charge. The excess of fair value over carrying value for each of 44 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HP's reporting units as of August 1, 2008, the annual testing date, ranged from approximately $700 million to approximately $37.9 billion. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the fair value calculations on the goodwill impairment test, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair values of each reporting unit. This hypothetical 10% decrease would result in excess fair value over carrying value ranging from approximately $500 million to approximately $33.5 billion for each of HP's reporting units. Warranty Provision We provide for the estimated cost of product warranties at the time we recognize revenue. We evaluate our warranty obligations on a product group basis. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period of time. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, we base our estimated warranty obligation upon warranty terms, ongoing product failure rates, repair costs, product call rates, average cost per call, and current period product shipments. If actual product failure rates, repair rates or any other post sales support costs differ from our estimates, we would be required to make revisions to the estimated warranty liability. Warranty terms generally range from 90 days to three years parts and labor, depending upon the product. Over the last three fiscal years, the annual warranty provision has averaged approximately 3.3% of annual net product revenue, while actual annual warranty costs have averaged approximately 3.1% of annual net product revenue. Retirement Benefits Our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations are dependent on various assumptions. Our major assumptions relate primarily to discount rates, salary growth, long-term return on plan assets and medical cost trend rates. We base the discount rate assumption on current investment yields of high quality fixed income investments during the retirement benefits maturity period. The salary growth assumptions reflect our long-term actual experience and future and near-term outlook. Long-term return on plan assets is determined based on historical portfolio results and management's expectation of the future economic environment, as well as target asset allocations. In the beginning of fiscal 2008, we implemented a liability-driven investment strategy for the HP U.S. defined benefit pension plan, which was frozen effective December 31, 2007. As part of the strategy, we have transitioned our investment allocation for that plan to predominantly fixed income assets. The expected return on the plan assets, used in calculating the net benefit cost, is 6.10% for fiscal 2009, which reflects this change in our asset allocation policy. Our medical cost trend assumptions are developed based on historical cost data, the near-term outlook and an assessment of likely long-term trends. Actual results that differ from our assumptions are accumulated and are amortized generally over the estimated future working life of the plan participants. Our major assumptions vary by plan and the weighted-average rates used are set forth in Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Each assumption has different sensitivity characteristics, and, in general, changes, if any, have moved in the 45 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) same direction over the last several years. For fiscal 2008, changes in the weighted-average rates for the HP benefit plans would have had the following impact on our net periodic benefit cost: A decrease of 25 basis points in the long-term rate of return would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $36 million; A decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $46 million; and An increase of 25 basis points in the future compensation rate would have increased our net benefit cost by approximately $12 million. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS As previously reported in our 2007 Annual Report on Form 10-K, we recognized the funded status of our benefit plans at October 31, 2007 in accordance with the recognition provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ("SFAS") No. 158, "Employers' Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans An Amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106 and 132(R)" ("SFAS 158"). In addition to the recognition provisions, SFAS 158 also requires companies to measure the funded status of the plan as of the date of their fiscal year end, effective for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2008. We will adopt the measurement provisions of SFAS 158 effective October 31, 2009 for the HP pension and post retirements plans. We do not expect the adoption of the measurement provisions of SFAS 158 to have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In September 2006, the FASB issued SFAS No. 157, "Fair Value Measurements" ("SFAS 157"). SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS 157 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and is required to be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. In February 2008, the FASB issued FASB Staff Position ("FSP") No. FAS 157-1, "Application of FASB Statement No. 157 to FASB Statement No. 13 and Other Accounting Pronouncements That Address Fair Value Measurements for Purposes of Lease Classification or Measurement under Statement 13" and also issued FSP No. 157-2, "Effective Date of FASB Statement No. 157," which collectively remove certain leasing transactions from the scope of SFAS 157 and partially delay the effective date of SFAS 157 for one year for certain nonfinancial assets and liabilities. In October 2008, the FASB also issued FSP SFAS 157-3, "Determining the Fair Value of a Financial Asset When the Market for That Asset Is Not Active," which clarifies the application of SFAS No. 157 in an inactive market and illustrates how an entity would determine fair value when the market for a financial asset is not active. Although we will continue to evaluate the application of SFAS 157, we do not currently believe adoption of SFAS 157 will have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In February 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 159, "The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Including an amendment of FASB Statement No. 115" ("SFAS 159"). SFAS 159 allows companies to elect to measure eligible financial instruments and certain other items at fair value that are not required to be measured at fair value. SFAS 159 requires that unrealized gains and losses on items for which the fair value option has been elected be reported in earnings at each reporting date. SFAS 159 is effective for fiscal years beginning after November 15, 2007 and is required to be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2009. We do not currently believe adoption will have a 46 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) material impact on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition since we do not expect to apply the fair value option to any existing eligible assets or liabilities. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS 141(R). SFAS 141(R) establishes principles and requirements for how an acquirer recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree and the goodwill acquired in connection with business combinations. SFAS 141(R) also establishes disclosure requirements to enable the evaluation of the nature and financial effects of the business combination. SFAS 141(R) is effective for fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2008 and will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We continue to evaluate the impact that the adoption of SFAS 141(R) will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition, which impact will be largely dependent on the size and nature of the business combinations completed after the adoption of this statement. In December 2007, the FASB issued SFAS No. 160, "Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements an amendment of Accounting Research Bulletin No. 51" ("SFAS 160"). SFAS 160 establishes accounting and reporting standards for ownership interests in subsidiaries held by parties other than the parent, the amount of consolidated net income attributable to the parent and to the noncontrolling interest, changes in a parent's ownership interest, and the valuation of retained noncontrolling equity investments when a subsidiary is deconsolidated. SFAS 160 also establishes disclosure requirements that clearly identify and distinguish between the interests of the parent and the interests of the noncontrolling owners. SFAS 160 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008 and will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We are currently evaluating the potential impact, if any, of the adoption of SFAS 160 on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In March 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 161, "Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, an amendment of FASB Statement No. 133" ("SFAS 161"). SFAS 161 applies to all derivative instruments and related hedged items accounted for under SFAS No. 133, "Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities" ("SFAS 133"). SFAS 161 requires entities to provide greater transparency about how and why an entity uses derivative instruments, how derivative instruments and related hedged items are accounted for under SFAS 133 and its related interpretations, and how derivative instruments and related hedged items affect an entity's financial position, results of operations and cash flows. SFAS 161 is effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after November 15, 2008 and will be adopted by us in the second quarter of fiscal 2009. We do not expect the adoption of SFAS 161 to have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In May 2008, the FASB issued SFAS No. 162, "The Hierarchy of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles" ("SFAS 162"). SFAS 162 identifies the sources of accounting principles and the framework for selecting the principles used in the preparation of financial statements of nongovernmental entities that are presented in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (the GAAP hierarchy). Statement 162 became effective November 15, 2008. We do not expect the adoption of SFAS 162 to have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In May 2008, the FASB issued FSP Accounting Principles Board ("APB") 14-1 "Accounting for Convertible Debt Instruments That May Be Settled in Cash upon Conversion (Including Partial Cash Settlement)" ("FSP APB 14-1"). FSP APB 14-1 requires the issuer of certain convertible debt instruments that may be settled in cash (or other assets) on conversion to separately account for the 47 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument in a manner that reflects the issuer's non-convertible debt borrowing rate. FSP APB 14-1 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008 on a retroactive basis and will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We are currently evaluating the potential impact of the adoption of FSP APB 14-1 on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. In June 2008, the FASB issued FSP Emerging Issues Task Force ("EITF") 03-6-1, "Determining Whether Instruments Granted in Share-Based Payment Transactions Are Participating Securities." FSP EITF 03-6-1 clarifies that share-based payment awards that entitle their holders to receive nonforfeitable dividends or dividend equivalents before vesting should be considered participating securities. We have some grants of restricted stock that contain non-forfeitable rights to dividends and will be considered participating securities upon adoption of FSP EITF 03-6-1. As participating securities, we will be required to include these instruments in the calculation of earnings per share ("EPS"), and we will need to calculate EPS using the "two-class method." The two-class method of computing EPS is an earnings allocation formula that determines EPS for each class of common stock and participating security according to dividends declared (or accumulated) and participation rights in undistributed earnings. FSP EITF 03-6-1 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2008 on a retrospective basis and will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We are currently evaluating the potential impact, if any, the adoption of FSP EITF 03-6-1 could have on our calculation of EPS. In November 2008, the FASB ratified EITF Issue No. 08-7, "Accounting for Defensive Intangible Assets," ("EITF 08-7"). EITF 08-7 applies to defensive intangible assets, which are acquired intangible assets that the acquirer does not intend to actively use but intends to hold to prevent its competitors from obtaining access to them. As these assets are separately identifiable, EITF 08-7 requires an acquiring entity to account for defensive intangible assets as a separate unit of accounting. Defensive intangible assets must be recognized at fair value in accordance with SFAS 141(R) and SFAS 157. EITF 08-7 is effective for defensive intangible assets acquired in fiscal years beginning on or after December 15, 2008 and will be adopted by us in the first quarter of fiscal 2010. We are currently evaluating the potential impact, if any, of the adoption of EITF 08-7 on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. During fiscal 2008, we adopted FIN 48. See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for the effect of applying FIN 48. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion compares the historical results of operations on a GAAP basis for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2008, 2007, and 2006. As discussed above, we have included the results of the business operations acquired from EDS in our consolidated results of operations beginning on August 26, 2008, the closing date of the EDS acquisition, and we have included those business operations as a separate business unit within HPS for financial reporting purposes. 48 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 (2) 2006 (2) In millions Net revenue $ 118,364 100.0 % $ 104,286 100.0 % $ 91,658 100.0 % Cost of sales (1) 89,921 76.0 % 78,887 75.6 % 69,427 75.7 % Gross profit 28,443 24.0 % 25,399 24.4 % 22,231 24.3 % Research and development 3,543 3.0 % 3,611 3.5 % 3,591 3.9 % Selling, general and administrative 13,104 11.1 % 12,226 11.7 % 11,266 12.3 % Amortization of purchased intangible assets 967 0.9 % 783 0.7 % 604 0.7 % In-process research and development charges 45 190 0.2 % 52 Restructuring charges 270 0.2 % 387 0.4 % 158 0.2 % Acquisition-related charges 41 Pension curtailments and pension settlements, net (517 ) (0.5 )% Earnings from operations 10,473 8.8 % 8,719 8.4 % 6,560 7.2 % Interest and other, net 458 0.4 % 631 0.6 % Earnings before taxes 10,473 8.8 % 9,177 8.8 % 7,191 7.8 % Provision for taxes 2,144 1.8 % 1,913 1.8 % 993 1.0 % Net earnings $ 8,329 7.0 % $ 7,264 7.0 % $ 6,198 6.8 % (1) Cost of products, cost of services and financing interest. (2) Certain reclassifications have been made to prior year amounts in order to conform to the current year presentation. Net Revenue The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 Percentage points Personal Systems Group 5.6 7.9 HP Services 5.6 1.1 Imaging and Printing Group 0.9 1.8 Enterprise Storage and Servers 0.7 1.5 HP Software 0.5 1.2 HP Financial Services 0.4 0.3 Corporate Investments/Other (0.2 ) Total HP 13.5 13.8 In fiscal 2008, HP net revenue increased approximately 13% from the prior-year period (8% on a constant currency basis). The favorable currency impact for fiscal 2008 was due primarily to the 49 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) movement of the dollar against the euro. U.S. net revenue was $36.9 billion for fiscal 2008, an increase of 6% from the prior year, while international net revenue increased 17% to $81.4 billion. PSG net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 as a result of a unit volume increase of 22%. The unit volume increase was the result of strong growth in notebooks with continued strength in emerging markets. The positive revenue impact from this unit volume increase was moderated by declines in average selling prices ("ASPs") in commercial and consumer clients of 7% and 4%, respectively. HPS net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 over the prior year due primarily to the acquisition of EDS on August 26, 2008. HPS net revenue, excluding EDS, also increased in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 as a result of revenue growth in technology services primarily from IT solution support services, existing account growth in outsourcing services and base business growth in our consulting and integration business unit. IPG net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 due to the growth in supplies net revenue as a result of higher unit volumes with strong performance from color-related products. For fiscal 2008, commercial and consumer hardware net revenues declined due primarily to competitive pricing pressures and a slowing economy. ESS net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 over the prior-year period due primarily to strong performance in storage, which was due in part to growth within our EVA and MSA product lines, and revenue growth in industry standard servers from increased unit volumes and blade revenues. Fiscal 2008 revenues in business critical systems were flat compared to the prior-year period. HP Software net revenue growth in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 was attributable to strong growth in our business technology optimization ("BTO") business unit resulting from revenue increases in support, growth in license revenue, partially as a result of our acquisition of Opsware Inc. ("Opsware") in September 2007, and, to a lesser extent, increased services contract sales. HPFS net revenue increased in fiscal 2008 from the prior year due primarily to an increase in the mix of operating leases as a portion of our asset portfolio and growth in average portfolio assets. In fiscal 2007, HP net revenue increased approximately 14% from the prior-year period (10% on a constant currency basis). The favorable currency impact for fiscal 2007 was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. U.S. net revenue was $34.8 billion for fiscal 2007, an increase of 8% from the prior year, while international net revenue increased 17% to $69.5 billion. PSG had double-digit net revenue growth in fiscal 2007 across all regions as a result of overall unit volume increases of 28%. The unit volume increases resulted from strong growth in notebooks with significant improvements in emerging markets. The impact of these increases was partially offset by declines in ASPs in commercial and consumer clients of 5% and 1%, respectively. HPS net revenue during fiscal 2007 increased due primarily to favorable currency impacts, revenue increases in outsourcing services driven by existing accounts growth and new business, and revenue increases in consulting and integration associated with acquisitions made in fiscal 2007. IPG net revenue growth in fiscal 2007 was due mainly to increased unit volumes of printer supplies resulting from the continued expansion of printer hardware placements and the strong performance of supplies for color-related products. 50 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) ESS net revenue growth during fiscal 2007 was the result primarily of strong blade revenue and unit growth in our industry standard servers business, increased option attach rates in our ProLiant server line, continued strong performance in mid-range EVA products, growth in commercial storage area networks and revenue increases from our Integrity servers. The ESS growth was partially moderated by the revenue declines in our tape business, high-end arrays and our PA-RISC and Alpha server product lines during fiscal 2007. The net revenue growth in HP Software during fiscal 2007 was due primarily to growth in our BTO business as a result of the acquisition of Mercury Interactive Corporation ("Mercury") and increases in revenue from license and support contracts. The HPFS net revenue increase during fiscal 2007 was due primarily to operating lease growth and higher end-of-lease activity. Gross Margin The weighted-average components of the change in gross margin as compared to prior-year periods were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 Percentage points HP Software 0.1 0.6 Enterprise Storage and Servers (0.1 ) (0.1 ) Personal Systems Group (0.1 ) (0.2 ) Imaging and Printing Group (0.1 ) (0.2 ) HP Services (0.2 ) 0.1 HP Financial Services (0.1 ) Corporate Investments/Other Total HP (0.4 ) 0.1 Total company gross margin decreased slightly in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. On a segment basis, an increase in HP Software gross margin and a small increase in ESS gross margin were offset by small gross margin declines in HPS and HPFS and flat gross margin growth across our remaining segments. For fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, the improvement in HP Software gross margin was primarily the result of cost savings in the BTO business unit. The slight improvement in ESS gross margin in fiscal 2008 from the prior year was primarily a result of improved cost management and attach rates in industry standard servers. In fiscal 2008, PSG gross margin remained flat due primarily to declining ASPs offset by an increase in the attach rate of higher-margin options. IPG gross margin remained flat in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007 with improved supplies margins resulting from mix shifts being offset by unfavorable hardware margins. HPS gross margin declined in fiscal 2008 from the prior year due primarily to the acquisition of EDS in the fourth quarter. Without the impact of the EDS acquisition, HPS gross margin would have increased for the fiscal year. 51 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HPFS gross margin declined slightly in fiscal 2008 due primarily to higher bad debt expenses, the effect of which was partially offset by increased margins on end-of-lease activity. Total company gross margin increased slightly in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The improvement in HP Software gross margin in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to a favorable change in revenue mix driven by the inclusion of revenue from Mercury licenses and support, which typically have a higher gross margin than the other offerings within the segment. During fiscal 2007, ESS contributed unfavorably to our total company's weighted-average change in gross margin while the ESS gross margin remained stable. This stability was due primarily to improved cost management, which was offset by an ongoing mix shift to lower-margin Integrity products within business critical systems and a continued mix shift towards industry standard servers. During fiscal 2007, PSG contributed unfavorably to our total company's weighted-average change in gross margin as a result of higher growth than the other segments. However, PSG gross margin increased primarily as a result of component cost declines and improvements in supply chain costs per unit, which were partially offset by ASP declines. During fiscal 2007, IPG gross margin decreased due primarily to unfavorable hardware margins, increased costs associated with new product introductions and a change in product mix. HPS gross margin increased during fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 due primarily to continued focus on cost structure improvements from delivery efficiencies and cost controls. This gross margin increase was partially offset by the impact from the continued competitive pricing environment. HPFS gross margin decline during fiscal 2007 was caused primarily by increased bad debt expenses and lower bad debt recoveries, as well as lower margins on leases and used equipment sales. Operating Expenses Research and Development Total research and development ("R&D") decreased in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007, due primarily to effective cost controls, the effect of which was partially offset by the unfavorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro. Each of our major segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in R&D expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008. Total R&D expense increased in fiscal 2007 due primarily to additional R&D expense as a result of the Mercury acquisition in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. As a percentage of net revenue, each of our major segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in R&D expense in fiscal 2007. Selling, General and Administrative Total selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expense increased in fiscal 2008 due primarily to higher field selling costs as a result of our investments in sales resources, unfavorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro, and additional expenses related to the EDS acquisition. Each of our major segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue during fiscal 2008. Total SG&A expense increased during fiscal 2007 due primarily to additional expense as a result of the acquisition of Mercury in the first quarter of fiscal 2007, unfavorable currency impacts related to the movement of the dollar against the euro and additional investments in our sales forces. The ESS, 52 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HPS, PSG and IPG segments experienced a year-over-year decrease in SG&A expense as a percentage of net revenue during fiscal 2007, while HP Software experienced a year-over-year increase in SG&A expense. Amortization of Purchased Intangible Assets The increase in amortization expense during fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007 was due primarily to amortization expenses related to the EDS acquisition as well as other acquisitions made in fiscal 2008. The increase in amortization expense in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006 was due primarily to amortization expense related to the acquisition of Mercury in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense related to certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions, including the Compaq Computer Corporation ("Compaq") acquisition, that had reached the end of their amortization period. For more information on our amortization of purchased intangibles assets, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. In-Process Research and Development Charges We record in-process research and development ("IPR&D") charges in connection with acquisitions accounted for as business combinations as more fully described in Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. In fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006 we recorded IPR&D charges of $45 million, $190 million and $52 million, respectively, related to acquisitions. The decrease in IPR&D in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to higher IPR&D expenses in the prior year as a result of our acquisition of Mercury in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. Restructuring Charges Restructuring charges for fiscal 2008 were $270 million, which included $246 million of charges due primarily to severance and facility costs related to the EDS acquisition and a net charge of $24 million relating to adjustments for existing restructuring programs. Restructuring charges for fiscal 2007 were $387 million, which included $354 million of expenses related to severance and other benefit costs associated with those employees who elected to participate in the early retirement program implemented in fiscal 2007 and a net charge of $33 million relating to adjustments to our previous restructuring programs. Restructuring charges in fiscal year 2006 were $158 million. This included a net charge of $233 million related to true-ups of severance and other related restructuring charges for all restructuring plans, a $6 million termination benefits expense and a $3 million settlement and curtailment loss from our non-U.S. pension plans related to the fiscal 2005 restructuring plan approved by our Board of Directors in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. These charges were partially offset by a $46 million settlement gain from the U.S. pension plans, a $24 million curtailment gain from the U.S. retiree medical program and a $14 million adjustment to reduce our non-cash stock-based compensation expense, all related to our fiscal 2005 restructuring plan. For more information on our restructuring charges, see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. 53 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Workforce Rebalancing As part of our ongoing business operations, we incurred workforce rebalancing charges for severance and related costs within certain business segments in fiscal 2008. Workforce rebalancing activities are considered part of normal operations as we continue to optimize our cost structure. Workforce rebalancing costs are included in our business segment results, and we expect to incur additional workforce rebalancing costs in the future. Acquisition-related Charges In fiscal 2008, we recorded acquisition-related charges of $41 million for consultant integration costs and retention bonuses associated with our acquisition of EDS. Pension Curtailments and Pension Settlements, Net In fiscal 2007, we recognized a net gain on pension curtailments and settlements of $517 million, relating primarily to a $542 million curtailment gain associated with a modification to our U.S. defined benefit pension plan and post-retirement benefit plan. This curtailment gain was offset partially by net settlement losses related to our other pension plan design changes. For more information on our retirement and post-retirement benefit plans, see Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Interest and Other, Net Interest and other, net decreased by $458 million in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The decrease resulted primarily from currency losses on balance sheet remeasurement items and lower interest income as a result of lower interest rates, the effect of which was partially offset by lower interest expense. Additionally, the prior-year period benefited from higher gains from the sale of real estate. Interest and other, net decreased by $173 million in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The decrease was due primarily to higher interest expense resulting from higher average debt balances. Net gains on investment in fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2006 resulted primarily from gains on the sale of equity investments, which were offset in part by impairment charges on our investment portfolio. Provision for Taxes Our effective tax rates were 20.5%, 20.8% and 13.8% in fiscal 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. The decrease in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 was related in part to lower tax rates in other jurisdictions. 54 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The increase in the overall tax rate in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 was related in part to favorable income tax adjustments of $599 million recorded in fiscal 2006, which included net favorable tax adjustments of $565 million to income tax accruals as a result of the settlement of the Internal Revenue Service ("IRS") examinations of our U.S. income tax returns for fiscal years 1993 to 1998. The reductions to the net income tax accruals for these years related primarily to the resolution of issues with respect to Puerto Rico manufacturing tax incentives and export tax incentives, and other issues involving our non-U.S. operations. For a full reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and further explanation of our provision for taxes, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Segment Information A description of the products and services, as well as financial data, for each segment can be found in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. We have realigned segment financial data for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2007 and 2006 to reflect changes in HP's organizational structure that occurred at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2008. We describe these changes more fully in Note 18. We have presented the business segments in this Annual Report on Form 10-K based on the distinct nature of various businesses such as customer base, homogenity of products and technology. The discussions below include the results of each of our segments. Technology Solutions Group ESS, HPS and HP Software are reported collectively as a broader Technology Solutions Group. We describe the results of the business segments of TSG in more detail below. Enterprise Storage and Servers For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Net revenue $ 19,400 $ 18,639 $ 17,211 Earnings from operations $ 2,577 $ 2,148 $ 1,557 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 13.3 % 11.5 % 9.0 % The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 Percentage points Storage 2.7 0.8 Industry standard servers 1.5 8.1 Business critical systems (0.1 ) (0.6 ) Total ESS 4.1 8.3 ESS net revenue increased 4.1% (decreased 0.5% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. Storage net revenue increased 13% in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007, with strong 55 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) performance in mid-range EVA, entry MSA, tape media and storage software. Industry standard servers net revenue grew 2% in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007 as a result of growth in blade revenue and unit volumes. Revenue growth in the industry standard servers business was partially offset by the decline in average unit prices driven by market movement to low-end product lines and component cost declines. Business critical systems net revenue growth was flat in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007. Integrity servers net revenue grew 22% in fiscal 2008 and represents 79% of the business critical systems revenue mix, up from 64% in fiscal 2007. The increase was offset by revenue declines in the PA-RISC product line and the planned phase-out of our Alpha Server product line. The contribution of Integrity server revenue to the business critical systems revenue mix is currently within the range expected in future periods. Integrity servers revenue in fiscal 2008 also included revenue from Montvale-based Integrity servers. In fiscal 2008, ESS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.8 percentage points compared to fiscal 2007, due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. Gross margin increased slightly in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007 due primarily to cost management and improved attach rates in industry standard servers, the effect of which was mostly offset by competitive pricing in storage and industry standard servers and a mix shift to entry level integrity servers. The decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to continued cost structure improvements. ESS net revenue increased 8.3% (4.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. Industry standard servers revenue grew 14% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006 as a result of strong growth in blade revenue and units, as well as increased option attach rates in the ProLiant server line. Storage net revenue increased 4% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006, with the increase driven primarily by mid-range EVA products and commercial products within the storage area networks offerings, as well as improved revenue growth in storage software. This increase was partially moderated by the revenue declines in our tape business and high-end arrays. Business critical systems net revenue decreased 3% in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006. The decrease was due primarily to revenue declines in the PA-RISC product line and the planned phase out of our Alpha server product line. The declines were partially offset by strong net revenue growth in our Integrity servers, which represented 64% of the business critical systems revenue mix in fiscal 2007, up from 37% in fiscal 2006. We expect revenue mix from Integrity servers to continue to grow as customers migrate from PA-RISC and Alpha products. In fiscal 2007, ESS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 2.5 percentage points compared to fiscal 2006, due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. Gross margin remained stable in fiscal 2007 compared to fiscal 2006 due primarily to improved cost management. The improved cost management was offset by an ongoing mix shift to lower-margin integrity products within business critical systems and a continued mix shift towards industry standard servers. The decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to cost structure improvements. 56 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HP Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Net revenue $ 22,397 $ 16,570 $ 15,578 Earnings from operations $ 2,491 $ 1,787 $ 1,498 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 11.1 % 10.8 % 9.6 % The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 Percentage points EDS (1) 23.3 N/A Technology services 5.3 1.9 Outsourcing services 4.6 2.8 Consulting and integration 2.0 1.7 Total HPS 35.2 6.4 (1) Represents the business operations acquired through our acquisition of EDS. HPS net revenue increased 35.2% over the prior year (29.1% when adjusted for currency), primarily due to the acquisition of EDS on August 26, 2008. The consolidated statements of earnings include the results of EDS since the date of acquisition. EDS net revenue includes revenue from infrastructure outsourcing services, applications services and business process outsourcing services, which accounted for approximately 56%, 30% and 14% of revenues, respectively. HPS net revenue, excluding EDS, increased 11.9% over the prior year (5.8% when adjusted for currency). Net revenue in technology services increased 10% in fiscal 2008 from the prior year due primarily to growth in IT solution support services, extended warranty revenue and favorable currency impacts, the impact of which was partially offset by competitive pricing pressures. Net revenue in outsourcing services increased 16% in fiscal 2008 due primarily to existing account growth, favorable currency impacts and new business, which were partially offset by installed base revenue erosion and pricing pressures. Net revenue in consulting and integration increased 11% in fiscal 2008 from the prior year due mainly to favorable currency impacts, base business growth and additional revenue from recent acquisitions. HPS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 increased 0.3 percentage points. The operating margin increase was the result of a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue, which was partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. In fiscal 2008, continued efficiency improvements in our operating expense structure contributed to the decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue compared to the prior year. Technology services operating margin in fiscal 2008 continued to benefit from improved delivery efficiencies and cost controls, the impact of which was partially offset by the ongoing portfolio mix shift from higher-margin proprietary support to lower-margin areas such as IT solution services. Outsourcing services operating margin increased in fiscal 2008 due primarily to increased volume, cost controls and favorable currency impacts, the effect of which was partially offset by installed base contract erosion and pricing pressures. Consulting and integration operating margin increased in fiscal 2008 due mainly to favorable currency impacts and business growth. 57 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HPS net revenue increased 6.4% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 (2.6% when adjusted for currency). In fiscal 2007, the favorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. Net revenue in technology services increased 4% in fiscal 2007 from the prior year due primarily to favorable currency impacts, growth in the IT solution support services and extended warranty revenue, the impact of which was partially offset by competitive pricing pressures and revenue erosion from installed base contracts. Net revenue in outsourcing services increased 10% in fiscal 2007 from the prior year. The increase was driven mainly by favorable currency impacts, existing account growth and new business, which were partially offset by installed base revenue erosion and pricing pressures. Net revenue in consulting and integration increased 9% in fiscal 2007 from the prior year due mainly to acquisitions made in fiscal 2007 and favorable currency impacts. HPS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2007 increased by 1.2 percentage points. The operating margin increase was the result of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin increase in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to the continued focus on cost structure improvements generated by delivery efficiencies and cost controls, the impact of which was partially offset by the impact from the continued competitive pricing environment. In fiscal 2007, continued efficiency improvements in our operating expense structure contributed to the decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue compared to the prior year. Technology services operating margin in fiscal 2007 continued to benefit from improved delivery efficiencies and cost controls, the impact of which was offset in part by the impact of the ongoing portfolio mix shift from higher margin proprietary support to lower margin areas such as IT solution services. Outsourcing services operating margin increased in fiscal 2007 due primarily to improved delivery efficiencies and reduced operating expenses partially offset by contractual pricing pressure. Consulting and integration operating margin decreased in fiscal 2007 due mainly to increased customer project losses and acquisition related costs, the impact of which was partially offset by more efficient utilization of our consultants and operating expense improvement. HP Software For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Net revenue $ 3,029 $ 2,531 $ 1,437 Earnings (loss) from operations $ 461 $ 221 $ (17 ) Earnings (loss) from operations as a % of net revenue 15.2 % 8.7 % (1.2 )% 58 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to the prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 Percentage points Business technology optimization (1) 19.5 77.6 Other software (1) 0.2 (1.5 ) Total HP Software 19.7 76.1 (1) Effective in fiscal 2008 the OpenView business unit was renamed "Business technology optimization" ("BTO") and the OpenCall and Other business unit was renamed "Other software." The renamed "Other software" business unit includes primarily OpenCall and business information optimization products. HP Software net revenue increased 19.7% (14.4% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. Net revenue from BTO increased 25% in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. BTO net revenue growth in fiscal 2008 was driven by increases in support, higher license revenue due in part to the Opsware acquisition, and increases in services contracts. Net revenue from Other software increased by 1% in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The growth in Other software net revenue in fiscal 2008 was attributable primarily to the growth in the information management business due in part to our acquisition of Tower Software in May 2008, when growth was partially offset by a decline in OpenCall net revenue resulting from a competitive environment following industry consolidation and the transfer of some hardware revenues to ESS due to a platform shift. HP Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 6.5 percentage points in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The operating margin increase in fiscal 2008 was the result of a combination of an increase in gross margin and a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The increase in gross margin in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to cost savings in the BTO business, cost structure improvements as a result of increased scale in the information management business and, to a lesser extent, a favorable change in the revenue mix driven by higher revenues from the BTO business, which typically has higher gross margins than the remainder of the segment. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to continued cost controls, the effect of which was partially offset by increased field selling costs driven by sales force investments. HP Software net revenue increased 76.1% (72.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006. The favorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro. Excluding the results of Mercury, HP Software's revenue grew 9.6% in fiscal 2007. Net revenue associated with the acquisition of Mercury was included in the results of BTO, which increased 125% in fiscal 2007 and 18% in the same respective period without Mercury. BTO net revenue growth also was the result of increases in revenue from license and support contracts. Net revenue for Other software decreased 4% in fiscal 2007. The decrease in Other software net revenue was due primarily to a platform shift that resulted in a transfer of the hardware revenue to ESS. The operating margin improvement of 9.9 percentage points in fiscal 2007 as compared to fiscal 2006 was the result primarily of an increase in gross margin and to a lesser degree a decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue. In fiscal 2007, the improvement in gross margin was a result of a favorable change in revenue mix driven by the inclusion of revenue from Mercury licenses 59 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) and support, which typically have a higher gross margin than the other offerings in the segment, and to a lesser degree by more effective management of the support costs for BTO and Other software. Operating expense as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2007 decreased due primarily to cost controls and synergy savings from the Mercury acquisition. Personal Systems Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Net revenue $ 42,295 $ 36,409 $ 29,166 Earnings from operations $ 2,375 $ 1,939 $ 1,152 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 5.6 % 5.3 % 3.9 % The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 Percentage points Notebook PCs 13.8 19.3 Desktop PCs 2.0 4.3 Workstations 0.5 1.2 Handhelds (0.5 ) (0.4 ) Other 0.4 0.4 Total PSG 16.2 24.8 PSG net revenue increased 16.2% (10.8% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. Unit volumes increased by 22% in fiscal 2008 as compared to fiscal 2007. The unit volume increase was the result of strong growth in notebooks, with continued strength in emerging markets. In fiscal 2008, net revenue for notebook PCs increased 28% while net revenue for desktop PCs increased 5% from the prior-year period. In fiscal 2008, net revenue for consumer clients increased 19%, while net revenue for commercial clients increased 15% from the prior-year period. The net revenue increase in Other PSG in fiscal 2008 was related primarily to increased sales of third-party branded options and extended warranties. The revenue increase was partially offset by a decline in handhelds revenue driven by product transition within converged devices. In fiscal 2008, the positive revenue impact from the PSG unit volume increase compared to fiscal 2007 was also moderated by a 7% decline in commercial client ASPs and a 4% decline in consumer client ASPs. ASPs declined from the prior year as a result of price erosion related to component cost reductions and a competitive pricing environment, the effect of which was partially offset by an increased notebook mix and improved attach rates for monitors and other options. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.3 percentage points in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 as a result of a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue combined with a flat gross margin. Gross margin performance was a result of declining ASPs offset by an increase in the attach rate of higher-margin options. The operating expense decline as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 was the result primarily of the increased net revenue and continued efforts to improve our cost structure through efficiency measures. 60 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) PSG net revenue increased 24.8% (20.6% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. Unit volumes increased by 28% in fiscal 2007, driving double-digit net revenue growth across all regions. The unit volume increase was the result of strong growth in notebooks, with significant improvements in emerging markets. In fiscal 2007, net revenue for notebook PCs increased 47% while net revenue for desktop PCs increased 9% from the prior-year period. In fiscal 2007, net revenue for consumer clients increased 39%, while net revenue for commercial clients increased 16% from the prior-year period. The net revenue increase in Other PSG in fiscal 2007 was related primarily to improvements in extended warranty sales. The revenue increase was partially offset by decreases in handhelds revenue due to declines in the PDA product market, which were partially offset by our new converged device and travel companion products. In fiscal 2007, the positive revenue impact from the PSG unit volume increase compared to fiscal 2006 was also moderated by a 5% decline in commercial client ASPs and a 1% decline in consumer client ASPs. The decline in ASPs from the prior year was a result of price erosion related to component cost reductions, the impact of which was partially offset by increased notebook mix and monitor attach rates. PSG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.4 percentage points in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 as a result of decreases in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue coupled with an increase in gross margin. The increased gross margin was primarily a result of component cost declines and improvements in supply chain costs per unit, the impact of which was partially offset by ASP declines. The operating expense decline as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2007 was the result primarily of the increased net revenue and continued efforts to improve our cost structure through efficiency measures. Imaging and Printing Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Net revenue $ 29,385 $ 28,465 $ 26,786 Earnings from operations $ 4,590 $ 4,315 $ 3,978 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 15.6 % 15.2 % 14.9 % The components of weighted-average net revenue growth as compared to prior-year periods by business unit were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 Percentage points Supplies 5.2 5.7 Commercial hardware (0.2 ) 0.5 Consumer hardware (1.8 ) 0.1 Total IPG 3.2 6.3 IPG net revenue increased 3.2% (decreased 1.1% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. The growth in printer supplies net revenue in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 reflected higher unit volumes of supplies as a result of the strong performance of color-related products. The decrease in commercial hardware net revenue in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 was due mainly to competitive pricing pressures, the effect of which was partially offset by unit volume growth in multifunction printers, color laser printers and large format printing products and revenue from recent acquisitions. 61 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The decrease in consumer hardware net revenue in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 was due primarily to discontinued sales of cameras, competitive pricing pressures and lower unit volumes of consumer hardware as a result of slower growth in the overall consumer printer market. Both consumer and commercial hardware were impacted by the continued shift in demand to lower-priced products and a slowing economy, which caused average revenue per unit in each category to decline. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.4 percentage points in fiscal 2008 from the prior fiscal year. The operating margin improvement in fiscal 2008 was due to lower operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. In fiscal 2008, the gross margin remained flat driven by improved margins for supplies as a result of product mix, the effect of which was offset by unfavorable hardware margins. The decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue in fiscal 2008 was due primarily to higher revenue and continued cost controls, the effect of which was partially offset by increased investments in our enterprise printing sales force. IPG net revenue increased 6.3% (4.3% when adjusted for currency) in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The favorable currency impact was due primarily to the movement of the dollar against the euro in fiscal 2007. The growth in printer supplies net revenue in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 reflected higher unit volumes of supplies as a result of the continued expansion of printer hardware placements and the strong performance of supplies for color-related products. The growth in commercial hardware net revenue in fiscal 2007 was attributable mainly to unit volume growth in multifunction printers and revenue from our digital press and large format printing products. The slight increase in consumer hardware net revenue in fiscal 2007 was attributable to increased unit volumes, improved average revenue per unit performance and a mix shift from single function products to All-in-Ones, the impact of which was partially offset by the continued shift in demand to lower priced products and strategic pricing decisions. IPG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.3 percentage points in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006, driven by a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue that was partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. Gross margin decreased due primarily to unfavorable hardware margins, increased costs associated with new product introductions and a change in product mix. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased due primarily to higher prior-year research and development expenses associated with product introduction costs, coupled with higher revenue and more effective spending controls. HP Financial Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Net revenue $ 2,698 $ 2,336 $ 2,078 Earnings from operations $ 192 $ 155 $ 147 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 7.1 % 6.6 % 7.1 % HPFS net revenue increased by 15.5% in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. The net revenue increase was due primarily to a shift towards operating leases from financing leases in the overall portfolio asset mix, higher average portfolio assets during the year, higher end-of-lease activity and a favorable currency impact. 62 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.5 percentage points in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 due primarily to a decrease in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue and increased margin on end-of lease activity, the effect of which was offset by higher bad debt expenses and lower portfolio margins due to higher operating leases in the portfolio asset mix. The operating expense decrease as a percentage of revenue is driven by a higher rate of increase in revenues relative to operating expenses due to higher operating lease mix of the portfolio and continued cost controls. HPFS net revenue increased by 12.4% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The net revenue increase was due primarily to operating lease growth and higher end-of-lease activity. The financing lease growth and increased used equipment sales, to a lesser extent, also contributed to the revenue growth. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.5 percentage point in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006 due primarily to a decrease in gross margin, which was partially offset by a decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decrease was driven primarily by increased bad debt expenses and lower bad debt recoveries, as well as lower margins on leases and used equipment sales. The decline in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was due to continued cost controls. Financing Originations For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Total financing originations $ 4,872 $ 4,441 $ 3,994 New financing originations, which represent the amounts of financing provided to customers for equipment and related software and services, and include intercompany activity, increased 9.7% in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007 and 11.2% in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The increases reflect higher financing associated with HP product sales resulting from improved integration and engagement with HP's sales efforts and a favorable currency impact. Portfolio Assets and Ratios HPFS maintains a strategy to generate a competitive return on equity by effectively leveraging its portfolio against the risks associated with interest rates and credit. The HPFS business model is asset-intensive and uses certain internal metrics to measure its performance against other financial services companies, including a segment balance sheet that is derived from our internal management reporting system. The accounting policies used to derive these amounts is substantially the same as those used by the consolidated company. However, certain intercompany loans and accounts that are reflected in the segment balances are eliminated in our Consolidated Financial Statements. 63 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The portfolio assets and ratios derived from the segment balance sheet for HPFS were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2008 2007 In millions Portfolio assets (1) $ 8,297 $ 8,415 Allowance for doubtful accounts 90 84 Operating lease equipment reserve 60 49 Total reserves 150 133 Net portfolio assets $ 8,147 $ 8,282 Reserve coverage 1.8 % 1.6 % Debt to equity ratio (2) 6.5x 6.0x (1) Portfolio assets include gross financing receivables of approximately $5.1 billion at October 31, 2008 and $5.4 billion at October 31, 2007 and net equipment under operating leases of $1.8 billion at October 31, 2008 and at October 31, 2007, as disclosed in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Portfolio assets also include capitalized profit on intercompany equipment transactions of approximately $700 million at October 31, 2008 and $500 million at October 31, 2007, and intercompany leases of approximately $800 million at October 31, 2008 and $700 million at October 31, 2007, both of which are eliminated in consolidation. (2) HPFS debt consists of intercompany equity that is treated as debt for segment reporting purposes, intercompany debt and debt issued directly by HPFS. Net portfolio assets at October 31, 2008 decreased 2% from October 31, 2007. The decrease resulted from unfavorable currency impact partially offset by financing originations in fiscal 2008. The overall percentage of portfolio assets reserved increased due primarily to higher specific customer reserves. HPFS funds its operations mainly through a combination of intercompany debt and equity. In addition to the balances reflected above, HP assumed net portfolio assets of $140 million through the acquisition of EDS. Rollforward of Reserves: October 31, 2007 Additions to allowance Deductions, net of recoveries Oct 31, 2008 In millions Allowance for doubtful accounts $ 84 $ 49 $ (43 ) $ 90 Operating lease equipment reserve 49 36 (25 ) 60 Total reserve $ 133 $ 85 $ (68 ) $ 150 64 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Corporate Investments For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Net revenue $ 965 $ 762 $ 566 Earnings (loss) from operations $ 49 $ (57 ) $ (151 ) Earnings (loss) from operations as a % of net revenue 5.1 % (7.5 )% (26.7 )% The majority of the net revenue in Corporate Investments relates to network infrastructure products sold under the brand "ProCurve Networking." In fiscal 2008, revenue from network infrastructure products increased 26% compared to the same period in fiscal 2007 as the result of continued increased sales of enterprise class gigabit and 10 gigabit Ethernet switch products. Fiscal 2008 network infrastructure revenue includes a small amount of revenue from Colubris Networks, Inc., a company that HP acquired on October 1, 2008. Corporate Investments reported earnings from operations in fiscal 2008 compared to losses in fiscal 2007 due primarily to increased earnings from operations generated by network infrastructure products and lower expenses related to HP Labs. In fiscal 2007, the majority of the net revenue in Corporate Investments related to network infrastructure products, which grew 33% from fiscal 2006 as new product introductions continued to drive increased sales of enterprise class gigabit Ethernet switch products. Corporate Investments loss from operations in fiscal 2007 was due primarily to expenses associated with corporate development, global alliances and HP Labs that are carried in the segment. The year-over-year decrease in operating losses was driven primarily by higher earnings from operations generated by network infrastructure products. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, including substantial amounts held outside of the United States. Most of the amounts held outside of the United States could be repatriated to the United States but, under current law, would be subject to United States federal income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Repatriation of some foreign balances is restricted by local laws. We have provided for the United States federal tax liability on these amounts for financial statement purposes, except for foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the United States. Repatriation could result in additional United States federal income tax payments in future years. Where local restrictions prevent an efficient intercompany transfer of funds, our intent is that cash balances would remain outside of the United States and we would meet United States liquidity needs through ongoing cash flows, external borrowings, or both. We utilize a variety of tax planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. The information discussed below is presented based on our historical results, which include the results of EDS for the period following the August 26, 2008 closing date of the acquisition. 65 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) FINANCIAL CONDITION (Sources and Uses of Cash) Our total cash and cash equivalents declined approximately 10% to $10.2 billion at October 31, 2008 from $11.3 billion at October 31, 2007 due primarily to increased investment spending on acquisitions and increased borrowings, which were partially offset by positive operating cash flows. Our cash position remains strong, and we believe our cash balances are sufficient to cover cash outlays expected in fiscal 2009 associated with additional stock repurchases, acquisitions, company bonus payments, and other operating cash requirements. For the fiscal years ended October 31 2008 2007 2006 In millions Net cash provided by operating activities $ 14,591 $ 9,615 $ 11,353 Net cash used in investing activities (13,711 ) (9,123 ) (2,787 ) Net cash used in financing activities (2,020 ) (5,599 ) (6,077 ) Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents $ (1,140 ) $ (5,107 ) $ 2,489 Key Performance Metrics October 31 2008 2007 2006 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable 45 43 40 Days of supply in inventory 27 34 38 Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable (49 ) (50 ) (59 ) Cash conversion cycle 23 27 19 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable ("DSO") measures the average number of days our receivables are outstanding. DSO is calculated by dividing accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, by a 90-day average net revenue. Days of supply in inventory ("DOS") measures the average number of days from procurement to sale of our product. DOS is calculated by dividing inventory by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable ("DPO") measures the average number of days our accounts payable balances are outstanding. DPO is calculated by dividing accounts payable by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our working capital requirements depend upon our effective management of the cash conversion cycle, which represents effectively the number of days that elapse from the day we pay for the purchase of raw materials to the collection of cash from our customers. The cash conversion cycle is the sum of DSO and DOS less DPO. The increase in DSO was due primarily to a higher accounts receivable balance during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 compared to the same period in fiscal 2007 and the effect of the EDS acquisition. The decrease in DOS was due primarily to more efficient inventory management, higher cost of goods sold during the fourth quarter of 2008 as a result of increased revenues and the effect of the EDS acquisition. The slight decrease in DPO was due primarily to purchasing linearity and improved 66 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) accounts payable management. These changes contributed to the decrease in our current year cash conversion cycle compared to the prior year. 2008 Compared to 2007 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by approximately $5.0 billion during fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. The increase was due primarily to higher net earnings in fiscal 2008, a decrease in accounts and financing receivables, and increased accounts payable. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by approximately $4.6 billion in fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007, due primarily to higher cash payments made in connection with acquisitions. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities decreased by approximately $3.6 billion during fiscal 2008 from fiscal 2007. The decrease was due primarily to higher net issuance of commercial paper and debt. Common Stock Repurchases We repurchase shares of our common stock under an ongoing program to manage the dilution created by shares issued under employee benefit plans as well as to repurchase shares opportunistically. This program authorizes repurchases in the open market or in private transactions. In fiscal 2008, we completed share repurchases of approximately 230 million shares. Repurchases of approximately 216 million shares were settled for $9.6 billion, which included approximately 1 million shares repurchased in transactions that were executed in fiscal 2007 but settled in fiscal 2008. At the end of fiscal 2008, we had approximately 14 million shares which would be settled in the next fiscal year. In fiscal 2007, we completed share repurchases of approximately 209 million shares. Repurchases of approximately 210 million shares were settled for $9.1 billion in fiscal 2007, including approximately 1 million shares repurchased in transactions that were executed in fiscal 2006 but settled in fiscal 2007. We intend to continue to repurchase shares as a means to manage dilution from the issuance of shares under employee benefit plans and to purchase shares opportunistically. On September 19, 2008, our Board of Directors authorized an additional $8.0 billion for future share repurchases. As of October 31, 2008, we had remaining authorization of approximately $9.1 billion for future share repurchases. For more information on our share repurchases, see Item 5 and Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. 2007 Compared to 2006 Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $1.7 billion during fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The decrease was due primarily to an increase in accounts receivable, a decrease in accounts payable and higher payments for bonuses earned in fiscal 2006 and paid in the first quarter of fiscal 2007. The decease in our cash flow from operations was partially offset by higher earnings in fiscal 2007. 67 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities increased by $6.3 billion in fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006, due primarily to higher cash payments made in connection with acquisitions. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $0.5 billion during fiscal 2007 from fiscal 2006. The decrease was due primarily to higher net issuance of commercial paper and debt, the impact of which was partially offset by increased repurchases of our common stock. Common Stock Repurchases In fiscal 2007, we completed share repurchases of approximately 209 million shares. Repurchases of approximately 210 million shares were settled for $9.1 billion, which included approximately 1 million shares repurchased in transactions that were executed in fiscal 2006 but settled in fiscal 2007. In fiscal 2006, we completed share repurchases of approximately 188 million shares. Repurchases of approximately 190 million shares were settled for $6.1 billion in fiscal 2006, including 2 million shares repurchased in transactions that were executed in fiscal 2005 but settled in fiscal 2006. In addition to the above transactions, we entered into an Accelerated Share Repurchase program (the "ASR Program") with a third-party investment bank during the second quarter of fiscal 2007. Pursuant to the terms of the ASR Program, we purchased 40 million shares of our common stock from a third-party bank for $1.8 billion (the "Purchase Price") on March 30, 2007 (the "Purchase Date"). We decreased our shares outstanding and reduced the outstanding shares used to calculate the weighted-average common shares outstanding for both basic and diluted EPS on the Purchase Date. The shares delivered to us included shares that the investment bank borrowed from third parties. The investment bank purchased an equivalent number of shares in the open market to cover its position with respect to the borrowed shares during a contractually specified averaging period that began on the Purchase Date and ended on June 6, 2007. At the end of the averaging period, the investment bank's total purchase cost based on the volume weighted-average purchase price of our shares during the averaging period was approximately $90 million less than the Purchase Price. Accordingly, we had the option to receive either additional shares of our common stock or a cash payment in the amount of the difference from the investment bank. In June 2007, we received approximately 2 million additional shares purchased by the investment bank in the open market with a value approximately equal to that amount. We reduced our shares outstanding upon receipt of those shares. Also, we entered into a prepaid variable share purchase program ("PVSPP") with a third-party investment bank during the first quarter of 2006 and prepaid $1.7 billion in exchange for the right to receive a variable number of shares of our common stock weekly over a one-year period beginning in the second quarter of fiscal 2006 and ending during the second quarter of fiscal 2007. We completed all repurchases under the PVSPP on March 9, 2007. As of that date, we had cumulatively received a total of 53 million shares. We retired all shares repurchased and no longer deem those shares outstanding. On March 15, 2007, our Board of Directors authorized an additional $8.0 billion for future share repurchases. As of October 31, 2007, we had remaining authorization of approximately $2.7 billion for future share repurchases. On November 19, 2007, our Board of Directors authorized an additional $8.0 billion for future share repurchases. 68 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) LIQUIDITY As previously discussed, we use cash generated by operations as our primary source of liquidity; we believe that internally generated cash flows are generally sufficient to support business operations, capital expenditures and the payment of stockholder dividends, in addition to a level of discretionary investments and share repurchases. We are able to supplement this near-term liquidity, if necessary, with broad access to capital markets and credit line facilities made available by various foreign and domestic financial institutions. We maintain debt levels that we establish through consideration of a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for operations, investment plans (including acquisitions), share repurchase activities, and our overall cost of capital. Outstanding debt increased to $17.9 billion as of October 31, 2008 as compared to $8.2 billion at October 31, 2007, bearing weighted-average interest rates of 3.9% and 5.2%, respectively. Short-term borrowings increased to $10.2 billion at October 31, 2008 from $3.2 billion at October 31, 2007. The increase in short-term borrowings was due primarily to the net issuance of approximately $5.0 billion of our commercial paper, including $9.9 billion of commercial paper issued to fund the acquisition of EDS, and the reclassification from long-term to short-term debt, including $1.0 billion in global notes that will mature in June 2009, $750 million in global notes that will mature in September 2009 and $700 million in senior notes that will mature in October 2009. During fiscal 2008, we issued $40.0 billion and repaid $34.9 billion of commercial paper. Long-term debt increased to $7.7 billion at October 31, 2008 from $5.0 billion at October 31, 2007. The increase in long-term debt was due primarily to the issuance of an aggregate of $3.0 billion in global notes in March 2008 and the assumption of $2.6 billion of debt in connection with the EDS acquisition, the effect of which was offset by the repayment of $500 million in global notes at maturity in March 2008, the repayment of $50 million of Series A Medium-Term Notes at maturity in December 2007, the redemption of approximately $377 million in zero-coupon subordinated convertible notes in March 2008 and the reclassifications from long-term to short-term debt. As of October 31, 2008, we had $6.1 million in total borrowings collateralized by certain financing receivable assets. As of October 31, 2008, a significant portion of our outstanding debt is related to HPFS. We issue debt in order to finance HPFS and as needed for other purposes, including acquisitions. HPFS has a business model that is asset-intensive in nature and therefore we fund HPFS more by debt than we fund our other business segments. At October 31, 2008, HPFS had approximately $8.1 billion in net portfolio assets, which included short- and long-term financing receivables and operating lease assets. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information about our borrowings. 69 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) At October 31, 2008, we had the following resources available to obtain short-term or long-term financings if we need additional liquidity: At October 31, 2008 Original amount available Used Available In millions 2002 Shelf Registration Statement (1) Debt, U.S. global securities and up to $1,500 of Series B Medium-Term Notes $ 3,000 $ 2,000 $ 1,000 Uncommitted lines of credit 2,600 1,400 (2) 1,200 Commercial paper programs U.S. 16,000 6,960 9,040 Euro. 500 186 314 $ 22,100 $ 10,546 $ 11,554 (1) We are unable to issue any additional securities under the 2002 Shelf Registration Statement as of December 1, 2008. (2) Approximately $863 million of this amount was recorded as debt as of October 31, 2008; the remaining amount was used to satisfy business operational requirements. In addition to the financing resources listed above, we had the additional borrowing resources described below. In May 2006, we filed a shelf registration statement (the "2006 Shelf Registration Statement") with the SEC to enable us to offer and sell, from time to time, in one or more offerings, an unlimited amount of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares and warrants. We have a $2.9 billion U.S. credit facility expiring in May 2012. In February and July 2008, we entered into additional 364-day credit facilities of $3.0 billion and $8.0 billion, respectively. The credit facilities are senior unsecured committed borrowing arrangements that we put in place primarily to support our U.S. commercial paper program. Under the terms of the July 2008 credit facility, the amount of credit available declines in an amount equal to the proceeds of any future issuance of long-term debt by us. On December 5, 2008, we issued $2.0 billion of global notes under the 2006 Shelf Registration Statement, which resulted in a reduction in the amount of credit available under the July 2008 credit facility to $6.0 billion. Our ability to have a U.S. commercial paper outstanding balance that exceeds the $11.9 billion supported by our credit facilities is subject to a number of factors, including liquidity conditions and business performance. In October 2008, we registered for the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The facility enables us to issue three-month unsecured commercial paper through a special purpose vehicle of the Federal Reserve at a rate established by the CPFF program, which is currently equal to a spread over the three-month overnight index swap rate. The maximum amount of commercial paper that we may issue at any time through this program is $10.4 billion less the total principal amount of all other outstanding commercial paper that we have issued. We will be unable to issue commercial paper under the program after April 30, 2009. As of October 31, 2008, we had not issued any commercial paper under the CPFF program. 70 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) We have revolving trade receivables-based facilities permitting us to sell certain trade receivables to third parties on a non-recourse basis. The aggregate maximum capacity under these programs was approximately $584 million as of October 31, 2008. We sold approximately $2.7 billion of trade receivables during fiscal 2008. As of October 31, 2008, we had approximately $142 million available under these programs. Our credit risk is evaluated by three independent rating agencies based upon publicly available information as well as information obtained in our ongoing discussions with them. Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, Moody's Investors Service and Fitch Ratings currently rate our senior unsecured long-term debt A, A2 and A+ and our short-term debt A-1, Prime-1 and F1, respectively. We do not have any rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity of a material amount of our debt. However, a downgrade in our credit rating would increase the cost of borrowings under our credit facilities. Also, a downgrade in our credit rating could limit our ability to issue commercial paper under our current programs. If this occurs, we would seek alternative sources of funding, including drawdowns under our credit facility or the issuance of notes under our existing shelf registration statements. Contractual Obligations The impact that we expect our contractual obligations as of October 31, 2008 to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods is as follows: Payments Due by Period Total Less than 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years In millions Long-term debt, including capital lease obligations (1) $ 10,271 $ 2,682 $ 1,113 $ 4,765 $ 1,711 Operating lease obligations 3,754 1,017 1,357 656 724 Purchase obligations (2) 3,303 2,596 572 110 25 Total $ 17,328 $ 6,295 $ 3,042 $ 5,531 $ 2,460 (1) Amounts represent the expected cash payments of our long-term debt and do not include any fair value adjustments or discounts. Included in our long-term debt are approximately $372 million of capital lease obligations that are secured by certain equipment. (2) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancelable without penalty. These purchase obligations are related principally to inventory and other items. In addition to the above, at October 31, 2008, we had approximately $1.7 billion of recorded FIN 48 liabilities and related interest and penalties. Of this liability amount, approximately $340 million is expected to be paid within one year. For the remaining amount, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when cash settlement with tax authorities might occur due to the uncertainties related to these tax matters. The $1.7 billion of FIN 48 liabilities and related interest and penalties will be partially offset by $330 million of deferred tax assets and interest receivable. 71 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Funding Commitments During fiscal 2008, we made approximately $170 million of contributions to non-U.S. pension plans, paid $6 million to cover benefit payments to U.S. non-qualified plan participants, and paid $50 million to cover benefit claims under post-retirement benefit plans. In addition, we used $25 million of cash to fund the distribution and subsequent transfer of accrued pension benefits from the U.S. Excess Benefit Plan to the U.S. Executive Deferred Compensation Plan for the terminated vested plan participants. In fiscal 2009, we expect to contribute approximately $360 million to our pension plans and approximately $35 million to cover benefit payments to U.S. non-qualified plan participants. We also expect to pay approximately $70 million to cover benefit claims for our post-retirement benefit plans in fiscal 2009. Our funding policy is to contribute cash to our pension plans so that we meet at least the minimum contribution requirements, as established by local government, funding and taxing authorities. We expect to use contributions made to the post-retirement benefit plans primarily for the payment of retiree health claims incurred during the fiscal year. We will make a significant cash payment associated with our fiscal 2008 bonus programs. We have implemented bonus programs that are designed to reward our employees upon achievement of annual performance objectives. We calculate bonuses based on a formula, with performance relative to targets, year over year improvements and market conditions that are set at the beginning of each fiscal year. Our Board of Directors approves the final bonus payments. We accrued and expensed this bonus, as it was earned, throughout fiscal 2008. In connection with the acquisition of EDS, we implemented a restructuring program to streamline our services business and to better align the structure and efficiency of that business with the operating model that we have successfully implemented in recent years. The restructuring program will be implemented over the next four years and will include changes to our workforce as well as cost savings from corporate overhead functions, such as real estate, IT and procurement. As part of the restructuring program, we expect to eliminate approximately 24,700 positions, with nearly half of the eliminations occurring in the United States. As a result of our approved restructuring plans, we expect future cash expenditures of approximately $2.1 billion. We expect to make cash payments of approximately $1.3 billion in fiscal 2009 and the majority of the remaining amount through 2012. Subsequent Acquisitions For subsequent acquisitions, see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As part of our ongoing business, we do not participate in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities ("SPEs"), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As of October 31, 2008, we are not involved in any material unconsolidated SPEs. Guarantees and Indemnifications In the ordinary course of business, we may provide certain clients, principally governmental entities, with subsidiary performance guarantees and/or financial performance guarantees, which may be backed by standby letters of credit or surety bonds. In general, we would be liable for the amounts of 72 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) these guarantees in the event our or our subsidiaries' nonperformance permits termination of the related contract by our client, the likelihood of which we believe is remote. We believe we are in compliance with our performance obligations under all service contracts for which there is a performance guarantee. As a result of the acquisition of EDS, we acquired certain service contracts supported by client financing or securitization arrangements. Under specific circumstances involving non performance resulting in service contract termination or failure to comply with terms under the financing arrangement we would be required to acquire certain assets. We consider the possibility of our failure to comply to be remote and the asset amounts involved not material. In the ordinary course of business, we enter into contractual arrangements under which we may agree to indemnify the third-party to such arrangement from any losses incurred relating to the services they perform on behalf of us or for losses arising from certain events as defined within the particular contract, which may include, for example, litigation or claims relating to past performance. Such indemnification obligations may not be subject to maximum loss clauses. Historically, payments we have made related to these indemnifications have been immaterial. 73 Table of Contents 
