CIK: 47217
Company Name: HEWLETT PACKARD CO
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-12-30


ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is organized as follows: Overview. A discussion of our business and overall analysis of financial and other highlights affecting the company to provide context for the remainder of MD&A. Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. A discussion of accounting estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results. Results of Operations. An analysis of our financial results comparing fiscal 2013 to fiscal 2012 and comparing fiscal 2012 to fiscal 2011. A discussion of results of operations at the consolidated level is followed by a more detailed discussion of results of operations by segment. Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our balance sheets and cash flows, and a discussion of our financial condition and liquidity. Contractual and Other Obligations and Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements. Overview of contractual obligations, postretirement benefit plan funding commitments, payments for restructuring, uncertain tax positions and off-balance sheet arrangements. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations that follows to provide information that will assist in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles, policies and estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. That discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this document. OVERVIEW We are a leading global provider of products, technologies, software, solutions and services to individual consumers, small- and medium-sized businesses ("SMBs"), and large enterprises, including customers in the government, health and education sectors. Our offerings span the following: personal computing and other access devices; imaging and printing-related products and services; enterprise IT infrastructure, including enterprise server and storage technology, networking products and solutions, technology support and maintenance; multi-vendor customer services, including infrastructure technology and business process outsourcing, application development and support services, and consulting and integration services; and IT management software, information management solutions and security intelligence/risk management solutions. We have seven reportable business segments for financial reporting purposes: Personal Systems, Printing, the Enterprise Group ("EG"), Enterprise Services ("ES"), Software, HP Financial Services ("HPFS") and Corporate Investments. 40 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The following provides an overview of our key financial metrics by segment for fiscal 2013: Printing and Personal Systems Group HP Consolidated (1) Personal Systems Printing Total Enterprise Group Enterprise Services Software HPFS In millions, except per share amounts Net revenue $ 112,298 $ 32,071 $ 23,854 $ 55,925 $ 28,183 $ 23,520 $ 3,913 $ 3,629 Year-over-year (decrease) increase % (6.7 )% (10.2 )% (2.6 )% (7.1 )% (5.4 )% (8.2 )% (3.6 )% (5.0 )% Earnings from operations $ 7,131 $ 949 $ 3,890 $ 4,839 $ 4,301 $ 679 $ 866 $ 399 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 6.4 % 3.0 % 16.3 % 8.7 % 15.3 % 2.9 % 22.1 % 11.0 % Year-over-year increase (decrease) percentage points 15.6 pts (1.7 ) pts 1.7 pts (0.1 ) pts (2.1 ) pts (1.2 ) pts 1.7 pts 0.8 pts Net earnings $ 5,113 Net earnings per share Basic $ 2.64 Diluted $ 2.62 (1) HP consolidated net revenue excludes intersegment net revenue and includes revenue from our Corporate Investments segment. HP consolidated earnings from operations includes the amortization of intangible assets, unallocated costs related to certain stock-based compensation expenses, restructuring charges, corporate and unallocated costs and eliminations, a loss from the Corporate Investments segment and acquisition-related charges. Net revenue declined 6.7% (decreased 5.5% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2013 compared to fiscal 2012 due primarily to revenue declines of approximately 10%, 8%, 5% and 3% in our Personal Systems, ES, EG and Printing segments, respectively. These revenue declines reflect a series of revenue growth challenges that impacted each of our segments to varying degrees. The primary challenges included: a significant contraction in the overall PC market, which impacted Personal Systems; weak public sector spending and enterprise IT demand, particularly in Europe, which impacted the ES and EG segments; competitive pricing pressures in the enterprise and PC markets, which impacted both the EG and Personal Systems segments; and unfavorable currency impacts and volume declines in supplies, which impacted the Printing segment. Gross margin decreased by 0.1 percentage points in fiscal 2013 compared to fiscal 2012. The gross margin decline was due primarily to competitive pricing environments in the markets for EG and Personal Systems products and decreased revenue and contractual price declines for ES. Partially offsetting these negative impacts was a gross margin increase in Printing due primarily to improvements in toner and higher average selling prices for higher-value consumer printers. Operating margin increased by 15.6 percentage points in fiscal 2013 compared to fiscal 2012 due primarily to the absence of goodwill and intangible asset impairment charges and lower restructuring charges in fiscal 2013. Additionally, total research and development ("R&D") and selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses decreased 2.9% due primarily to R&D activity streamlining in EG, particularly in Business Critical Systems ("BCS"), and cost savings associated with our ongoing restructuring efforts that impacted all expense categories. 41 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Our business continues to produce significant cash flow from operations, generating $11.6 billion in fiscal 2013. During the year, we repaid $5.7 billion of debt, returned $1.1 billion to stockholders through dividends and repurchased $1.5 billion worth of common stock. In addition, we purchased $3.2 billion in capital assets. We ended fiscal 2013 with an investment portfolio of $12.5 billion, consisting of cash and cash equivalents and short-term and long-term investments, which was an increase of approximately $800 million from the end of fiscal 2012. We entered fiscal 2013 having experienced a multi-quarter decline in revenue and operating margins. That decline in financial performance reflected a series of challenges that were facing our business. Some of those challenges related to structural and execution issues, such as aligning costs to our revenue trajectory, addressing the need to rationalize our R&D investments and reinvest in IT systems, and rebuilding our channel partner relationships. Other challenges related to dynamic market trends, such as the growth of mobility, the increasing demand for hyperscale computing infrastructure, the shift to software-as-a-service ("SaaS"), the transition towards cloud computing, and aggressive pricing conditions. We also confronted a series of significant macroeconomic challenges in fiscal 2013, such as a shift in consumer spending, weak demand in the SMB and enterprise sectors in Europe, and declining growth in some emerging markets. During fiscal 2013, we continued to address these challenges by driving innovation across the company, improving operations, aligning our cost structure and rebuilding our balance sheet. As a result of these efforts, revenue declines have begun to moderate as we reap the early benefits of our investments in product innovation, as decreasing costs driven by our restructuring efforts have begun to align to our revenue trajectory, as our enterprise services business has begun to become more predictable, and as our business performance has begun to improve in our printing business due to our focus on key initiatives such as Ink in the Office, Managed Print Services and Ink Advantage. In addition, we made investments targeted at our channel partner relationships through improvements in sales force and channel partner deal pricing tools and reporting infrastructure. Our strong cash flows from operations in fiscal 2013 also have allowed us to further reduce our debt. As we enter fiscal 2014, we continue to experience challenges that represent trends and uncertainties that may affect our business and results of operations. One set of challenges relates to continuing dynamic and accelerating market trends, such as the decline in the PC market, the growth of multi-architecture devices running competing operating systems, the market shift towards tablets within mobility, the market shift to cloud-related infrastructure, software, and services, and the growth in SaaS business models. Another set of challenges relates to changes in the competitive landscape. Our major competitors are expanding their product and service offerings with integrated products and solutions, our business-specific competitors are exerting increased competitive pressure in targeted areas and are going after new markets, our emerging competitors are introducing new technologies and business models, and our alliance partners in some businesses are increasingly becoming our competitors in others. A third set of challenges relates to business model and go-to-market execution. In addition, we are continuing to experience macroeconomic weakness across many geographic regions, particularly in Europe, the Middle East and Africa ("EMEA"), China and other high-growth markets. A discussion of some of these challenges at the segment level is set forth below. In Personal Systems, we continue to be negatively impacted by the market shift towards tablet products within mobility, which has reduced the demand for consumer and notebook products. If benefits from our new product investments in this area do not materialize, we will continue to be negatively impacted by this trend. Personal Systems is also being impacted by consumer demand weakness, particularly in EMEA and a competitive pricing environment. 42 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) In Printing, we are experiencing the impact of the growth in mobility, weak consumer demand, weak demand in EMEA and a competitive pricing environment. To be successful in addressing these challenges, we need to execute on our key initiatives of focusing on products targeted at high usage categories, developing emerging market opportunities, and introducing new revenue delivery models to consumer customers. In EG, we are experiencing revenue declines due to multiple market trends and a highly competitive pricing environment, including the increasing demand for hyperscale computing infrastructure products and the transition to cloud computing. In addition, the market for our BCS products continues to weaken as the overall market for UNIX products contracts. To be successful in overcoming these challenges, we must address business model and go-to-market execution challenges, including improved channel execution, and continue to pursue new product innovation, such as HP Moonshot servers, 3PAR storage and the HP CloudSystem and in the areas of software-defined networking, blade servers and wireless networking. In ES, we are facing market and macroeconomic pressures, a competitive pricing environment, internal execution challenges, and weak public sector spending. To be successful in addressing these challenges, we must execute on our multi-year turnaround plan, which includes a cost reduction initiative to align our costs to our revenue trajectory and initiatives targeted at improved execution in the areas of sales performance and accountability, contracting practices and pricing. In Software, we are facing multiple challenges, including the market shift to SaaS and go-to-market execution challenges. To be successful in addressing these challenges, we must improve our go-to-market execution with integrated customer solutions more aligned to customer demand and achieve broader integration across our overall product portfolio as we work to capitalize on the important market opportunities in the areas of cloud, big data, security and mobility. To address these challenges, we need to continue to pursue new product innovation with a view towards developing new products and services aligned with market demand, industry trends and with the needs of our customers and partners. In addition, we need to continue to improve our operations, with a particular focus on enhancing our end-to-end processes. We also need to continue to optimize our sales coverage models, align our sales incentives with our strategic goals, improve channel execution, strengthen our capabilities in our areas of strategic focus, and develop and capitalize on market opportunities. For a further discussion of trends, uncertainties and other factors that could impact our operating results, see the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A, which is incorporated herein by reference. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES General The Consolidated Financial Statements of HP are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenue and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying amount of assets and liabilities that are 43 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) not readily apparent from other sources. Senior management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of HP's Board of Directors. Management believes that the accounting estimates employed and the resulting balances are reasonable; however, actual results may differ from these estimates. Making estimates and judgments about future events is inherently unpredictable and is subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to have been incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows. The summary of significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue applying the basic revenue recognition criteria (i.e., when persuasive evidence of a sales arrangement exists, delivery has occurred or services are rendered, the sales price or fee is fixed or determinable, and collectibility is reasonably assured) along with other revenue recognition principles, including industry specific revenue recognition guidance. We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and while many of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements we enter into which contain non-standard terms and conditions. Further, many of our arrangements include multiple elements. As a result, significant contract interpretation is required to determine the appropriate accounting, including the identification of deliverables considered to be separate units of accounting, the allocation of the transaction price among the elements in the arrangement, and the timing of revenue recognition for each of those elements. We recognize revenue for delivered elements as separate units of accounting only when the delivered elements have standalone value, uncertainties regarding customer acceptance are resolved and there are no customer-negotiated refund or return rights or other contingencies present for the delivered elements. For elements with no standalone value, we recognize revenue consistent with the pattern of the associated deliverables. If the arrangement includes a customer-negotiated refund or return right relative to the delivered item and the delivery and performance of the undelivered item is considered probable and substantially within our control, the delivered element constitutes a separate unit of accounting. Changes in the allocation of the transaction price between elements may impact the timing of revenue recognition for the contract but will not change the total revenue recognized for the contract. We establish the selling prices used for each deliverable based on the vendor-specific objective evidence ("VSOE") of selling price, if available, third-party evidence ("TPE"), if VSOE of selling price is not available, or estimated selling price ("ESP"), if neither VSOE of selling price nor TPE is available. We establish VSOE of selling price using the price charged for a deliverable when sold separately and, in rare instances, using the price established by management having the relevant authority. TPE of selling price is established by evaluating largely similar and interchangeable competitor products or services in standalone sales to similarly situated customers. ESP is established, based on management's judgment, considering internal factors such as margin objectives, pricing practices and controls, customer segment pricing strategies and the product life cycle. Consideration is 44 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) also given to market conditions such as competitor pricing strategies and industry technology life cycles. We may modify or develop new go-to-market practices in the future, which may result in changes in selling prices, impacting both VSOE of selling price and ESP. In arrangements with multiple elements, allocation of the transaction price is determined at inception of the arrangement based on each unit of accounting's relative selling price. However, the aforementioned factors may result in a different allocation of the transaction price to the deliverables in multiple element arrangements entered into in future periods. This may change the pattern and timing of revenue recognition for identical arrangements executed in future periods, but will not change the total revenue recognized for any given arrangement. For hardware products, we recognize revenue generated from direct sales to end customers and indirect sales to channel partners (including resellers, distributors and value-added solution providers) assuming all revenue recognition criteria are met. For indirect sales to channel partners, we recognize revenue at the time of delivery when the channel partners have economic substance apart from HP, and HP has completed its obligations related to the sale. We record estimated reductions to revenue for customer and distributor programs and incentive offerings, including price protection, promotions, other volume-based incentives and expected returns. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take actions to increase customer incentive offerings, possibly resulting in an incremental reduction of revenue at the time the incentive is offered. Additionally, certain incentive programs require us to estimate the number of customers who will actually redeem the incentive, based on historical experience and the specific terms and conditions of the incentive. Outsourcing services revenue is generally recognized when the service is provided and the amount earned is not contingent upon any future event. If the service is provided evenly during the contract term but service billings are uneven, we generally recognize revenue on a straight-line basis over the contract term. Losses on outsourcing arrangements are recognized in the period in which such contractual losses become probable and estimable. We recognize revenue as work progresses on certain fixed-price contracts, such as consulting arrangements, using a proportional performance method. We estimate the total expected labor costs in order to determine the amount of revenue earned to date. We apply a proportional performance method because reasonably dependable estimates of the labor costs applicable to various stages of a contract can be made. On fixed-price contracts for certain design and build projects (to design, develop, and construct software infrastructure and systems), we recognize revenue as work progresses using the percentage-of-completion method. We use the cost-to-cost method of measurement towards completion as determined by the percentage of cost incurred to date compared to the total estimated costs of the project. Total contract profit is subject to revisions throughout the life of a fixed-price contract. As a result of revisions to cost estimates, and overall contract losses where applicable, we record such changes in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. In circumstances when reasonable and reliable cost estimates for a project cannot be made, we recognize revenue using the completed contract method. For the various software products we sell (e.g., operating system software, network enabling software, information technology and management software and enterprise security software), we assess whether the associated software products were sold stand alone or with the hardware products. If the software sold with the hardware product is more-than-incidental and is essential to the functionality of the hardware, we apply the software accounting guidance. We recognize revenue from the sale of 45 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) perpetual software licenses at the inception of the license term, assuming all revenue recognition criteria have been met. Term-based software license revenue is generally recognized ratably over the term of the license. For software products within the scope of the software accounting guidance, we use the residual method to allocate revenue to software licenses at the inception of the license term when VSOE of fair value for all undelivered elements exists, such as post-contract support, and all other revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied. Revenue generated from maintenance and unspecified upgrades or updates on an if-and-when-available basis is recognized ratably over the period during which such items are delivered. For software hosting or SaaS arrangements, we recognize revenue as the service is delivered, generally on a straight-line basis, over the contractual period of performance. In software hosting arrangements where software licenses are sold, the associated software revenue is generally recognized according to whether perpetual licenses or term licenses are sold, subject to the above guidance. In such software hosting arrangements, we consider the rights provided to the customer (e.g., ownership of a license, contract termination provisions and feasibility of the customer to operate the software) in determining how to account for the license fees. In SaaS arrangements where software licenses are not sold, the entire arrangement is recognized ratably over the term of the subscription arrangement. Warranty Provision We accrue the estimated cost of product warranties at the time we recognize revenue. We evaluate our warranty obligations on a product group basis. Our standard product warranty terms generally include post-sales support and repairs or replacement of a product at no additional charge for a specified period of time. While we engage in extensive product quality programs and processes, including actively monitoring and evaluating the quality of our component suppliers, we base our estimated warranty obligation on contractual warranty terms, repair costs, product call rates, average cost per call, current period product shipments and ongoing product failure rates, as well as specific product class failure outside of our baseline experience. Warranty terms generally range from 90 days to three years for parts and labor, depending upon the product. Over the last three fiscal years, the annual warranty provision and actual warranty costs have averaged approximately 2.9% and 3.1% of annual net product revenue, respectively. Business Combinations We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests in the acquiree generally based on their fair values at the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair value of these assets acquired, liabilities assumed and non-controlling interests in the acquiree is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair values of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and non-controlling interests in the acquiree, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, expected future cash flows, which includes consideration of future growth rates and margins, attrition rates, future changes in technology and brand awareness, loyalty and position, and discount rates. Fair value estimates are based on the assumptions management believes a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability. Amounts recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions existing at the acquisition date becomes available. 46 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Goodwill We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. While we are permitted to conduct a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is necessary to perform a two-step quantitative goodwill impairment test, for our annual goodwill impairment test in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013, we performed a quantitative test for all of our reporting units. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. Except for EG and ES, our reporting units are consistent with the reportable segments identified in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. EG includes two reporting units, which are Enterprise Servers, Storage and Networking ("ESSN") and Technology Services ("TS"). ES also consists of two reporting units, which are MphasiS Limited and the remainder of ES. In fiscal 2013, we made two changes to our reporting units. We identified MphasiS Limited as a reporting unit apart from the remainder of ES, and in connection with integration activities we combined the Autonomy reporting unit with the legacy HP Software business reporting unit. In the first step of the impairment test, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying amount. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units using a weighting of fair values derived most significantly from the income approach and to a lesser extent the market approach. Under the income approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. Cash flow projections are based on management's estimates of revenue growth rates and operating margins, taking into consideration industry and market conditions. The discount rate used is based on the weighted-average cost of capital adjusted for the relevant risk associated with business-specific characteristics and the uncertainty related to the reporting unit's ability to execute on the projected cash flows. Under the market approach, we estimate fair value based on market multiples of revenue and earnings derived from comparable publicly-traded companies with similar operating and investment characteristics as the reporting unit. We weight the fair value derived from the market approach up to 50% of the concluded reporting unit fair value depending on the level of comparability of these publicly-traded companies to the reporting unit. When market comparables are not meaningful or not available, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit using only the income approach. For the MphasiS Limited reporting unit, we used the quoted market price in an active market to estimate fair value. In order to assess the reasonableness of the estimated fair values of our reporting units, we compare the aggregate reporting unit fair values to HP's market capitalization and calculate an implied control premium (the excess of the sum of the reporting units' fair values over HP's market capitalization). We evaluate the control premium by comparing it to observable control premiums from recent comparable transactions. If the implied control premium is not believed to be reasonable in light of these recent transactions, we reevaluate reporting unit fair values, which may result in an adjustment to the discount rate and/or other assumptions. This reevaluation could reduce the estimated fair value for certain or all of our reporting units. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions may include revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions and determination of appropriate comparable publicly-traded companies. In addition, we make certain judgments and assumptions in allocating shared assets and liabilities to individual reporting units to determine the carrying amount for each reporting unit. 47 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying amount of the net assets assigned to that reporting unit, goodwill is not impaired and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then we must perform the second step of the impairment test to measure the amount of impairment loss, if any. In the second step, the reporting unit's assets, including any unrecognized intangible assets, liabilities and non-controlling interests are measured at fair value in a hypothetical analysis to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill for the reporting unit in the same manner as if the reporting unit was being acquired in a business combination. If the implied fair value of the reporting unit's goodwill is less than its carrying amount, the difference is recorded as an impairment loss. Our annual goodwill impairment analysis, which we performed as of the first day of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013, did not result in any impairment charges. The excess of fair value over carrying amount for each of our reporting units ranged from approximately 14% to approximately 1,200% of carrying amounts. The Software and ESSN reporting units have the lowest excess of fair value over carrying amount at 31% and 14%, respectively. In estimating the fair value of our reporting units, we have taken into consideration the challenging industry and market trends that existed as of August 1, 2013, the date of the annual goodwill impairment test, for each respective reporting unit. In order to evaluate the sensitivity of the estimated fair values of our reporting units in the goodwill impairment test, we applied a hypothetical 10% decrease to the fair values of each reporting unit. This hypothetical 10% decrease resulted in an excess of fair value over carrying amount ranging from approximately 2% to approximately 1,000% of the carrying amounts. This hypothetical 10% decrease resulted in the Software and ESSN reporting units having the lowest excess of fair value over carrying amount of 18% and 2%, respectively. We will continue to monitor goodwill on an annual basis as of the beginning of our fourth fiscal quarter and whenever events or changes in circumstances, such as significant adverse changes in business climate or operating results, changes in management's business strategy or significant declines in our stock price, indicate that there may be potential indicator of impairment. Intangible Assets We review intangible assets with finite lives for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these intangible assets is assessed based on the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset. If the undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying amount, the finite-lived intangible assets are considered to be impaired. The amount of the impairment loss, if any, is measured as the difference between the carrying amount of the asset and its fair value. We estimate the fair value of the finite-lived intangible assets by using an income approach or, when available and appropriate, using a market approach. Restructuring We have engaged in restructuring actions, which require management to utilize significant estimates related to the timing and amount of severance and other employee separation costs for workforce reduction and enhanced early retirement programs, realizable values of assets made redundant or obsolete, lease cancellation and other exit costs. We accrue for severance and other employee separation costs under these actions when it is probable that benefits will be paid and the amount is reasonably estimable. The rates used in determining severance accruals are based on existing plans, historical experiences, and negotiated settlements. For a full description of our restructuring 48 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) actions, refer to our discussions of restructuring in "Results of Operations" below and in Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Stock-Based Compensation Our stock-based compensation program primarily consists of awards of restricted stock, as well as stock options and, to a lesser extent, other award types. The fair value of a restricted stock award is equal to HP's stock price on the date of grant. For stock options, determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating fair value requires the use of assumptions, including the expected term of the option and the expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the option. We utilize the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing formula to value service-based stock options. We determine the expected term using our historical exercise and post-vesting termination patterns. We determine the expected stock price volatility using implied volatility from options traded on HP's stock. We believe that implied volatility calculated based on actively traded options on HP's stock is a better indicator of expected volatility and future stock price trends than historical volatility. The amount of compensation recognized for awards of restricted stock and options is adjusted for an assumed level of forfeiture due to the presence of service or performance vesting conditions and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. These compensation costs are determined at the aggregate grant level for service-based awards and at the individual vesting tranche level for awards with performance and/or market conditions. To the extent our actual forfeitures are different than our estimates, we record an adjustment for the difference in the period that the awards vest, and such adjustments could materially affect our operating results. For a further discussion on stock-based compensation, refer to Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Taxes on Earnings We calculate our current and deferred tax provisions based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the final positions reflected in our income tax returns filed during the subsequent fiscal year. We adjust our current and deferred tax provisions based on income tax returns which are generally filed in the third and fourth quarters of the subsequent fiscal year for U.S. federal and state purposes, respectively. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which we expect the differences to reverse. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that we are more likely than not to realize. We have considered future market growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event we were to determine that it is more likely than not that we will be unable to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance and recognize a corresponding charge to earnings or other comprehensive income in the period in which we make such a determination. Likewise, if we later determine that we are more likely than not to realize the deferred tax assets, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously recognized valuation allowance. In order for us to realize our deferred tax assets, we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in the tax jurisdictions in which the deferred tax assets are located. 49 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Our effective tax rate includes the impact of certain undistributed foreign earnings for which we have not provided U.S. federal taxes because we plan to reinvest such earnings indefinitely outside the United States. We plan foreign earnings remittance amounts based on projected cash flow needs as well as the working capital and long-term investment requirements of our foreign subsidiaries and our domestic operations. Based on these assumptions, we estimate the amount we will distribute to the United States and provide the U.S. federal taxes due on these amounts. Further, as a result of certain employment actions and capital investments we have undertaken, income from manufacturing activities in certain countries is subject to reduced tax rates and, in some cases, is wholly exempt from taxes for fiscal years through 2024. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital and long-term investment requirements in the various jurisdictions in which we do business could impact our effective tax rate. We are subject to income taxes in the United States and approximately 80 other countries, and we are subject to routine corporate income tax audits in many of these jurisdictions. We believe that our tax return positions are fully supported, but tax authorities are likely to challenge certain positions, which may not be fully sustained. Accordingly, our income tax expense includes amounts intended to satisfy income tax assessments that may result from these challenges. Determining the income tax expense for these potential assessments and recording the related effects requires management judgments and estimates. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of audits could be materially different from the amounts previously included in our income tax expense and, therefore, could have a material impact on our tax provision, net income and cash flows. Our accrual for uncertain tax positions is attributable primarily to uncertainties concerning the tax treatment of our international operations, including the allocation of income among different jurisdictions, and related interest. For a further discussion on taxes on earnings, refer to Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts for Accounts Receivable We determine our allowance for doubtful accounts using a combination of factors to ensure that we state our account receivables balance at net realizable value. We record specific provisions for individual accounts when we become aware of specific customer circumstances, such as in the case of bankruptcy filings or a deterioration in the customer's operating results or financial position. If the customer's circumstances change, we would adjust our estimate of the net realizable value of the receivables. In addition, we maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for all other customers based on a variety of factors, including the use of third-party credit risk models that generate quantitative measures of default probabilities based on market factors, the financial condition of customers, the length of time receivables are past due, trends in overall weighted-average risk rating of the total portfolio, macroeconomic conditions, information derived from competitive benchmarking, significant one-time events and historical experience. The past due or delinquency status of a receivable is based on the contractual payment terms of the receivable. The annual provision for doubtful accounts has averaged approximately 0.04% of net revenue over the last three fiscal years. Using our third-party credit risk model at October 31, 2013, a 50-basis-point deterioration in the weighted-average default probabilities of our significant customers would have increased the allowance for doubtful accounts by $48 million. 50 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Inventory We state our inventory at the lower of cost or market. We make adjustments to reduce the cost of inventory to its net realizable value, if required, at the product group level for estimated excess, obsolescence or impaired balances. Factors influencing these adjustments include changes in demand, technological changes, product life cycle and development plans, component cost trends, product pricing, physical deterioration and quality issues. Fair Value of Derivative Instruments We use derivative instruments to manage a variety of risks, including risks related to interest rates and foreign exchange. HP mainly holds non-speculative forwards, swaps and options to hedge certain foreign currency and interest rate exposures. At October 31, 2013, the gross notional of our derivative portfolio was $51.9 billion. Assets and liabilities related to derivative instruments are measured at fair value every reporting period. At October 31, 2013, derivative assets and liabilities were $452 million and $656 million, respectively. Fair value is the price we would receive to sell an asset or pay to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In the absence of active markets for the identical assets or liabilities, such measurements involve developing assumptions based on market observable data and, in the absence of such data, internal information that is consistent with what market participants would use in a hypothetical transaction that occurs at the measurement date. The determination of fair value often involves significant judgments about assumptions such as determining an appropriate discount rate that factors in both risk and liquidity premiums, identifying the similarities and differences in market transactions, weighting those differences accordingly and then making the appropriate adjustments to those market transactions to reflect the risks specific to our asset or liability being valued. HP generally uses industry standard valuation models to measure the fair value of its derivative positions. When prices in active markets are not available for the identical asset or liability, HP uses industry standard valuation models to measure fair value. Where applicable, these models project future cash flows and discount the future amounts to present value using market based observable inputs, including interest rate curves, HP and counterparty credit risk, foreign exchange rates, and forward and spot prices. For a further discussion on fair value measurements and derivative instruments, refer to Note 8 and Note 9, respectively, to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. Retirement and Post-Retirement Benefits Our pension and other post-retirement benefit costs and obligations are dependent on various assumptions. Our major assumptions relate primarily to discount rates, future compensation growth rates and the expected long-term return on plan assets. The discount rate assumption is based on current investment yields of high-quality fixed-income securities with maturities similar to the expected benefits payment period. The future compensation growth rate assumption reflects our long-term actual experience and future outlook. The expected long-term return on plan assets is determined based on asset allocations, historical portfolio results, historical asset correlations, and management's expected returns for each asset class. In any fiscal year, significant differences may arise between the actual return and the expected long-term return on plan assets. Historically, differences between the actual return and expected long-term return on plan assets have resulted from changes in target or actual asset allocation, short-term asset performance relative to expected long-term asset performance, 51 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) differences between target and actual investment allocations, the timing of benefit payments compared to expectations, and the use of derivatives intended to effect asset allocation changes or hedge certain investment or liability exposures. For the recognition of net periodic benefit cost, the calculation of the expected long-term return on plan assets uses the fair value of plan assets as of the beginning of the fiscal year. Our major assumptions vary by plan, and the weighted-average rates used are set forth in Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. For fiscal 2013, changes in the weighted-average assumptions would have had the following impact on our net periodic benefit cost: A decrease of 25 basis points in the expected long-term rate of return would have increased our net periodic benefit cost by approximately $65 million; A decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate would have increased our net periodic benefit cost by approximately $75 million; and An increase of 25 basis points in the future compensation growth rate would have increased our net periodic benefit cost by approximately $18 million. Loss Contingencies We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations and proceedings that arise in the ordinary course of business. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both the probability of having incurred a liability and the estimated amount of the liability. We review these matters at least quarterly and adjust these liabilities to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel and updated information. For a further discussion on litigation and contingencies, refer to Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements with application to our consolidated financial statements see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion compares the historical results of operations for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011. Unless otherwise noted, all comparative performance data included below reflect year-over-year comparisons. Revenue from our international operations has historically represented, and we expect will continue to represent, a majority of our overall net revenue. As a result, our revenue growth has been impacted, and we expect will continue to be impacted, by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. In order to provide a framework for assessing how each of our business segments performed excluding the impact of foreign currency fluctuations, we present the year-over-year percentage change in revenue on a constant currency basis, which assumes no change in the exchange rate from the prior-year period. This information is provided so that revenue can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, which is consistent with how management evaluates our 52 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) operational results and trends. This constant currency disclosure is provided in addition to, and not as a substitute for, the year-over-year percentage change in revenue on a GAAP basis. Other companies may calculate and define similarly labled items differently, which may limit the usefulness of this measure for comparative purposes. Results of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net revenue were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net revenue $ 112,298 100.0 % $ 120,357 100.0 % $ 127,245 100.0 % Cost of sales (1) 86,380 76.9 % 92,385 76.8 % 97,418 76.6 % Gross profit 25,918 23.1 % 27,972 23.2 % 29,827 23.4 % Research and development 3,135 2.8 % 3,399 2.8 % 3,254 2.6 % Selling, general and administrative 13,267 11.8 % 13,500 11.2 % 13,577 10.6 % Amortization of intangible assets 1,373 1.2 % 1,784 1.5 % 1,607 1.3 % Impairment of goodwill and intangible assets (2) 18,035 15.0 % 885 0.7 % Restructuring charges 990 0.9 % 2,266 1.9 % 645 0.5 % Acquisition-related charges 22 45 182 0.1 % Earnings (loss) from operations 7,131 6.4 % (11,057 ) (9.2 )% 9,677 7.6 % Interest and other, net (3) (621 ) (0.6 )% (876 ) (0.8 )% (695 ) (0.5 )% Earnings (loss) before taxes 6,510 5.8 % (11,933 ) (10.0 )% 8,982 7.1 % Provision for taxes (1,397 ) (1.2 )% (717 ) (0.5 )% (1,908 ) (1.5 )% Net earnings (loss) $ 5,113 4.6 % $ (12,650 ) (10.5 )% $ 7,074 5.6 % (1) Cost of products, cost of services and financing interest. (2) For fiscal 2012, includes an $8.8 billion goodwill and intangible asset impairment charge associated with the Autonomy reporting unit within the Software segment, an $8.0 billion goodwill impairment within the ES segment and a $1.2 billion intangible asset impairment associated with the "Compaq" trade name within the Personal Systems segment. For fiscal 2011, represents impairment charges to goodwill and intangible assets associated with the acquisition of Palm, Inc. that were recorded as result of the decision announced on August 18, 2011 to wind down the webOS device business. (3) For fiscal 2011, includes $276 million of charges in connection with the acquisition of Autonomy, which is primarily comprised of the $265 million net cost of British pound options bought to limit foreign exchange rate risk. Net Revenue Fiscal 2013 In fiscal 2013, our total net revenue decreased 6.7% (decreased 5.5% on a constant currency basis). U.S. net revenue decreased 4.4% to $40.3 billion, while net revenue from outside of the United States decreased 7.9% to $72.0 billion. 53 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of the weighted net revenue change were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2013 2012 Percentage Points Personal Systems (3.0 ) (3.1 ) Enterprise Services (1.7 ) (0.5 ) Enterprise Group (1.3 ) (1.3 ) Printing (0.5 ) (1.3 ) HP Financial Services (0.2 ) 0.2 Software (0.1 ) 0.5 Corporate Investments/Other 0.1 0.1 Total HP (6.7 ) (5.4 ) In fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012, each of our segments experienced a net revenue decline. The leading factors contributing to the declines by segment are as follows: Personal Systems net revenue declined due to the contraction in the overall PC market as a result of a customer shift, particularly consumers, to tablet products; ES net revenue declined due primarily to net service revenue runoff and contractual price declines in ongoing contracts due in part to weak public sector spending and enterprise IT demand; EG net revenue declined due to multiple factors, including competitive pricing challenges in Industry Standard Servers ("ISS"), a market decline for UNIX products impacting BCS, declines in TS due in part to lower support for BCS products, product transitions in Storage and overall weak enterprise IT demand; Printing net revenue declined due to unfavorable currency impacts, particularly the euro, and declines in supplies and commercial printers; HPFS net revenue decreased due primarily to lower rental revenue from a decrease in operating lease assets; and Software net revenue declined due to lower license and professional services revenues from IT/cloud management and information management products. Fiscal 2012 In fiscal 2012, our total net revenue decreased 5.4% (decreased 4.4% on a constant currency basis). U.S. net revenue decreased 4.5% to $42.1 billion, while net revenue from outside of the United States decreased 5.9% to $78.2 billion. Our revenue decreased due primarily to a weak customer demand environment resulting in volume declines in our hardware businesses and printing supplies coupled with contractual rate declines on ongoing contracts in ES. Software contributed favorably to our total net revenue change as a result of the acquisition of Autonomy in October 2011. A more detailed discussion of segment revenue is included under "Segment Information" below. 54 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Gross Margin Our total gross margin decreased 0.1 percentage points and 0.2 percentage points in fiscal 2013 and 2012, respectively. Fiscal 2013 compared with Fiscal 2012 From a segment perspective, the total decrease in our gross margin was due primarily to gross margin decreases in EG, Personal Systems, ES and Software. Printing and, to a lesser extent, HPFS experienced gross margin increases. The primary factors impacting gross margin performance for each of our segments are summarized below: EG experienced a gross margin decline due primarily to competitive pricing pressures in ISS and, to a lesser extent, mix impacts from lower BCS and Storage revenue; Personal Systems experienced a gross margin decline due primarily to unfavorable currency impacts and competitive pricing pressures; ES gross margin decreased due to net service revenue runoff and contractual price declines; Software gross margin decreased slightly due to higher development costs in IT/cloud management products; HPFS gross margin increased slightly due primarily to higher portfolio margins from a lower mix of operating leases and higher margins on early buyouts; and Printing gross margin increased due primarily to improvement in toner gross margins as a result of lower discounting and higher average revenue per unit ("ARU") in consumer printers. Fiscal 2012 compared with Fiscal 2011 From a segment perspective, the total decrease in our gross margin was due primarily to gross margin decreases in ES, EG and, to a lesser extent, in Personal Systems, Printing and Software. HPFS experienced a gross margin increase. The primary factors impacting gross margin performance for each of our segments are summarized below: ES gross margin decreased due primarily to lower than expected revenue, contractual rate declines on ongoing contracts, a lower resource utilization rate and additional costs associated with certain contract deliverable delays; EG experienced a gross margin decline due to competitive pricing pressures, particularly in ISS and, to a lesser extent, in Networking; Personal Systems gross margin decreased due primarily to higher component costs combined with an unfavorable currency impact; Printing experienced a gross margin decrease due to an unfavorable currency impact driven by the strength of the Japanese yen and from lower ink supplies volumes as a result of demand declines in all regions; Software gross margin decreased due primarily to a lower mix of license revenue; and HPFS gross margin increased due primarily to lower bad debt expense. 55 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) A more detailed discussion of segment operating margins is included under "Segment Information" below. Operating Expenses Research and Development R&D expense decreased in fiscal 2013 due primarily to the rationalization of R&D in EG for BCS, cost savings from restructuring and higher value added R&D tax subsidy credits. The decrease was partially offset by increased R&D expense in our Storage and ISS business units and in Software for innovation-focused spending in the areas of converged infrastructure and converged cloud. In fiscal 2013, R&D expense as a percentage of revenue increased for Software, Personal Systems and ES, decreased for EG, and was flat for Printing. R&D expense increased in fiscal 2012 due primarily to additional expense from the acquisition of Autonomy and innovation-focused spending for Storage, Networking and converged cloud. The increase was partially offset by the elimination of R&D expense associated with the former webOS device business. In fiscal 2012, R&D expense as a percentage of revenue increased for EG, Software, Printing and Personal Systems, and was flat for ES. Selling, General and Administrative SG&A expense decreased in fiscal 2013 due primarily to cost savings associated with our ongoing restructuring efforts that impacted all of our segments. Partially offsetting the decline was higher marketing expenses to support new product introductions and increased administrative expenses due in part to higher consulting project spending. In fiscal 2013, SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue increased for our EG, ES, HPFS, and Personal Systems segments, due in part to the revenue declines taking place in these segments, and decreased for our Software and Printing segments. SG&A expense decreased in fiscal 2012 due primarily to lower marketing costs and $103 million in net gains from the sale of real estate in fiscal 2012. In fiscal 2012, SG&A expense as a percentage of revenue increased for ES and Personal Systems, decreased for EG and Software and was flat for Printing and HPFS. Amortization of Intangible Assets Amortization expense decreased in fiscal 2013 due primarily to the intangible asset impairment recorded in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 related to Autonomy and certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions reaching the end of their amortization periods. Amortization expense increased in fiscal 2012 due primarily to the intangible assets purchased as part of the Autonomy acquisition in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011. The increase was partially offset by decreased amortization expenses related to certain intangible assets associated with prior acquisitions reaching the end of their amortization periods. For more information on our amortization of intangible assets, see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Impairment of Goodwill and Intangible Assets In fiscal 2012, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $8.0 billion and $5.7 billion associated with ES and the acquisition of Autonomy, respectively. In addition, we recorded intangible asset 56 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) impairment charges of $3.1 billion and $1.2 billion associated with the acquisition of Autonomy and the "Compaq" trade name, respectively. For more information on our impairment charges, see Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Restructuring Charges Restructuring charges decreased in fiscal 2013 due primarily to the $2.1 billion charge recorded in fiscal 2012 for the restructuring plan announced in May 2012 (the "2012 Plan"). Restructuring charges for fiscal 2013 were approximately $1.0 billion, which included $1.2 billion of charges related to the 2012 Plan that were partially offset by a reversal of $190 million of severance charges related to our fiscal 2010 ES restructuring plan. Restructuring charges increased in fiscal 2012 due primarily to the $2.1 billion charge for the 2012 Plan, the effect of which was partially offset by lower charges from the fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2010 ES restructuring plans. Restructuring charges for fiscal 2012 were $2.3 billion which included $2.1 billion of costs related to the 2012 Plan, $106 million of costs related to our fiscal 2008 restructuring plan and $75 million of costs related to our fiscal 2010 ES restructuring plan. For more information on our restructuring charges, see Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. As part of our ongoing business operations, we incur workforce rebalancing charges for severance and related costs. Workforce rebalancing activities are considered part of normal operations as we continue to optimize our cost structure. Workforce rebalancing costs are included in our business segment results, and we expect to incur additional workforce rebalancing costs in the future. Acquisition-Related Charges In fiscal 2013, 2012 and 2011, we recorded acquisition-related charges of $22 million, $45 million and $182 million, respectively. The decrease in fiscal 2013 and 2012 was due primarily to lower consulting and integration costs associated with the Autonomy acquisition and a reduced level of acquisition activity. Interest and Other, Net Interest and other, net decreased by $255 million in fiscal 2013. The decrease was driven primarily by lower currency transaction losses coupled with lower interest expense due to lower average debt balances, a gain on sale of investments and lower investment losses. Interest and other, net increased by $181 million in fiscal 2012. The increase was driven primarily by higher interest expense due to higher average debt balances and higher currency transaction losses. Provision for Taxes Our effective tax rates were 21.5%, (6.0)% and 21.2% in fiscal 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Our effective tax rate generally differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% due to favorable tax rates associated with certain earnings from our operations in lower-tax jurisdictions throughout the world. The jurisdictions with favorable tax rates that have the most significant effective tax rate impact in the periods presented include China, Ireland, the Netherlands, Puerto Rico and Singapore. We plan to reinvest some of the earnings of these jurisdictions indefinitely outside the United States and therefore have not provided U.S. taxes on those indefinitely reinvested earnings. 57 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) In addition to the above factors, the overall tax rates in fiscal 2012 and 2011 were impacted by nondeductible goodwill impairments and increases in valuation allowances against certain deferred tax assets. For a full reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 35% and further explanation of our provision for taxes, see Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Segment Information A description of the products and services for each segment can be found in Note 18 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Future changes to this organizational structure may result in changes to the business segments disclosed. We have implemented certain organizational realignments. As a result of these realignments, we re-evaluated our segment financial reporting structure and, effective in the first quarter of fiscal 2013: We created a new EG segment consisting of our TS business unit, which was previously a part of our former ESSN segment; We created a new ES segment consisting of our Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing ("ITO") business unit, and our Application and Business Services ("ABS") business unit both of which were previously a part of our former Services segment; We transferred our Personal Systems commercial products support business from our TS business unit to the Other business unit within our Personal Systems segment; We transferred our end-user workplace support business from our TS business unit to our ITO business unit within our new ES segment; and We transferred the portion of our business intelligence services business that was a part of our Corporate Investments segment to our ABS business unit within our new ES segment. As noted above, as a result of these changes, we created two new reportable segments, the EG segment and the ES segment. Also as noted above, we eliminated two existing reportable segments, the ESSN segment and the Services segment. Taking into account these changes, effective at the beginning of our first quarter of fiscal 2013, our seven reportable segments are Personal Systems, Printing, the Enterprise Group, Enterprise Services, Software, HP Financial Services and Corporate Investments. Printing and Personal Systems Group Printing and Personal Systems segments were realigned beneath a newly formed Printing and Personal Systems Group during fiscal 2012. We describe the results of the business segments within the Printing and Personal Systems Group in more detail below. Personal Systems For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net revenue $ 32,071 $ 35,725 $ 39,654 Earnings from operations $ 949 $ 1,689 $ 2,327 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 3.0 % 4.7 % 5.9 % 58 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) The components of the weighted net revenue change by Personal Systems business units were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2013 2012 Percentage Points Notebook PCs (7.8 ) (6.3 ) Desktop PCs (2.9 ) (3.4 ) Workstations (0.2 ) Other 0.5 Total Personal Systems (10.2 ) (9.9 ) Personal Systems net revenue decreased 10.2% (decreased 9.0% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2013. The Personal Systems business continues to experience significant challenges due to the overall PC market contraction as a result of a customer shift, particularly consumers, to tablet products. The business is also experiencing broad-based regional demand weakness, particularly in the EMEA region. The decline in Personal Systems revenue was driven by an 8% decline in unit volume along with a 3% decline in average selling prices ("ASPs"). The unit volume decrease was led by declines in consumer and notebook products as a result of the market shift to tablet products. The decline in ASPs was due primarily to a competitive pricing environment. Net revenue for consumer clients decreased 19%, while net revenue for commercial clients decreased 4%. Notebook PCs net revenue decreased 15%, while Desktop PCs net revenue decreased 8%. Workstations net revenue growth was flat, while Other net revenue increased 22%. The net revenue increase in Other was related to increased sales of extended warranties and third-party branded options and sales of our newly introduced consumer tablets. Personal Systems earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased 1.7 percentage points in fiscal 2013. The decrease was driven by a decline in gross margin combined with an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The decline in gross margin was due to unfavorable currency impacts and competitive pricing pressures. These unfavorable impacts to gross margin were partially offset by lower component and warranty costs and a favorable mix of higher-margin commercial products. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased due primarily to the size of the revenue decline as well as slightly higher R&D costs. However, operating expenses declined across most other expense categories as a result of our ongoing restructuring efforts. Personal Systems net revenue decreased 9.9% (decreased 8.8% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2012. The revenue decline was due primarily to a decline in unit volumes, the effect of which was partially offset by a nominal increase in ASPs. ASPs increased due primarily to a mix shift toward higher-end models, the effect of which was partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts. Unit volume was down 11% due primarily to continued demand weakness in both the consumer and commercial markets. In fiscal 2012, net revenue from Notebook PCs decreased 12% while net revenue from Desktop PCs decreased 9% as a result of the overall market decline. Workstations revenue decreased 3% due to weak demand in the commercial PC market. In fiscal 2012, net revenue for consumer clients decreased 15% while commercial client revenue decreased 6%. Personal Systems earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased 1.2 percentage points in fiscal 2012. The decrease was due primarily to a gross margin decline resulting from higher component costs combined with an unfavorable currency impact. These negative impacts to gross margin were partially offset by lower warranty and logistics costs, benefits from insurance proceeds related to flooding in Thailand in July 2011 and an increased level of component vendor 59 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) rebates. In addition, operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased due primarily to the decline in revenue coupled with increased investments in research and development, the effects of which were partially offset by a decrease in administrative expenses. Printing For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net revenue $ 23,854 $ 24,487 $ 26,176 Earnings from operations $ 3,890 $ 3,585 $ 3,927 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 16.3 % 14.6 % 15.0 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by Printing business units were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2013 2012 Percentage Points Supplies (1.8 ) (3.9 ) Commercial Hardware (0.8 ) (1.1 ) Consumer Hardware (1.5 ) Total Printing (2.6 ) (6.5 ) Printing net revenue decreased 2.6% (decreased 1.0% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2013. The decrease was driven by unfavorable currency impacts, particularly weakness in the euro, and declines in supplies and commercial printers. Net revenue for Supplies decreased 3% due to unfavorable currency impacts and lower volumes of toner and ink supplies. These effects were partially offset by growth in large format printing supplies. Printer unit volumes declined by 3% while ARU increased by 1%. Printer unit volumes decreased largely due to declines in low-end consumer printers as we continued our focus on higher-value Ink in the Office and Ink Advantage products. The increase in ARU was driven by a mix shift to high-value consumer printers, the effect of which was partially offset by higher discounting in commercial printers. Net revenue for Commercial Hardware decreased 3%, which was driven by a 6% decline in ARU that was partially offset by a volume increase of 2%. The decline in commercial hardware net revenue was partially offset by net revenue growth in the graphics services and managed print services businesses. Net revenue for Consumer Hardware remained flat due to a 7% increase in ARU, the effect of which was offset by a 5% reduction in volume. Unit volume and ARU increased within high-value consumer printers as a result of our continued focus on those more profitable printers. Printing earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.7 percentage points in fiscal 2013 due to an increase in gross margin combined with lower operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin increase was due to improvement in toner gross margins resulting from lower discounting, higher ARU in consumer printers, and lower cost of sales in toner and commercial printers due to a favorable currency impact from the Japanese yen. These positive effects were partially offset by an unfavorable mix of lower-margin consumer printers. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased due to lower administrative, R&D and field selling costs as a result of our ongoing restructuring efforts. These effects were partially offset by higher marketing expenses to support new product introductions. 60 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Printing net revenue decreased 6.5% (decreased 6.3% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2012, driven by broad-based consumer demand weakness in all regions. Printer unit volume declined 15%, while ARU increased by 8%. Net revenue for Supplies decreased 6% in fiscal 2012 driven by demand declines in all regions, the effects of which were partially offset by growth in large format printing supplies. Net revenue for Consumer Hardware decreased 14% in fiscal 2012, due primarily to a decline in consumer demand. Inkjet unit volume reductions of 18% were partially offset by a higher mix of high value inkjet units reflecting an increase in ARU of 6%. Net revenue for Commercial Hardware decreased 5% in fiscal 2012. The net revenue decline was driven by volume declines of 8%, due primarily to a weak worldwide demand environment impacting our LaserJet printer business. These negative impacts were offset by higher ARU of 2% and net revenue growth in both large format printers and our managed print services business. Printing earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 0.4 percentage points in fiscal 2012. Gross margin declined in fiscal 2012 due to an unfavorable currency impact driven by the strength of the Japanese yen and from lower ink supplies volumes as a result of demand declines in all regions. These effects were partially offset by our focus on higher-end inkjet printers combined with a higher mix of supplies. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased due to the decline in revenue and investments in research and development, the effects of which were partially offset by declines in marketing and administrative expenses. Enterprise Group For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net revenue $ 28,183 $ 29,779 $ 31,460 Earnings from operations $ 4,301 $ 5,194 $ 6,265 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 15.3 % 17.4 % 19.9 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by business units were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2013 2012 Percentage Points Industry Standard Servers (1.6 ) (3.0 ) Business Critical Systems (1.4 ) (1.5 ) Technology Services (1.3 ) (0.3 ) Storage (1.1 ) (0.8 ) Networking 0.3 Total Enterprise Group (5.4 ) (5.3 ) EG net revenue decreased 5.4% (decreased 4.4% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2013 due primarily to the macroeconomic demand challenges the business faced during the fiscal year. Additionally, new product and technology transitions in Storage and ISS and a competitive pricing environment contributed to the revenue decline. EG also experienced execution challenges that impacted revenue growth in fiscal 2013, although those challenges moderated in the fourth quarter due to improved sales execution. Each of the business units within EG experienced year-over-year revenue declines in fiscal 2013 except Networking. ISS net revenue decreased by 4% due to competitive pricing and soft demand. Within ISS, we experienced a revenue decline in our core mainstream products that 61 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) was partially offset by revenue growth in our hyperscale server products. TS net revenue decreased by 4% due to revenue declines in the support and consulting businesses and, to a lesser extent, to unfavorable currency impacts. Support revenue declined due to a reduction in support for BCS products. The consulting revenue decline was a result of unfavorable currency impacts, the divestiture of a service product line and a shift to more profitable services such as data center and storage consulting. BCS net revenue decreased by 26% as a result of ongoing pressures from the decline in the overall UNIX market along with lower demand for our Itanium-based servers. Storage net revenue decreased by 9% due to declines in traditional storage products, which include our tape, storage networking, and legacy external disk products, the effects of which were partially offset by growth in Converged Storage solutions, which include our 3PAR, StoreOnce, StoreVirtual and StoreAll products. Networking revenue increased by 2% due to higher demand for our switching, routing, and wireless products, the effect of which was partially offset by the impact of the divestiture of our video surveillance business in the first quarter of fiscal 2012. EG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 2.1 percentage points in fiscal 2013 driven by a decrease in gross margin and, to a lesser extent, an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decrease was due primarily to competitive pricing pressures in ISS and, to a lesser extent, pricing pressures in Storage and mix impacts from lower BCS revenue. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased due to the decline in EG net revenue and increased field selling costs and administrative expenses. R&D expenses as a percentage of net revenue decreased due primarily to the rationalization of R&D specifically for BCS and a value-added tax subsidy credit in BCS. EG also benefitted from cost savings resulting from our ongoing restructuring efforts. EG net revenue decreased 5.3% (decreased 4.6% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2012 due primarily to revenue decreases in ISS, BCS, Storage and TS. In fiscal 2012, ISS net revenue decreased by 7% driven by declines in unit volume and average unit prices. The declines were due primarily to competitive pricing pressures and macroeconomic challenges in EMEA. These effects were partially offset by increased demand for public and private cloud offerings. BCS net revenue decreased by 23% in fiscal 2012 mainly as a result of lower demand for our Itanium-based servers, the impact of which was slightly offset by growth in NonStop servers. Storage net revenue decreased 6% in fiscal 2012, due primarily to revenue declines in storage tape and storage networking products, the effect of which was partially offset by strong growth in 3PAR products and StoreOnce data deduplication solutions. TS net revenue decreased by 1% in fiscal 2012, due primarily to revenue declines in our support business driven by an unfavorable currency impact. Support contract renewals remained steady while declines in third-party hardware support were offset by growth in project services. Networking net revenue increased 4% in fiscal 2012 due to higher market demand for our core data center products, the effect of which was partially offset by competitive pricing pressures and the divestiture of our video surveillance business. EG earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 2.5 percentage points in fiscal 2012 driven by a decrease in gross margin coupled with an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The decrease in gross margin was due primarily to competitive pricing pressures, particularly in ISS and, to a lesser extent, in Networking. The increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue was driven by an increase in research and development costs and field selling costs, the effect of which was partially offset by lower administrative expenses. 62 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Enterprise Services For fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net revenue $ 23,520 $ 25,609 $ 26,268 Earnings from operations $ 679 $ 1,045 $ 1,972 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 2.9 % 4.1 % 7.5 % The components of the weighted net revenue change by ES business units were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2013 2012 Percentage Points Infrastructure Technology Outsourcing (4.4 ) (1.9 ) Application and Business Services (3.8 ) (0.6 ) Total Enterprise Services (8.2 ) (2.5 ) ES net revenue decreased 8.2% (decreased 7.1% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2013. Revenue performance in ES continues to be challenged by several factors that impact the demand environment, including weak public sector spending in the United States and austerity measures in other countries, particularly in the United Kingdom, and weak IT services spend due to the mixed global recovery, particularly in the EMEA region. The net revenue decrease in ES was driven primarily by net service revenue runoff, contractual price declines in ongoing contracts and unfavorable currency impacts. ITO net revenue decreased by 7% in fiscal 2013, due to net service revenue runoff, contractual price declines in ongoing contracts and unfavorable currency impacts, the effects of which were partially offset by net revenue growth in security and cloud offerings. ABS net revenue declined 10% in fiscal 2013. The net revenue decline was due primarily to net service revenue runoff and unfavorable currency impacts, the effects of which were partially offset by revenue growth in cloud and information and analytics offerings. Revenue in ABS was also negatively impacted by weakness in public-sector spending. ES earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 1.2 percentage points in fiscal 2013. The decrease was due to a decline in gross margin combined with an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. Gross margin declined due primarily to net service revenue runoff and contractual price declines. These unfavorable impacts to gross margin were partially offset by our continued focus on improving resource management and profit improvements on under-performing contracts. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased due to higher administrative, marketing and R&D costs. These effects were partially offset by reduced field selling costs due to lower headcount-related costs during the year and other savings from our ongoing restructuring efforts. ES net revenue decreased 2.5% (decreased 0.4% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2012 due to revenue decreases in all business units. ITO net revenue decreased by 3% in fiscal 2012. Contractual rate declines on ongoing contracts, increased deal selectivity designed to meet threshold margins and strategic fit, and an unfavorable currency impact contributed to the decrease in revenues. These effects were partially offset by an increase in product-related revenue and increased revenue from cloud and security offerings. ABS net revenue decreased by 2% in fiscal 2012. The decrease was driven by 63 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) declines in short-term project work combined with an unfavorable currency impact, the effect of which was partially offset by increases in sales of cloud and information management and analytics offerings. ES earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 3.4 percentage points in fiscal 2012. The decrease was due primarily to a gross margin decline driven by lower than expected revenue, contractual rate declines on ongoing contracts, a lower resource utilization rate and additional costs associated with certain contract deliverable delays. These effects were partially offset by a continued focus on operating improvements and cost initiatives that favorably impacted the cost structure of all business units. Software For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net revenue $ 3,913 $ 4,060 $ 3,367 Earnings from operations $ 866 $ 827 $ 722 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 22.1 % 20.4 % 21.4 % Software net revenue decreased 3.6% (decreased 2.6% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2013. Net revenue from licenses and professional services decreased by 17% and 14%, respectively, while net revenue from SaaS and support increased by 10% and 8%, respectively. The decline in software revenue was driven primarily by lower license revenue from IT/cloud management and information management products, due primarily to a large deal entered into in the prior year and the market shift to SaaS offerings. The revenue decline was also due to lower professional services revenue from IT/cloud management and information management products as we manage the professional services portfolio to focus on higher-margin solutions. These declines were partially offset by higher growth in support revenue from our information management and security products and higher revenue growth in our SaaS offerings from IT/cloud management and information management products as we shift with the market to providing more SaaS offerings. Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 1.7 percentage points in fiscal 2013 due to a decrease in operating expense as a percentage of net revenue, the effect of which was partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. The decrease in gross margin was due primarily to higher development costs in IT/cloud management products and the comparative impact of a highly profitable software deal entered into in the prior year. These decreases were partially offset by a lower mix of lower-margin professional services revenue. The decrease in operating expense as a percentage of revenue was driven primarily by lower field selling costs due to cost savings associated with our ongoing restructuring efforts. Software net revenue increased 20.6% (increased 21.3% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2012 due to revenue from acquired companies, primarily Autonomy, which was acquired in October 2011. In fiscal 2012, net revenue from services, support and licenses increased by 71%, 16% and 8%, respectively. Software earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue decreased by 1.0 percentage points in fiscal 2012 due primarily to a decrease in gross margin and a slight increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue. The gross margin decline was due primarily to a lower mix of license revenue, the effect of which was partially offset by a highly profitable software deal entered into in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012. 64 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) HP Financial Services For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net revenue $ 3,629 $ 3,819 $ 3,596 Earnings from operations $ 399 $ 388 $ 348 Earnings from operations as a % of net revenue 11.0 % 10.2 % 9.7 % HPFS net revenue decreased by 5.0% (decreased 4.2% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2013 due primarily to lower rental revenue from a decrease in average operating lease assets, lower asset recovery services revenue, and unfavorable currency impacts. These effects were partially offset by higher revenue from remarketing sales and higher finance income from an increase in finance lease assets. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.8 percentage points in fiscal 2013. The increase was due primarily to an increase in gross margin, the effect of which was partially offset by an increase in operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue as a result of higher IT investments. The increase in gross margin was the result of higher portfolio margin from a lower mix of operating leases, higher margin on early buyouts and lower bad debt expense. HPFS net revenue increased by 6.2% (increased 9.0% on a constant currency basis) in fiscal 2012. The net revenue increase was due primarily to portfolio growth, along with higher buyout activity and higher end-of-lease revenue from residual expirations. The effects of these changes were partially offset by unfavorable currency movements. HPFS earnings from operations as a percentage of net revenue increased by 0.5 percentage points in fiscal 2012. The increase was due primarily to an increase in gross margin. The increase in gross margin was due primarily to lower bad debt expense, the effect of which was partially offset by lower margins on end-of-term activities, including buyouts and lease extensions. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenue were flat due to our continued focus on cost efficiencies. Financing Originations For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Total financing originations $ 5,603 $ 6,590 $ 6,765 New financing originations, which represent the amount of financing provided to customers for equipment and related software and services, including intercompany activity, decreased 15.0% and 2.6% in fiscal 2013 and fiscal 2012, respectively. The decrease in new financing originations for both the periods was primarily driven by lower financing associated with HP product sales and services offerings, and to a lesser extent unfavorable currency impacts. Portfolio Assets and Ratios The HPFS business model is asset intensive and uses certain internal metrics to measure its performance against other financial services companies, including a segment balance sheet that is derived from our internal management reporting system. The accounting policies used to derive these amounts are substantially the same as those used by the consolidated company. However, intercompany 65 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) loans and certain accounts that are reflected in the segment balances are eliminated in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The portfolio assets and ratios derived from the segment balance sheet for HPFS were as follows for the following fiscal years ended October 31: 2013 2012 In millions Portfolio assets (1) $ 12,440 $ 13,054 Allowance for doubtful accounts (2) 131 149 Operating lease equipment reserve 76 81 Total reserves 207 230 Net portfolio assets $ 12,233 $ 12,824 Reserve coverage 1.7 % 1.8 % Debt to equity ratio (3) 7.0x 7.0x (1) Portfolio assets include gross financing receivables of approximately $7.2 billion and $7.7 billion at October 31, 2013 and October 31, 2012, respectively, and net equipment under operating leases of $2.4 billion at October 31, 2013 and October 31, 2012, as disclosed in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Portfolio assets also include capitalized profit on intercompany equipment transactions of approximately $0.7 billion and $0.9 billion at October 31, 2013 and October 31, 2012, respectively, and intercompany leases of approximately $2.1 billion at October 31, 2013 and October 31, 2012, respectively, both of which are eliminated in consolidation. (2) Allowance for doubtful accounts includes both the short-term and the long-term portions of the allowance on financing receivables. (3) HPFS debt consists of intercompany equity that is treated as debt for segment reporting purposes, intercompany debt and $0.9 billion of borrowing and funding related activity associated with HPFS and its subsidiaries. At October 31, 2013 and October 31, 2012, debt allocated to HPFS totaled $10.8 billion and $11.3 billion, respectively. HPFS equity at October 31, 2013 and October 31, 2012 was $1.5 billion and $1.6 billion, respectively. We believe the allocated intercompany debt to equity ratio above is comparable to that of other similar financing companies. At October 31, 2013 and 2012, HPFS cash balances were $697 million and $700 million, respectively. Net portfolio assets at October 31, 2013 decreased 4.6% from October 31, 2012. The decrease resulted from lower levels of new financing originations, early customer buyouts and unfavorable currency impacts. HPFS recorded net bad debt expenses of $57 million, $54 million, and $60 million in fiscal 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. 66 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Corporate Investments For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net revenue $ 24 $ 58 $ 166 Loss from operations $ (236 ) $ (233 ) $ (1,633 ) Loss from operations as a % of net revenue N/M N/M N/M In fiscal 2013, Corporate Investments net revenue was primarily related to licensing revenue from HP Labs. Net revenue decreased from fiscal 2012 due primarily to lower residual activity from the webOS device business and lower revenue from business intelligence products. Costs and expenses in Corporate Investments are due to activities in the segment from residual activity related to the webOS device business, HP Labs, certain incubation projects, corporate strategy, and global alliances. In fiscal 2012, the revenue decrease in Corporate Investments was a result of lower sales due to the wind down of the webOS device business announced in August 2011. Corporate Investments reported a smaller loss from operations in fiscal 2012 due primarily to the recognition of charges in fiscal 2011 related to the wind down of the webOS device business. The loss from operations in Corporate Investments was also due to expenses associated with corporate strategy, global alliances and HP Labs. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES We use cash generated by operations as our primary source of liquidity. We believe that internally generated cash flows are generally sufficient to support our operating businesses, capital expenditures, restructuring activities, maturing debt, income tax payments and the payment of stockholder dividends, in addition to discretionary investments and share repurchases. We are able to supplement this short-term liquidity, if necessary, with broad access to capital markets and credit line facilities made available by various foreign and domestic financial institutions. Our access to capital markets may be constrained and our cost of borrowing may increase under certain business, market and economic conditions; however, our use of a variety of funding sources to meet our liquidity needs is designed to facilitate continued access to borrowing resources under all such conditions. Our liquidity is subject to various risks including the risks identified in the section entitled "Risk Factors" in Item 1A and market risks identified in the section entitled "Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk" in Item 7A. Our cash balances are held in numerous locations throughout the world, with substantially all of those amounts held outside of the United States. We utilize a variety of planning and financing strategies in an effort to ensure that our worldwide cash is available when and where it is needed. Our cash position remains strong, and we expect that our cash balances, anticipated cash flow generated from operations and access to capital markets will be sufficient to cover our expected near-term cash outlays. Amounts held outside of the United States are generally utilized to support non-U.S. liquidity needs, although a portion of those amounts may from time to time be subject to short-term intercompany loans into the United States. Most of the amounts held outside of the United States 67 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) could be repatriated to the United States but, under current law, would be subject to U.S. federal income taxes, less applicable foreign tax credits. Repatriation of some foreign balances is restricted by local laws. Except for foreign earnings that are considered indefinitely reinvested outside of the United States, we have provided for the U.S. federal tax liability on these earnings for financial statement purposes. Repatriation could result in additional income tax payments in future years. Where local restrictions prevent an efficient intercompany transfer of funds, our intent is that cash balances would remain outside of the United States and we would meet liquidity needs through ongoing cash flows, external borrowings, or both. We do not expect restrictions or potential taxes incurred on repatriation of amounts held outside of the United States to have a material effect on our overall liquidity, financial condition or results of operations. LIQUIDITY Our cash and cash equivalents, total debt and available borrowing resources for each of the three years ended October 31, were as follows: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In billions Cash and cash equivalents $ 12.2 $ 11.3 $ 8.0 Total debt $ 22.6 $ 28.4 $ 30.6 Available borrowing resources (1)(2) $ 17.8 $ 17.4 $ 14.6 (1) In addition to these available borrowing resources, we are able to offer for sale, from time to time, in one or more offerings, an unspecified amount of debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares and warrants under a shelf registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission in May 2012 (the "2012 Shelf Registration Statement"). (2) Available borrowing resources does not include 2.2 billion ($3.6 billion) in borrowing resources under our 364-day senior unsecured bridge term loan agreement that was entered into in August 2011 and terminated in November 2011. Sources and Uses of Cash The following table summarizes the key cash flow metrics from our consolidated statements of cash flow: For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions Net cash provided by operating activities $ 11,608 $ 10,571 $ 12,639 Net cash used in investing activities (2,803 ) (3,453 ) (13,959 ) Net cash used in financing activities (7,943 ) (3,860 ) (1,566 ) Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ 862 $ 3,258 $ (2,886 ) 68 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $1.0 billion for fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012. The increase was due primarily to the impact of improved payment terms from suppliers and a reduction in payments associated with webOS contract cancellations, the impact of which was partially offset due to higher cash utilization in inventory. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $2.1 billion for fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. The decrease was due primarily to lower net earnings and higher utilization of cash resources for payment of accounts payable, the impact of which was partially offset by lower investments in inventory and higher cash generated from collections of accounts and financing receivables. Our key working capital metrics are as follows: October 31 2013 2012 2011 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable 49 49 51 Days of supply in inventory 24 25 27 Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable (56 ) (53 ) (52 ) Cash conversion cycle 17 21 26 Days of sales outstanding in accounts receivable ("DSO") measures the average number of days our receivables are outstanding. DSO is calculated by dividing ending accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, by a 90-day average net revenue. Our accounts receivable balance was $15.9 billion as of October 31, 2013. Days of supply in inventory ("DOS") measures the average number of days from procurement to sale of our product. DOS is calculated by dividing ending inventory by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our inventory balance was $6.0 billion as of October 31, 2013. Days of purchases outstanding in accounts payable ("DPO") measures the average number of days our accounts payable balances are outstanding. DPO is calculated by dividing ending accounts payable by a 90-day average cost of goods sold. Our accounts payable balance was $14.0 billion as of October 31, 2013. Our working capital requirements depend on effectively managing the cash conversion cycle, which represents the number of days that elapse from the day we pay for the purchase of inventory to the collection of cash from our customers. The cash conversion cycle is the sum of DSO and DOS less DPO. The cash conversion cycle for fiscal 2013 decreased by 4 days compared to fiscal 2012 and is below what we expect to be a long-term sustainable rate. The DSO remained flat year over year. The decrease in DOS was due to lower inventory balances, relative to the rate of decline in cost of goods sold, in most segments as of October 31, 2013. The increase in DPO was primarily due to favorable payment term changes partially offset by unfavorable purchasing linearity. The cash conversion cycle for fiscal 2012 decreased by five days compared to fiscal 2011. The decrease in DSO was due primarily to improved collections, an increase in cash discounts and a decline in extended payment terms. Additionally, our DSO benefited from the current-period DSO calculation containing a full quarter of revenue from our Autonomy acquisition versus the approximately one month of revenue that was included in the prior-period DSO calculation. These favorable impacts to 69 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) DSO were partially offset by revenue linearity. The decrease in DOS was due to lower inventory balances in most segments as of October 31, 2012. The increase in DPO was primarily due to improved purchasing linearity. Investing Activities Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $0.7 billion for fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012, due primarily to lower investments in property, plant and equipment and higher net sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities. Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $10.5 billion for fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, due primarily to lower payments for acquisitions in 2012. Financing Activities Net cash used in financing activities increased by $4.1 billion for fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012. The increase was due primarily to higher maturities of debt and net repayments of commercial paper. Net cash used in financing activities increased by approximately $2.3 billion for fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. The increase was due primarily to lower net proceeds from the issuance of U.S. Dollar Global Notes and an increase in net repayment of commercial paper, the impact of which was partially offset by lower cash paid for repurchases of our common stock. For more information on our share repurchase programs, see Item 5 and Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which are incorporated herein by reference. CAPITAL RESOURCES Debt Levels For the fiscal years ended October 31 2013 2012 2011 In millions, except interest rates and ratios Short-term debt $ 5,979 $ 6,647 $ 8,083 Long-term debt $ 16,608 $ 21,789 $ 22,551 Debt-equity ratio 0.82x 1.25x 0.79x Weighted-average interest rate 3.0 % 3.0 % 2.4 % We maintain debt levels that we establish through consideration of a number of factors, including cash flow expectations, cash requirements for operations, investment plans (including acquisitions), share repurchase activities, overall cost of capital and our targeted capital structure. Short-term debt and long-term debt decreased by $0.6 billion and $5.2 billion, respectively, for fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012. Both net decreases were due primarily to higher maturities of debt and net repayments of commercial paper. The issuances and repayments of commercial paper were $16.1 billion and $16.2 billion in fiscal 2013 and $12.2 billion and $15.0 billion in fiscal 2012, respectively. Short-term debt and long-term debt decreased by $1.4 billion and $0.8 billion, respectively, for fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. The net decrease in total debt is due primarily to fewer acquisitions and lower levels of share repurchases coupled with debt maturities. During fiscal 2014, $4.9 billion of U.S. Dollar Global Notes is scheduled to mature. For more information on our borrowings, see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. 70 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Our debt-equity ratio is calculated as the carrying value of debt divided by the carrying value of equity. Our debt-equity ratio decreased by 0.43x in fiscal 2013, due to a decrease in total debt balances of $5.8 billion coupled with an increase in stockholders equity by $4.8 billion at the end of fiscal 2013. Our debt-equity ratio increased by 0.46x in fiscal 2012, due primarily to a decrease in stockholders equity of $16.2 billion at the end of fiscal 2012. Our weighted-average interest rate reflects the average effective rate on our borrowings prevailing during the period and reflects the impact of interest rate swaps. For more information on our interest rate swaps, see Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Available Borrowing Resources At October 31, 2013, we had the following resources available to obtain short-term or long-term financings if we need additional liquidity: At October 31, 2013 In millions 2012 Shelf Registration Statement (1) Unspecified Commercial paper programs (1) $16,173 Uncommitted lines of credit (1) $ 1,593 (1) For more information on our available borrowings resources, see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. Credit Ratings Our credit risk is evaluated by the major independent rating agencies based upon publicly available information as well as information obtained in our ongoing discussions with them. Our ratings as of October 31, 2013 were: Standard & Poor's Ratings Services Moody's Investors Service Fitch Ratings Short-term debt ratings A-2 Prime-2 F2 Long-term debt ratings BBB+ Baa1 A- Two of the major independent rating agencies, Moody's Investors Service and Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, downgraded our ratings once during fiscal 2012, and a third rating agency, Fitch Ratings, downgraded our ratings twice during that fiscal year. Moody's Investors Service also downgraded our long-term debt from A3 to Baa1 in November 2012. Our credit ratings remain under negative outlook by Moody's Investors Service. While we do not have any rating downgrade triggers that would accelerate the maturity of a material amount of our debt, previous downgrades have increased the cost of borrowing under our credit facilities, have reduced market capacity for our commercial paper and have required the posting of additional collateral under some of our derivative contracts. In addition, any further downgrade in our credit ratings by any of the rating agencies may further impact us in a similar manner, and, depending on the extent of the downgrade, could have a negative impact on our liquidity and capital position. We expect to rely on alternative sources of funding, including drawdowns under our credit facilities or the issuance of debt or other securities 71 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) under our existing shelf registration statement, if necessary to offset reductions in the market capacity for our commercial paper. CONTRACTUAL AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS The impact that we expect our contractual and other obligations as of October 31, 2013 to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods is as follows: Payments Due by Period Total 1 Year or Less 1-3 Years 3-5 Years More than 5 Years In millions Principal payments on long-term debt (1) $ 21,420 $ 4,971 $ 5,534 $ 3,728 $ 7,187 Interest payments on long-term debt (2) 4,591 565 951 672 2,403 Operating lease obligations 2,900 728 1,004 445 723 Purchase obligations (3) 2,166 1,191 706 269 Capital lease obligations 289 229 27 8 25 Total (4)(5)(6) $ 31,366 $ 7,684 $ 8,222 $ 5,122 $ 10,338 (1) Amounts represent the expected principal cash payments relating to our long-term debt and do not include any fair value adjustments, discounts or premiums. (2) Amounts represent the expected interest payments relating to our long-term debt. We have outstanding interest rate swap agreements accounted for as fair value hedges that have the economic effect of changing fixed interest rates associated with some of our global notes to variable interest rates. The impact of these interest rate swaps was factored into the calculation of the future interest payments on long-term debt. (3) Purchase obligations include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding on us and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. These purchase obligations are related principally to inventory and other items. Purchase obligations exclude agreements that are cancellable without penalty. Purchase obligations also exclude open purchase orders that are routine arrangements entered into in the ordinary course of business, as they are difficult to quantify in a meaningful way. Even though open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust terms based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. (4) In fiscal 2014, we expect to contribute approximately $617 million to our non-U.S. pension plans and approximately $33 million to cover benefit payments to U.S. non-qualified plan participants. We expect to pay approximately $109 million to cover benefit claims for our post-retirement benefit plans. Our policy is to fund our pension plans so that they meet at least the minimum contribution requirements, as established by local government, funding and taxing authorities. Expected contributions to our pension and post-retirement benefit plans are excluded from the table because they do not represent contractual cash outflows as they are dependent on numerous factors, which may result in a wide range of outcomes. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial 72 Table of Contents HEWLETT-PACKARD COMPANY AND SUBSIDIARIES Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (Continued) Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information about our retirement and post-retirement benefit plans. (5) We expect future cash expenditures of approximately $1.9 billion in connection with our approved restructuring plans. We expect to make cash payments of approximately $1.4 billion in fiscal 2014 with remaining cash payments to be made through fiscal 2017. Payments for restructuring have been excluded from the table as they are not contractual and there remains uncertainty as to the timing of these payments. See Note 7 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on restructuring activities. (6) In fiscal 2013, we had approximately $3 billion of recorded liabilities and related interest and penalties pertaining to uncertain tax positions. These liabilities and related interest and penalties include $104 million expected to be made within one year. For the remaining amount, we are unable to make a reasonable estimate as to when cash settlement with the tax authorities might occur due to the uncertainties related to these tax matters. Payments of these obligations would result from settlements with taxing authorities. As we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the timing of any cash payments to the tax authorities as a result of future settlements, these obligations are not included in the table. See Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference, for additional information on our uncertain tax positions. OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS As part of our ongoing business, we have not participated in transactions that generate material relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. We have third-party financing arrangements consisting of revolving short-term financing intended to facilitate the working capital requirements of certain customers. The total aggregate capacity of the facilities was $1.4 billion as of October 31, 2013, including an aggregate capacity of $0.8 billion in non-recourse facilities and a $0.6 billion partial recourse facility. For more information on our third-party financing arrangements, see Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. 73 Table of Contents 
