CIK: 5513
Company Name: UNUM GROUP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-24


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The discussion and analysis presented in this section should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto in Item 8. Executive Summary Our primary objectives for 2008 included: Consistent execution of our operating plans. We continued our emphasis on disciplined, profitable growth. Continued innovation throughout our businesses. Within Unum US, we broadly launched Simply Unum in the small to mid sized employer marketplace. We capitalized on the introduction of a number of health related products for Colonial Life and continued to expand our enrollment capabilities and product offerings. In Unum UK, we worked on the development of new product offerings and the improvement of corporate efficiencies. Leveraging of our leadership positions and marketplace reputation. We built on the momentum of 2007 with increased brand and product awareness. Execution of our capital management strategy. We completed our share repurchase program and maintained our financial measurements at favorable levels relative to our targets. Professional development of our employees. We continued our emphasis on training and leadership development and talent management throughout our organization. Through focusing on these objectives, we believe that we have instilled greater confidence in our company among our constituents. In commenting on our results for 2008, we will discuss our operating performance, strategic and capital initiatives, the current economic environment, and our major areas of focus for 2009. Operating Performance During 2008, Unum US reported an increase in segment operating income of 12.5 percent compared to the prior year and excluding the 2007 revision to the claim reassessment reserve estimate. The group disability benefit ratio was 88.7 percent for the fourth quarter of 2008 and 89.9 percent for full year 2008, consistent with our goal of continual profit margin improvement for this line of business. Unum US sales increased 11.0 percent in 2008 compared to 2007. Our group core market segment, which we define for Unum US as employee groups with less than 2,000 lives, had a sales increase of 23.7 percent over the prior year, and the number of new accounts increased 16.4 percent. Our supplemental and voluntary sales increased 6.8 percent in 2008 compared to last year, with a 14.6 percent increase in voluntary sales offsetting the expected decrease in sales of individual long-term care. Sales in the group large case market segment declined 1.8 percent compared to the prior year. During the third quarter of 2007, we introduced Simply Unum , an integrated platform of products and online services that we believe will transform the benefits marketplace through innovative solutions for our group core market segment and our voluntary market. The initial limited market rollout occurred in 2007, and we have now expanded the availability of Simply Unum to 45 states nationwide. We will complete the rollout to the remaining states as state approvals are received. We are also in the process of developing additional products and services. Our Unum UK segment continues to produce excellent operating results, with an increase in segment operating income of 6.5 percent for 2008, as measured in Unum UK local currency, relative to 2007. The functional currency of Unum UK is the British pound sterling, and we translate Unum UK pound-denominated financial statements into dollars for our consolidated financial reporting. The recent fluctuations in the pound to dollar exchange rate have decreased our current year results relative to 2007, particularly results reported for the second half of 2008. We expect this volatility in translated financial results, which is a financial reporting issue and is not indicative of an operating problem, to continue in 2009. Overall sales in Unum UK increased 3.6 percent in 2008 compared to the prior year. Sales in 2007 benefited from the change in age equality legislation more so than in 2008. Excluding sales related to the change in age equality legislation from all comparable periods, Unum UK achieved underlying sales growth of approximately 16 percent in 2008 relative to 2007. The U.K. market remains highly competitive. We are developing new products and services to target new customer segments. During 2008 we launched a dual benefit group disability product designed for the needs of the smaller employer. 30 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Our Colonial Life segment reported an increase in segment operating income of 9.1 percent in 2008 compared to the prior year. Colonial Life sales increased 1.6 percent in 2008 relative to last year, with sales in the commercial market segment for employee groups with less than 100 lives increasing 6.9 percent. The number of new accounts and the average new case size both increased over the prior year. During the latter part of 2007, we introduced a new hospital confinement indemnity insurance plan product and a group limited benefit medical plan product, and in the first quarter of 2008, we introduced the new Colonial Life brand. We are pleased with the marketplace reception for our new Colonial Life brand and these new product offerings. Colonial Life continues to expand its enrollment capabilities and its product offerings. In the third quarter of 2008, Colonial Life introduced two new life products and the latest release of its enrollment system, Harmony , which offers multiple enrollment solutions. In addition, all of Colonial Life individual products, including the two new life products, are available on Harmony . Our investment strategy continues to provide benefits to our overall business performance. We are focused on both the quality of our investment portfolio and on investing new money in investments appropriate for our liabilities and with yields that will increase our portfolio yield. Our net investment income in 2008 was slightly below the level of 2007 due primarily to a decrease in the level of bond call premiums. Included in 2008 results are net realized investment losses from sales and write-downs of investments related primarily to fixed maturity securities in the financial institutions, automotive, and media sectors that we either sold or considered other than temporarily impaired during the third and fourth quarters of 2008. We believe our investment portfolio is well positioned for the current environment, with historically low levels of below-investment-grade securities, no exposure to subprime mortgages, Alt-A loans, or collateralized debt obligations in our asset-backed or mortgage-backed securities portfolios, and minimal exposure to collateralized debt obligations within our public bond portfolio. Further discussion is included in Investments contained in this Item 7. Strategic and Capital Initiatives The first priority of our capital management strategy is to maintain sufficient financial flexibility to support our operations over various economic cycles and to respond to opportunities in the marketplace while positioning our Company for improvements in its credit ratings. We have several financial targets which guide our capital management decisions including: Maintain a risk based capital ratio of 300 percent or greater for our traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries. This is to be measured on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula. Maintain leverage at approximately 25 percent. Leverage will be measured as total debt to total capital, which we define as total long-term and short-term debt plus stockholders equity, excluding the net unrealized gain or loss on securities and the net gain or loss on cash flow hedges. This target level excludes the non-recourse debt and associated capital of Tailwind Holdings and Northwind Holdings. Maintain cash and liquid investments at our holding companies sufficient to cover one year of fixed charges (measured as interest expense plus common stock dividends) plus a capital fund which will vary with business and economic conditions. Maintain a common stock dividend yield that is near the median of our peer companies. At the end of 2008, all of our financial measurements for capital management continue to compare favorably to our target levels. We have completed our $700.0 million authorized share repurchase program, and we have maintained our leverage at 21.5 percent, compared to 21.4 percent at the end of 2007. See Liquidity and Capital Resources contained in this Item 7 for further detail. Economic Environment Analysis and stress testing are important aspects of understanding our financial risk exposure and developing proactive risk management efforts. As part of our recessionary analysis, we have identified the following potential challenges to our 2009 business outlook, as well as what we perceive to be opportunities and mitigating factors, resulting from the current economy. 31 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Potential Challenges Lower premium income from fewer employees in the work-force of our markets; employer- and employee-paid cost pressures may also limit sales and reduce persistency. Lower net investment income from fewer long-term assets to match our liability portfolio; lower bond call prepayment income. Lower investment income and/or higher realized investment losses due to an increase in defaults. Higher unrealized investment losses. Higher disability claim costs. Higher operating expense ratios due to declining premiums. Opportunities and Mitigating Factors Lower premium income may be mitigated by mix of business and by our growing position in the voluntary market. Lower premium income may be mitigated by the flexibility of our product design and pricing. We may achieve higher investment income from wider corporate spreads which enhance investment income associated with new purchases of fixed maturity securities. We have low levels of exposure to high risk investments. We believe our claim reserve discount rates are adequate relative to investment portfolio yield rates. We believe our risk management is strong; we have a diversified business mix, with a core market focus which generally has lower and less volatile claim incidence. Our historical pattern of benefits paid to revenues is consistent, even during cycles of economic downturns. We manage our expenses aggressively and have cost management initiatives in place. We believe our risk-based capital and holding company liquidity position us well for an economic downturn. Our business outlook recognizes both the challenges of the current economic environment as well as the mitigating impact of risk-reducing actions we have taken in recent years, including product diversification across sectors and locations, our mix of business, our disciplined underwriting, pricing, claims, and expense management, a reduced credit risk profile in our investment portfolio, our capital management strategy, and better risk management practices. Our outlook is responsive to our risk management framework and is consistent with our risk appetite. Although occurrence of one or more of the risk factors previously discussed herein in Item 1A may cause our results to differ from our outlook, we believe that our business outlook is built on sound operating plans that have been tested against many of the challenges presented by the current economic environment. Focus for 2009 During 2009, we intend to continue our focus on a number of key areas. Consistent execution of our operating plans. We will continue our emphasis on disciplined, profitable growth. Maintain a strong investment portfolio. We will maintain disciplined credit analysis in our selection of investment assets and continue to be conservative within our investment risk tolerances. Build and effectively use capital. We intend to continue to build capital and manage it effectively within our stated capital management strategy objectives. Professional development of our employees. We will continue our focus on employee training and development as well as talent management. 32 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements 2008 Significant Transactions and Events Legal and Regulatory Issues On January 12, 2009, in a two-to-one decision, the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the District Court earlier ruling certifying a class in the case styled, In re UnumProvident Corp. ERISA Benefits Denial Actions . On January 26, 2009, the plaintiffs filed a petition for rehearing of this decision by the full court. The District Court has yet to rule on our pending motions for judgment on the pleadings or for summary judgment. During 2008, we reached a settlement in the Shareholder Derivative action that was originally filed in 2002. Under the terms of the settlement, which is subject to approval of the court, we have agreed to implement or continue certain corporate governance measures and pay plaintiffs attorneys fees in an amount to be determined by the court. Also during 2008, we reached a settlement with the U.S. Attorney in San Diego regarding broker compensation disclosure practices dating back several years. While this settlement was only recently finalized, it covers issues that were resolved several years ago with other regulators. We have worked cooperatively with the U.S. Attorney office since its inquiry into the industry compensation practices began. As part of the settlement, we agreed to a payment of $5.6 million and included this expense in our 2008 results. Compliance with the terms of the settlement agreement will not require any further changes in our business practices, as we previously made changes to our broker compensation program. During 2007, we completed the claim reassessment process required by the 2004 and 2005 regulatory settlement agreements. The lead regulators conducted a final examination and presented their findings to Unum Group board of directors and management on April 14, 2008. The report of the multistate market conduct examination for the Maine Bureau of Insurance, Massachusetts Division of Insurance, New York State Insurance Department, Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance, and other participating jurisdictions as well as the report of the California Department of Insurance market conduct examination both provided that we satisfactorily complied with each of the agreements mandates and that no fines will be assessed. We continue to work closely with our regulators and also continue to work toward resolution of other outstanding legal and regulatory issues. See Note 14 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for information on our legal proceedings. Financing During 2007, Unum Group board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $700.0 million of Unum Group common stock. During 2008, we completed our share repurchase program and purchased 29.9 million shares of Unum Group common stock for $700.0 million. During the second quarter of 2008, we retired the remaining $175.0 million of our 5.997% senior notes. During 2008, we made principal payments of $59.3 million and $10.0 million on our senior secured non-recourse variable rate notes issued by Northwind Holdings and Tailwind Holdings, respectively. We also purchased and retired $36.6 million of our 6.85% senior debentures due 2015 and $17.8 million of our outstanding 5.859% senior notes due in May 2009. In December 2008, we obtained a new credit facility. The current facility establishes a $250.0 million unsecured revolving line of credit and replaces an existing facility. We intend to use any drawn borrowings from the facility for general corporate purposes. Any actions that we may take will be consistent with our stated capital management strategy. See Liquidity and Capital Resources contained in this Item 7 and Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. 33 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Other During the first quarter of 2008, we established a new non-insurance company, Unum Ireland Limited, which is an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Unum Group. The purpose of Unum Ireland Limited is to expand our information technology resource options to ensure that our resource capacity keeps pace with the growing demand for information technology support. This subsidiary, which is located in Carlow, Ireland, had approximately 40 full-time employees at the end of 2008. Accounting Pronouncements Effective January 1, 2008, we adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 (SFAS 157), Fair Value Measurements . SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. The adoption of SFAS 157 did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. Effective December 31, 2008, we adopted the provisions of FASB Staff Position No. EITF 99-20-1, (FSP EITF 99-20-1), Amendments to the Impairment Guidance of EITF Issue No. 99-20 . This FSP amends the impairment guidance in Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) Issue No. 99-20, Recognition of Interest Income and Impairment on Purchased Beneficial Interests and Beneficial Interests That Continue to Be Held by a Transferor in Securitized Financial Assets , to achieve more consistent determination of whether an other-than-temporary impairment has occurred. The FSP also retains and emphasizes the objective of an other-than-temporary impairment assessment and the related disclosure requirements in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 115, Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and Equity Securities, and other related guidance. The adoption of FSP EITF 99-20-1 did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 161 (SFAS 161), Disclosures about Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, an amendment of FASB Statement No. 133 , was issued in March 2008. SFAS 161 is intended to improve financial reporting about derivative instruments and hedging activities by requiring enhanced disclosures to enable investors to better understand their effects on an entity financial position, financial performance, and cash flows. We will adopt the provisions of SFAS 161 effective January 1, 2009. The adoption of SFAS 161 will amend our disclosures but will have no effect on our financial position or results of operations. FASB Staff Position No. FAS 132(R)-1, (FSP FAS 132(R)-1), Employers Disclosures about Postretirement Benefit Plan Assets , was issued December 30, 2008. This FSP amends Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 132 (revised 2003), Employers Disclosures about Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits, to provide guidance on an employer disclosures about plan assets of a defined benefit pension or other postretirement plan. The disclosures about plan assets required by this FSP are required for fiscal years ending after December 15, 2009. The adoption of FSP FAS 132(R)-1 will amend our disclosures but will have no effect on our financial position or results of operations. 2007 Significant Transactions and Events Legal and Regulatory Issues Revised Claim Reassessment Reserve Estimate As previously noted, during 2007 we completed the claim reassessment process required by the 2004 and 2005 regulatory settlement agreements. Prior to completion of the claim reassessment process, in the second quarter of 2007 we increased our provision for the estimated cost of the claim reassessment process $53.0 million before tax and $34.5 million after tax based on changes in our emerging experience for the number of decisions being overturned and the average cost per reassessed claim. The revised second quarter of 2007 estimate was based on the cost of approximately 99 percent of the potential inventory of claim reassessment information forms returned to us, with our claim reassessment on approximately 88 percent of the forms completed at that time. At the time of our second quarter of 2007 revision, we had not yet finalized our claim reassessment on the remaining forms but had performed a financial review and included that information in our analysis of emerging experience. Additional information regarding the second quarter revision to our estimate is as follows: 34 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements 1. We increased our previous estimate for benefit costs for claims reopened for our Unum US group long-term disability product line $76.5 million. The revision related to the increase during the second quarter of 2007 in the overturn rate and the average cost, as well as a slightly higher number of claims. 2. We decreased our previous estimate for benefit costs for claims reopened for our Individual Disability Closed Block segment $10.7 million. Although the experience relative to our assumptions for the overturn rate was slightly higher, experience indicated that the total number of claims for this segment would be less than our previous assumptions. 3. We decreased our previous estimate for the additional incremental direct claim reassessment operating expenses $12.8 million due to our projections for an earlier completion of the reassessment process. We released $10.3 million for Unum US group long-term disability and $2.5 million for our Individual Disability Closed Block segment. 4. These second quarter of 2007 adjustments to our claim reassessment costs decreased 2007 before-tax operating earnings for our Unum US group disability line of business $66.2 million and increased 2007 before-tax operating earnings for our Individual Disability Closed Block segment $13.2 million. Financing The scheduled remarketing of the senior note element of our 2004 adjustable conversion-rate equity units (units) occurred in February 2007, as stipulated by the terms of the original offering, and we reset the interest rate on $300.0 million of senior notes due May 15, 2009 to 5.859%. We purchased $150.0 million of the senior notes in the remarketing which were subsequently retired. In May 2007, we settled the purchase contract element of the 2004 units by issuing 17.7 million shares of common stock. We received proceeds of approximately $300.0 million from the transaction. Throughout 2007, we repaid an additional $619.5 million of our outstanding debt, for total long-term debt repayments of $769.5 million. The cost related to the early retirement of debt during 2007 decreased our 2007 operating results approximately $58.8 million before tax, or $38.3 million after tax. On October 31, 2007, Northwind Holdings issued $800.0 million of floating rate, insured, senior, secured notes due 2037 in a private offering. The notes bear interest at a floating rate equal to the three month London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus 0.78%. Recourse for the payment of principal, interest, and other amounts due on the notes will be dependent principally on the receipt of dividends from Northwind Reinsurance Company (Northwind Re), the sole subsidiary of Northwind Holdings. See Liquidity and Capital Resources contained in this Item 7 and Notes 8 and 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on Northwind Holdings and Northwind Re. In December 2007, we established a $400.0 million unsecured revolving credit facility. Dispositions During the first quarter of 2007, we completed the sale of our wholly-owned subsidiary, GENEX Services, Inc. (GENEX), a leading workers compensation and medical cost containment services provider. Our growth strategy is focused on the development of our primary markets, and GENEX specialty role in case management and medical cost containment related to the workers compensation market was no longer consistent with our overall strategic direction. We recognized an after-tax gain on the transaction of approximately $6.2 million. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. Accounting Pronouncements Effective January 1, 2007, we adopted the provisions of Statement of Position 05-1 (SOP 05-1), Accounting by Insurance Enterprises for Deferred Acquisition Costs in Connection With Modifications or Exchanges of Insurance Contracts . SOP 05-1 provides guidance on accounting by insurance enterprises for deferred acquisition costs 35 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements (DAC) on internal replacements of insurance and investment contracts other than those specifically described in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 97, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain Long-Duration Contracts and for Realized Gains and Losses from the Sale of Investments. The cumulative effect of applying the provisions of SOP 05-1 decreased our 2007 opening balance of retained earnings $445.2 million. Effective January 1, 2007, we adopted the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 48 (FIN 48), Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 (SFAS 109) . FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with SFAS 109. Unlike SFAS 109, FIN 48 prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. Additionally, FIN 48 provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. The cumulative effect of applying the provisions of FIN 48 increased our 2007 opening balance of retained earnings $22.7 million. Effective January 1, 2007, we adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 155 (SFAS 155), Accounting for Certain Hybrid Financial Instruments, an amendment of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 133 (SFAS 133) and 140 (SFAS 140) . SFAS 155: (a) permits fair value remeasurement for any hybrid financial instrument that contains an embedded derivative that otherwise would require bifurcation; (b) clarifies which interest-only strips and principal-only strips are not subject to the requirements of SFAS 133; (c) establishes a requirement to evaluate beneficial interests in securitized financial assets to identify interests that are freestanding derivatives or that are hybrid financial instruments that contain an embedded derivative requiring bifurcation; (d) clarifies that concentrations of credit risk in the form of subordination are not embedded derivatives; and, (e) eliminates restrictions on a qualifying special-purpose entity ability to hold passive derivative financial instruments that pertain to beneficial interests that are or contain a derivative financial instrument. The adoption of SFAS 155 did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. 2006 Significant Transactions and Events Legal and Regulatory Issues Revised Claim Reassessment Reserve Estimate In the first quarter of 2006, we completed an analysis of our assumptions related to the reserves we established for our claim reassessment process. Our analysis was based on preliminary data as of the end of the first quarter of 2006, when actual results to date were considered credible enough to enable us to update our initial expectations of costs related to the reassessment process. We concluded that a change in our initial assumptions, primarily related to the number of claimants for whom payments will continue because the claimant remains eligible for disability payments, was warranted. We based our conclusion and our revised estimate on the information that existed at that time, which was the actual cost related to approximately 20 percent of the projected ultimate total number of claims expected to be reassessed. The characteristics, profile, and cost of those initial 20 percent of claims were more statistically credible than the information on which we based the initial charges in 2004 and 2005. Based on our analysis, in the first quarter of 2006 we recorded a charge of $86.0 million before tax, or $55.9 million after tax, to reflect our then current estimate of future obligations for benefit costs for claims reopened in the reassessment. The first quarter charge decreased 2006 before-tax operating results for our Unum US group disability line of business $72.8 million and our Individual Disability Closed Block segment $13.2 million. In the third quarter of 2006, we increased our provision for the cost of the reassessment process $325.4 million before tax and $211.5 million after tax based on changes in our emerging experience for the number of decisions being overturned by the reassessment process and the average cost per reassessed claim. The revised third quarter estimate was based on the cost of approximately 55 percent of the projected ultimate total number of claims expected to be reassessed. The third quarter charge was comprised of $310.4 million to reflect our revised estimate of future obligations for benefit costs for claims reopened in the reassessment and $15.0 million for additional incremental direct claim reassessment operating expenses because of the additional time then estimated to complete the process. Our best estimate of $310.4 million for the reopened claims assumed that the nature and characteristics of the approximately 45 percent remaining claims estimated to be reassessed at that time would be similar to the 36 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements average profile of the 55 percent already reviewed at that time. The third quarter charge decreased before-tax operating results for our Unum US group disability line of business $291.4 million and our Individual Disability Closed Block segment $34.0 million. Regulatory Investigations Beginning in 2004, several of our insurance subsidiaries insurance regulators requested information relating to the subsidiaries policies and practices on one or more aspects of broker compensation, quoting insurance business, and related matters. Additionally, we responded to investigations about certain of these same matters by state attorneys general and the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL). Following highly publicized litigation involving the alleged practices of a major insurance broker, the NAIC has undertaken to provide a uniform Compensation Disclosure Amendment to the Producer Licensing Model Act that can be adopted by states in an effort to provide uniform guidance to insurers, brokers, and customers relating to disclosure of broker compensation. We expect there to be continued uncertainty surrounding this matter until clearer regulatory guidelines are established. In June 2004, we received a subpoena from the NYAG requesting documents and information relating to compensation arrangements between insurance brokers or intermediaries and us and our subsidiaries. In November 2006, we entered into a settlement agreement on broker compensation with the NYAG in the form of an assurance of discontinuance that provided for a national restitution fund of $15.5 million and a fine of $1.9 million. We support the full disclosure of compensation paid to both brokers and agents and have implemented policies to facilitate customers obtaining information regarding broker compensation from their brokers. Additionally, we provide appropriate notices to customers stating our policy surrounding disclosure and provide information on our Company website about our broker compensation programs. Under these policies, any customer who wants specific broker compensation related information can obtain this information by contacting our Broker Compensation Services at a toll-free number. Other changes implemented during 2006 included requiring customer approval of compensation paid by us to the broker when the customer is also paying a fee to the broker and strengthening certain policies and procedures associated with new business and quoting activities. Financing The scheduled remarketing of the senior note element of our 2003 units occurred in February 2006, as stipulated by the terms of the original offering, and we reset the interest rate on $575.0 million of senior notes due May 15, 2008 to 5.997%. We purchased $400.0 million of the senior notes in the remarketing which were subsequently retired. In May 2006, we settled the purchase contract element of the units by issuing 43.3 million shares of common stock. We received proceeds of approximately $575.0 million from the transaction. Throughout 2006, we repaid an additional $332.0 million of our outstanding debt, for total long-term debt repayments of $732.0 million. The cost related to the early retirement of debt decreased our 2006 annual income approximately $25.8 million before tax, or $16.9 million after tax. In November 2006, Tailwind Holdings, a Delaware limited liability company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Unum Group, issued $130.0 million of floating rate, insured, senior, secured notes in a private offering. The payment of principal, interest, and other amounts due on the notes will be dependent principally on the receipt of dividends from Tailwind Reinsurance Company (Tailwind Re), the sole subsidiary of Tailwind Holdings. See Liquidity and Capital Resources contained in this Item 7 and Notes 8 and 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on Tailwind Holdings and Tailwind Re. Income Tax During 2006, we recognized an income tax benefit of approximately $91.9 million as the result of the reversal of tax liabilities related primarily to group relief benefits recognized from the use of net operating losses in a foreign jurisdiction in which our businesses operate. 37 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Accounting Pronouncements Effective January 1, 2006, we adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (revised 2004) (SFAS 123(R)), Share-Based Payment , which is a revision to Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (SFAS 123), Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation . SFAS 123(R) focuses primarily on accounting for transactions in which an entity obtains employee service in exchange for share-based payments. Under SFAS 123(R), share-based awards that do not require future service (i.e., vesting awards) are expensed immediately. Share-based employee awards that require future service are amortized over the relevant service period. We adopted SFAS 123(R) using the modified prospective transition method. Under this method, the provisions are generally applied only to share-based awards granted after adoption. The adoption of SFAS 123(R) did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. Additional information concerning the adoption of SFAS 123(R) can be found in Notes 1 and 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8. Effective January 1, 2006, we adopted the provisions of FASB Staff Position No. FAS 115-1 (FSP 115-1), The Meaning of Other-Than-Temporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments , which addresses the determination of when an investment is considered impaired, whether the impairment is other than temporary, and the measurement of an impairment loss. FSP 115-1 also includes accounting considerations subsequent to the recognition of other-than-temporary impairment and requires certain disclosures about unrealized losses. The adoption of FSP 115-1 did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. Effective December 31, 2006, we adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 158 (SFAS 158), Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R) . SFAS 158 requires an employer to recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans as an asset or liability in its balance sheet and to recognize changes in that funded status through comprehensive income. Also, under SFAS 158, defined benefit pension and other postretirement plan assets and obligations are to be measured as of the date of the employer fiscal year-end. The adoption of SFAS 158, which resulted in an $84.1 million decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income in stockholders equity, had no effect on our results of operations. Critical Accounting Estimates We prepare our financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. The accounting estimates we deem to be most critical to our results of operations and balance sheets are those related to reserves for policy and contract benefits, deferred acquisition costs, investments, and income taxes. Estimates and assumptions could change in the future as more information becomes known, which could impact the amounts reported and disclosed in our financial statements. For additional information, refer to our significant accounting policies in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8. Reserves for Policy and Contract Benefits Our largest liabilities are reserves for claims that we estimate we will eventually pay to our policyholders. The two primary categories of reserves are policy reserves for claims not yet incurred and claim reserves for claims that have been incurred or are estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to us. These reserves equaled $37.2 billion and $36.9 billion at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, or approximately 85 percent of our total liabilities. Reserves ceded to reinsurers were $6.7 billion and $6.6 billion at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, and are reported as a reinsurance recoverable in our consolidated balance sheets. Policy Reserves Policy reserves are established in the same period we issue a policy and equal the difference between projected future policy benefits and future premiums, allowing a margin for expenses and profit. These reserves relate primarily to our traditional non interest-sensitive products, including our individual disability, individual and group long-term care, and voluntary benefits products in our Unum US segment; individual disability products in our 38 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Unum UK segment; disability and cancer and critical illness policies in our Colonial Life segment; and, the Individual Disability Closed Block segment products. The reserves are calculated based on assumptions that were appropriate at the date the policy was issued and are not subsequently modified unless the policy reserves become inadequate (i.e., loss recognition occurs). Persistency assumptions are based on our actual historical experience adjusted for future expectations. Claim incidence and claim resolution rate assumptions related to mortality and morbidity are based on actual experience or industry standards adjusted as appropriate to reflect our actual experience and future expectations. Discount rate assumptions are based on our current and expected net investment returns. In establishing policy reserves, we use assumptions that reflect our best estimate while considering the potential for adverse variances in actual future experience, which results in a total policy reserve balance that has an embedded reserve for adverse deviation. We do not, however, establish an explicit and separate reserve as a provision for adverse deviation from our assumptions. We perform loss recognition tests on our policy reserves annually, or more frequently if appropriate, using best estimate assumptions as of the date of the test, without a provision for adverse deviation. We group the policy reserves for each major product line within a segment when we perform the loss recognition tests. If the policy reserves determined using these best estimate assumptions are higher than our existing policy reserves net of any deferred acquisition cost balance, the existing policy reserves are increased or deferred acquisition costs are reduced to immediately recognize the deficiency. Thereafter, the policy reserves for the product line are calculated using the same method we used for the loss recognition testing, referred to as the gross premium valuation method, wherein we use our best estimate as of the gross premium valuation (loss recognition) date rather than the initial policy issue date to determine the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay and the expected future gross premiums we will receive. We maintain policy reserves for a policy for as long as the policy remains in force, even after a separate claim reserve is established. Policy reserves for Unum US, Unum UK, and Colonial Life products, which at December 31, 2008 represented approximately 34.6 percent, 0.2 percent, and 9.2 percent, respectively, of our total gross policy reserves, are determined using the net level premium method as prescribed by GAAP. In applying this method, we use, as applicable by product type, morbidity and mortality incidence rate assumptions, claim resolution rate assumptions, and policy persistency assumptions, among others, to determine our expected future claim payments and expected future premium income. We then apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay and the expected future premiums we will receive, with a provision for profit allowed. Policy reserves for our Individual Disability Closed Block segment, which at December 31, 2008, represented approximately 12.0 percent of our total gross policy reserves, are determined using the gross premium valuation method based on assumptions established as of January 1, 2004, the date of loss recognition. Key assumptions are policy persistency, claim incidence, claim resolution rates, commission rates, and maintenance expense rates. We then apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay as well as the expected future premiums we will receive. There is no provision for profit. The interest rate is based on our expected net investment returns on the investment portfolio supporting the reserves for this segment. Under the gross premium valuation method, we do not include an embedded provision for the risk of adverse deviation from these assumptions. Gross premium valuation assumptions do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient. We perform loss recognition tests on the policy reserves for this block of business quarterly. The Corporate and Other segment includes certain products no longer actively marketed, the majority of which have been reinsured. Policy reserves for this segment represent $5.6 billion on a gross basis, or approximately 44.0 percent, of our total policy reserves. We have ceded $4.2 billion of the related policy reserves to reinsurers. The ceded reserve balance is reported in our consolidated balance sheets as a reinsurance recoverable. We continue to service a block of group pension products, which we have not ceded, and the policy reserves for these products are 39 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements based on expected mortality rates and retirement rates. Expected future payments are discounted at interest rates reflecting the anticipated investment returns for the assets supporting the liabilities. Claim Reserves Claim reserves are established when a claim is incurred or is estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported (IBNR) to us and, as prescribed by GAAP, equals our long-term best estimate of the present value of the liability for future claim payments and claim adjustment expenses. A claim reserve is based on actual known facts regarding the claim, such as the benefits available under the applicable policy, the covered benefit period, and the age and occupation of the claimant, as well as assumptions derived from our actual historical experience and expected future changes in experience for factors such as the claim duration and discount rate. Reserves for IBNR claims, similar to incurred claim reserves, include our assumptions for claim duration and discount rates but because we do not yet know the facts regarding the specific claims, are also based on historical incidence rate assumptions, including claim reporting patterns, the average cost of claims, and the expected volumes of incurred claims. Our incurred claim reserves and IBNR claim reserves do not include any provision for the risk of adverse deviation from our assumptions. Claim reserves, unlike policy reserves, are subject to revision as current claim experience and projections of future factors affecting claim experience change. Each quarter we review our emerging experience to ensure that our claim reserves are appropriate. If we believe, based on our actual experience and our view of future events, that our long-term assumptions need to be modified, we adjust our reserves accordingly with a charge or credit to our current period income. Multiple estimation methods exist to establish claim reserve liabilities, with each method having its own advantages and disadvantages. Available reserving methods utilized to calculate claim reserves include the tabular reserve method, the paid development method, the incurred loss development method, the count and severity method, and the expected claim cost method. No singular method is better than the others in all situations and for all product lines. The estimation methods we have chosen are those that we believe produce the most reliable reserves at that time. Claim reserves supporting our Unum US group and individual disability and group and individual long-term care lines of business and our Individual Disability Closed Block segment represent approximately 39.6 percent and 43.4 percent, respectively, of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2008. We use a tabular reserve methodology for group and individual long-term disability and group and individual long-term care claims that have been reported. Under the tabular reserve methodology, reserves for reported claims are based on certain characteristics of the actual reported claimants, such as age, length of time disabled, and medical diagnosis. We believe the tabular reserve method is the most accurate to calculate long-term liabilities and allows us to use the most available known facts about each claim. IBNR claim reserves for our long-term products are calculated using the count and severity method using historical patterns of the claims to be reported and the associated claim costs. For group short-term disability products, an estimate of the value of future payments to be made on claims already submitted, as well as IBNR claims, is determined in aggregate rather than on the individual claimant basis that we use for our long-term products, using historical patterns of claim incidence as well as historical patterns of aggregate claim resolution rates. The average length of time between the event triggering a claim under a policy and the final resolution of those claims is much shorter for these products than for our long-term liabilities and results in less estimation variability. Claim reserves supporting the Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment products represent approximately 3.8 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2008. Claim reserves for these products are related primarily to death claims reported but not yet paid, IBNR death claims, and a liability for waiver of premium benefits. The death claim reserve is based on the actual face amount to be paid, the IBNR reserve is calculated using the count and severity method, and the waiver of premium benefits reserve is calculated using the tabular reserve methodology. 40 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Claim reserves supporting our Unum UK segment represent approximately 8.5 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2008, and are calculated using generally the same methodology that we use for Unum US disability and group life reserves. The assumptions used in calculating claim reserves for this line of business are based on standard United Kingdom industry experience, adjusted for Unum UK own experience. The majority of the Colonial Life segment lines of business have short-term benefits, which have less estimation variability than our long-term products because of the shorter claim payout period. Our claim reserves for Colonial Life lines of business, which approximate 1.4 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2008, are predominantly determined using the incurred loss development method based on our own experience. The incurred loss development method uses the historical patterns of payments by loss date to predict future claim payments for each loss date. Where the incurred loss development method may not be appropriate, we estimate the incurred claims using an expected claim cost per policy or other measure of exposure. The key assumptions for claim reserves for the Colonial Life lines of business are: (1) the timing, rate, and amount of estimated future claim payments; and (2) the estimated expenses associated with the payment of claims. The following table displays policy reserves, incurred claim reserves, and IBNR claim reserves by major product line, with the summation of the policy reserves and claim reserves shown both gross and net of the associated reinsurance recoverable. Incurred claim reserves represent reserves determined for each incurred claim and also include estimated amounts for litigation expenses and other expenses associated with the payment of the claims as well as provisions for claims which we estimate will be reopened for our long-term care products. IBNR claim reserves include provisions for incurred but not reported claims and a provision for reopened claims for our disability products. The IBNR and reopen claim reserves for our disability products are developed and maintained in aggregate based on historical monitoring that has only been on a combined basis. 41 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements (in millions of dollars) December 31, 2008 Gross Total Reinsurance Ceded Total Net Policy Reserves % Claim Reserves % Total Incurred IBNR Group Disability $ - - % $ 7,799.1 $ 583.1 34.3 % $ 8,382.2 $ 81.1 $ 8,301.1 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 72.9 0.6 750.1 170.3 3.8 993.3 0.9 992.4 Individual Disability - Recently Issued 493.6 3.9 882.5 90.3 4.0 1,466.4 84.1 1,382.3 Long-term Care 2,915.3 22.9 295.9 35.2 1.3 3,246.4 48.9 3,197.5 Voluntary Benefits 925.5 7.2 21.1 37.0 0.2 983.6 19.1 964.5 Unum US Segment 4,407.3 34.6 9,748.7 915.9 43.6 15,071.9 234.1 14,837.8 Unum UK Segment 22.6 0.2 1,887.6 181.5 8.5 2,091.7 102.7 1,989.0 Colonial Life Segment 1,172.2 9.2 237.0 97.3 1.4 1,506.5 31.1 1,475.4 Individual Disability - Closed Block Segment 1,527.6 12.0 10,239.9 350.3 43.4 12,117.8 1,456.6 10,661.2 Corporate and Other Segment 5,605.4 44.0 490.7 270.1 3.1 6,366.2 4,853.8 1,512.4 Subtotal, Excl. Unrealized Adj. $ 12,735.1 100.0 % $ 22,603.9 $ 1,815.1 100.0 % 37,154.1 6,678.3 30,475.8 Adjustment to Reserves for Unrealized Investment Losses (803.1) (31.9) (771.2) Consolidated $ 36,351.0 $ 6,646.4 $ 29,704.6 December 31, 2007 Gross Total Reinsurance Ceded Total Net Policy Reserves % Claim Reserves % Total Incurred IBNR Group Disability $ - - % $ 7,770.4 $ 596.9 33.8 % $ 8,367.3 $ 92.9 $ 8,274.4 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 73.9 0.6 772.4 178.5 3.8 1,024.8 3.4 1,021.4 Individual Disability - Recently Issued (1) 458.4 3.8 808.3 86.6 3.6 1,353.3 79.4 1,273.9 Long-term Care 2,478.2 20.4 244.3 32.6 1.1 2,755.1 52.6 2,702.5 Voluntary Benefits 853.1 7.0 19.1 35.0 0.2 907.2 14.6 892.6 Unum US Segment 3,863.6 31.8 9,614.5 929.6 42.5 14,407.7 242.9 14,164.8 Unum UK Segment 30.7 0.2 2,420.4 268.8 10.8 2,719.9 149.3 2,570.6 Colonial Life Segment 1,091.7 9.0 239.9 104.1 1.4 1,435.7 33.4 1,402.3 Individual Disability - Closed Block Segment (1) 1,657.2 13.6 10,043.5 362.0 42.0 12,062.7 1,374.4 10,688.3 Corporate and Other Segment 5,515.2 45.4 518.3 288.9 3.3 6,322.4 4,770.8 1,551.6 Subtotal, Excl. Unrealized Adj. $ 12,158.4 100.0 % $ 22,836.6 $ 1,953.4 100.0 % 36,948.4 6,570.8 30,377.6 Adjustment to Reserves for Unrealized Investment Gains 859.3 - 859.3 Consolidated $ 37,807.7 $ 6,570.8 $ 31,236.9 (1) Amounts have been reclassified to conform to current year presentation. Key Assumptions The calculation of policy and claim reserves involves numerous assumptions, but the primary assumptions used to calculate reserves are (1) the discount rate, (2) the claim resolution rate, and (3) the claim incidence rate for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves. Of these assumptions, our discount rate and claim resolution rate assumptions 42 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements have historically had the most significant effects on our level of reserves because many of our product lines provide benefit payments over an extended period of time. 1. The discount rate , which is used in calculating both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the interest rate that we use to discount future claim payments to determine the present value. A higher discount rate produces a lower reserve. If the discount rate is higher than our future investment returns, our invested assets will not earn enough investment income to support our future claim payments. In this case, the reserves may eventually be insufficient. We set our assumptions based on our current and expected future investment yield of the assets supporting the reserves, considering current and expected future market conditions. If the investment yield on new investments that are purchased is below or above the investment yield of the existing investment portfolio, it is likely that the discount rate assumption on claims will be established to reflect the effect of the new investment yield. 2. The claim resolution rate , used for both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the probability that a disability claim will close due to recovery or death of the insured. It is important because it is used to estimate how long benefits will be paid for a claim. Estimated resolution rates that are set too high will result in reserves that are lower than they need to be to pay the claim benefits over time. Claim resolution assumptions involve many factors, including the cause of disability, the policyholder age, the type of contractual benefits provided, and the time since initially becoming disabled. We use our own claim experience to develop our claim resolution assumptions. These assumptions are established for the probability of death and the probability of recovery from disability. Our studies review actual claim resolution experience over a number of years, with more weight placed on our experience in the more recent years. We also consider any expected future changes in claim resolution experience. 3. The incidence rate , used for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves, is the rate at which new claims are submitted to us. The incidence rate is affected by many factors including the age of the insured, the insured occupation or industry, the benefit plan design, and certain external factors such as consumer confidence and levels of unemployment. We establish our incidence assumption using a historical review of actual incidence results along with an outlook of future incidence expectations. Establishing reserve assumptions is complex and involves many factors. Reserves, particularly for policies offering insurance coverage for long-term disabilities, are dependent on numerous assumptions other than just those presented in the preceding discussion. The impact of internal and external events, such as changes in claims management procedures, economic trends such as the rate of unemployment and the level of consumer confidence, the emergence of new diseases, new trends and developments in medical treatments, and legal trends and legislative changes, among other factors, will influence claim incidence and resolution rates. Reserve assumptions differ by product line and by policy type within a product line. Additionally, in any period and over time, our actual experience may have a positive or negative variance from our long-term assumptions, either singularly or collectively, and these variances may offset each other. We test the overall adequacy of our reserves using all assumptions and with a long-term view of our expected experience over the life of a block of business rather than test just one or a few assumptions independently that may be aberrant over a short period of time. Therefore it is not possible to bifurcate the assumptions to evaluate the sensitivity of a change in each assumption, but rather in the aggregate by product line. We have presented in the following section an overview of our trend analysis for key assumptions and the results of variability in our assumptions, in aggregate, for the reserves which we believe are reasonably possible to have a material impact on our future financial results if actual claims yield a materially different amount than what we currently expect and have reserved for, either favorable or unfavorable. Trends in Key Assumptions Because our actual experience regarding persistency and claim incidence has varied very little from our policy reserve and IBNR claim reserve assumptions, we have had minimal adjustments to our persistency assumptions and claim incidence assumptions during the years 2006 through 2008. Generally, we do not expect our mortality and morbidity claim incidence trends or our persistency trends to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent 43 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time. However, we have historically experienced an increase in our group long-term disability morbidity claim incidence trends during and following a recessionary period, particularly in our Unum US operations. Given the current weakening economy, it is possible that our claim incidence rates for this type of product may increase. Actual new money interest rates varied throughout 2008 but generally trended downward for all segments and product lines during 2007 and 2006. The assumptions we use to discount our reserves generally trended downward slightly for all segments and product lines during 2008, 2007, and 2006. Reserve discount rate assumptions for new policies and new claims have been adjusted to reflect our current and expected net investment returns. Changes in our discount rate assumptions tend to occur gradually over a longer period of time because of the long duration investment portfolio needed to support the reserves for the majority of our lines of business. Both the mortality rate experience and the retirement rate experience for our block of group pension products have remained stable and consistent with expectations. Claim resolution rates have a greater chance of significant variability in a shorter period of time than our other reserve assumptions. These rates are reviewed on a quarterly basis for the death and recovery components separately. Claim resolution rates in our Unum US segment group and individual long-term disability product lines and our Individual Disability Closed Block segment have over the last several years exhibited some variability. Relative to the resolution rate we expect to experience over the life of the block of business, actual quarterly rates during the period 2006 through 2008 have varied by +7 and -5 percent in our Unum US group long-term disability line of business, between +10 and -5 percent in our Unum US individual disability recently issued line of business, and between +8 and -6 percent in our Individual Disability Closed Block segment. Claim resolution rates are very sensitive to operational and environmental changes and can be volatile over short periods of time. During 2006, we experienced quarter to quarter variability in our claim resolution rates. We believe this variability was primarily the result of a short-term reduction in the operating effectiveness of our Unum US and Individual Disability Closed Block segment claims management performance. During 2007 and continuing throughout 2008, we gained more stability in our claims management performance, and our claim resolution rates were more consistent with our long-term assumptions. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period, both favorably and unfavorably. We monitor and test our reserves for adequacy relative to all of our assumptions in the aggregate. In our estimation, scenarios based on reasonably possible variations in each of our reserve assumptions, when modeled together in aggregate, could produce a potential result, either positive or negative, in our Unum US group disability line of business that would change our reserve balance by +/- 2.5 percent. Using our actual claim reserve balance at December 31, 2008, this variation would have resulted in an approximate change (either positive or negative) of $200 million to our claim reserves. Using the same sensitivity analysis approach for our Individual Disability Closed Block segment, the claim reserve balance could potentially vary by +/- 2.2 percent of our reported balance, which at December 31, 2008, would have resulted in an approximate change (either positive or negative) of $225 million to our claim reserves. The major contributor to the variance for both the group long-term disability line of business and the Individual Disability Closed Block segment is the claim resolution rate. We believe that these ranges provide a reasonable estimate of the possible changes in reserve balances for those product lines where we believe it is possible that variability in the assumptions, in the aggregate, could result in a material impact on our reserve levels, but we record our reserves based on our long-term best estimate. Because these product lines have long-term claim payout periods, there is a greater potential for significant variability in claim costs, either positive or negative. Deferred Acquisition Costs (DAC) We defer certain costs incurred in acquiring new business and amortize (expense) these costs over the life of the related policies. Deferred costs include certain commissions, other agency compensation, selection and policy issue expenses, and field expenses. Acquisition costs that do not vary with the production of new business, such as commissions on group products which are generally level throughout the life of the policy, are excluded from deferral. 44 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Over 90 percent of our DAC relates to traditional non interest-sensitive products, and we amortize DAC in proportion to the premium income we expect to receive over the life of the policies in accordance with the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 60, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises . Key assumptions used in developing the future amortization of DAC are future persistency and future premium income. We use our own historical experience and expectation of the future performance of our businesses in determining the expected persistency and premium income. The estimated premium income in the early years of the amortization period is generally higher than in the later years due to higher anticipated policy persistency in the early years, which results in a greater proportion of the costs being amortized in the early years of the life of the policy. During 2006, our key assumptions used to develop the future amortization did not change materially from those we had previously used. We adopted the provisions of SOP 05-1 effective January 1, 2007. The adoption of SOP 05-1 shortened the amortization period of our Unum US and Unum UK group disability, group life, and group accidental death and dismemberment products, as shown below. The amortization periods for the other product lines were not impacted by the adoption of SOP 05-1. Generally, we do not expect our persistency or interest rates to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time. Presented below are our assumptions, both before and after the adoption of SOP 05-1, for the years 2008, 2007, and 2006, regarding the length of our amortization periods and the approximate DAC balance that remains at the end of years 3, 10, and 15, as a percentage of the cost initially deferred. 2008 and 2007 2006 Balance Remaining as a % Balance Remaining as a % Amortization of Initial Deferral Amortization of Initial Deferral Period Year 3 Year 10 Year 15 Period Year 10 Year 15 Unum US Group Disability 6 25% 0% 0% 20 25% 10% Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 6 20% to 25% 0% 0% 15 15% 0% Supplemental and Voluntary Individual Disability - Recently Issued 20 75% 50% 25% 20 50% 25% Long-term Care 20 80% 55% 25% to 30% 20 55% 25% Voluntary Benefits 15 55% to 60% 15% 0% 15 15% 0% Unum UK Group Disability 6 25% 0% 0% 15 20% 0% Group Life 6 20% 0% 0% 15 20% 0% Individual Disability 15 60% 15% 0% 15 15% 0% Colonial Life 17 60% 20% to 25% 10% 17 20% 10% Amortization of DAC on traditional products is adjusted to reflect the actual policy persistency as compared to the anticipated experience, and as a result, the unamortized balance of DAC reflects actual persistency. We may experience accelerated amortization if policies terminate earlier than projected. Because our actual experience regarding persistency and premium income has varied very little from our assumptions during the last three years, we have had minimal adjustments to our projected amortization of DAC during those years. We measure the recoverability of DAC annually by performing gross premium valuations. Our testing indicates that our DAC is recoverable. Valuation of Investments All of our fixed maturity securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value. Our derivative financial instruments, including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts, are reported as either assets or liabilities and measured at fair value. We hold an immaterial amount of equity securities, which are also reported at fair value. 45 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Effective January 1, 2008, we adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 (SFAS 157), Fair Value Measurements . SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. The adoption of SFAS 157 did not materially change the approach or methods we utilize for determining fair value measurements or the fair values derived under those methods. Definition of Fair Value Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date and, therefore, represents an exit price, not an entry price. The exit price objective applies regardless of a reporting entity intent and/or ability to sell the asset or transfer the liability at the measurement date. The degree of judgment utilized in measuring the fair value of financial instruments generally correlates to the level of pricing observability. Financial instruments with readily available active quoted prices or for which fair value can be measured from actively quoted prices in active markets generally have more pricing observability and less judgment utilized in measuring fair value. An active market for a financial instrument is a market in which transactions for an asset or a similar asset occur with sufficient frequency and volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis. A quoted price in an active market provides the most reliable evidence of fair value and should be used to measure fair value whenever available. Conversely, financial instruments rarely traded or not quoted have less observability and are measured at fair value using valuation techniques that require more judgment. Pricing observability is generally impacted by a number of factors, including the type of financial instrument, whether the financial instrument is new to the market and not yet established, the characteristics specific to the transaction, and overall market conditions. Valuation Techniques Valuation techniques used for assets and liabilities accounted for at fair value are generally categorized into three types: 1. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information from market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities. Valuation techniques consistent with the market approach often use market multiples derived from a set of comparables or matrix pricing. Market multiples might lie in ranges with a different multiple for each comparable. The selection of where within the range the appropriate multiple falls requires judgment, considering both quantitative and qualitative factors specific to the measurement. Matrix pricing is a mathematical technique used principally to value certain securities without relying exclusively on quoted prices for the specific securities but comparing the securities to benchmark or comparable securities. 2. The income approach converts future amounts, such as cash flows or earnings, to a single present amount, or a discounted amount. Income approach techniques rely on current market expectations of future amounts. Examples of income approach valuation techniques include present value techniques, option-pricing models that incorporate present value techniques, and the multi-period excess earnings method. 3. The cost approach is based upon the amount that currently would be required to replace the service capacity of an asset, or the current replacement cost. That is, from the perspective of a market participant (seller), the price that would be received for the asset is determined based on the cost to a market participant (buyer) to acquire or construct a substitute asset of comparable utility. We use valuation techniques that are appropriate in the circumstances and for which sufficient data are available that can be obtained without undue cost and effort. In some cases, a single valuation technique will be appropriate (for example, when valuing an asset or liability using quoted prices in an active market for identical assets or liabilities). In other cases, multiple valuation techniques will be appropriate. If we use multiple valuation techniques to measure fair value, we evaluate and weigh the results, as appropriate, considering the reasonableness of the range indicated by those results. A fair value measurement is the point within that range that is most representative of fair value in the circumstances. 46 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The selection of the valuation method(s) to apply considers the definition of an exit price and depends on the nature of the asset or liability being valued. For assets and liabilities accounted for at fair value, we generally use valuation techniques consistent with the market approach, and to a lesser extent, the income approach. We believe the market approach valuation technique provides more observable data than the income approach, considering the type of investments we hold. Our fair value measurements could differ significantly based on the valuation technique and available inputs. When markets are less active, brokers may rely more on models with inputs based on the information available only to the broker. In weighing a broker quote as an input to fair value, we place less reliance on quotes that do not reflect the result of market transactions. We also consider the nature of the quote, particularly whether the quote is an indicative price or a binding offer. If prices in an inactive market do not reflect current prices for the same or similar assets, adjustments may be necessary to arrive at fair value. When relevant market data is unavailable, which may be the case during periods of market uncertainty, the income approach can, in appropriate circumstances, provide a more appropriate fair value. During 2008, we have applied valuation techniques on a consistent basis to similar assets and liabilities and consistent with those techniques used at year end 2007. Due to recent market conditions, the mix and availability of observable inputs for valuation techniques have been volatile, and the risk inherent in the inputs is elevated relative to prior periods. Inputs to Valuation Techniques Inputs refer broadly to the assumptions that market participants use in pricing assets or liabilities, including assumptions about risk, for example, the risk inherent in a particular valuation technique used to measure fair value (such as a pricing model) and/or the risk inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. Inputs may be observable or unobservable. Observable inputs are inputs that reflect the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on market data obtained from independent sources. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect our own assumptions about the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. Observable inputs which we utilize to determine the fair values of our investments and derivative financial instruments include indicative broker prices and prices obtained from external pricing services. At December 31, 2008, approximately 87.6 percent of our fixed maturity securities were valued based on active trades and/or broker quotes or prices obtained from pricing services that generally use observable inputs in their valuation techniques, with no additional adjustments to the prices. These assets were classified as either Level 1 or Level 2, with the categorization dependent on whether the price was for an actual representative sale, for identical assets actively traded, and/or the quote binding or non-binding. We generally obtain, on average, one quote per financial instrument. We review the prices obtained to ensure they are consistent with a variety of observable market inputs and to verify the validity of a security price. These inputs, along with our knowledge of the financial conditions and industry in which the issuer operates, will be considered in determining whether the quoted or indicated price, as well as the change in price from quarter to quarter, are valid. On selected securities where there is not an indicated price or where we cannot validate the price, some combination of market inputs may be used to determine a price using a pricing matrix, or we may use pricing inputs from a comparable security. At December 31, 2008, we valued approximately 9.8 percent of our fixed maturity securities using this method. These assets were classified as Level 2. The parameters and inputs used to validate a price on a security may be adjusted for assumptions about risk and current market conditions on a quarter to quarter basis, as certain features may be more significant drivers of valuation at the time of pricing. Changes to inputs in valuations are not changes to valuation methodologies; rather, the inputs are modified to reflect direct or indirect impacts on asset classes from changes in market conditions. We consider transactions in inactive or disorderly markets to be less representative of fair value. We use all available observable inputs when measuring fair value, but when significant other unobservable inputs and adjustments are necessary, we classify these assets as Level 3. 47 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Inputs that may be used include the following: Benchmark yields (Treasury and swap curves) Transactional data for new issuance and secondary trades Broker/dealer quotes and pricing Security cash flows and structures Recent issuance/supply Sector and issuer level spreads Credit ratings/maturity/weighted average life/seasoning/capital structure Security optionality Corporate actions Underlying collateral Prepayment speeds/loan performance/delinquencies Public covenants Comparative bond analysis Derivative spreads Third-party pricing sources Relevant reports issued by analysts and rating agencies The overall valuation process for determining fair values may include adjustments to valuations obtained from our pricing sources when they do not represent a valid exit price. These adjustments may be made when, in our judgment, certain features of the financial instrument, such as its complexity or the market in which the financial instrument is traded (such as counterparty, credit, concentration, or liquidity), require that an adjustment be made to the value originally obtained from our pricing sources. Additionally, an adjustment to the price derived from a model typically reflects our judgment of the inputs that other participants in the market for the financial instrument being measured at fair value would consider in pricing that same financial instrument. We analyze credit default swap spreads relative to the average credit spread embedded within the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) setting syndicate in determining the effect of credit risk on our derivatives fair values. If counterparty credit risk for a derivative asset is determined to be material and is not adequately reflected in the LIBOR-based fair value obtained from our pricing sources, we adjust the valuations obtained from our pricing sources. In regards to our own credit risk component, we adjust the valuation of derivative liabilities wherein the counterparty is exposed to our credit risk when the LIBOR-based valuation of our derivatives obtained from pricing sources does not effectively include an adequate credit component for our own credit risk. Certain of our investments do not have readily determinable market prices and/or observable inputs or may at times be affected by the lack of market liquidity. For these securities, we use internally prepared valuations combining matrix pricing with vendor purchased software programs, including valuations based on estimates of future profitability, to estimate the fair value. Additionally, we may obtain prices from independent third-party brokers to aid in establishing valuations for certain of these securities. Key assumptions used by us to determine fair value for these securities include risk-free interest rates, risk premiums, performance of underlying collateral (if any), and other factors involving significant assumptions which may or may not reflect those of an active market. As of December 31, 2008, the key assumptions we generally used to estimate the fair value of these types of securities included those listed below. Where appropriate, we have noted the assumption used for the prior period as well as the reason for the change. Risk free interest rates of 1.55 percent for five-year maturities to 2.68 percent for 30-year maturities were derived from the current yield curve for U.S. Treasury Bonds with similar maturities. This compares to interest rates of 3.44 percent for five-year maturities to 4.45 percent for 30-year maturities used at December 31, 2007. Current Baa corporate bond spreads ranging from 5.28 percent to 7.75 percent plus an additional 20 basis points were added to the risk free rate to reflect the lack of liquidity. We used spreads ranging from 1.81 percent to 2.15 percent plus an additional 20 basis points at December 31, 2007. The changes were based 48 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements on observable market spreads. Newly issued private placement securities have historically offered yield premiums of 20 basis points over comparable newly issued public securities. An additional five basis points were added to the risk free rates for foreign investments, consistent with December 31, 2007. Additional basis points were added as deemed appropriate for certain industries and for individual securities in certain industries that are considered to be of greater risk. Increasing the 20 basis points added to the risk free rate for lack of liquidity by 1.5 basis points, increasing the five basis points added to the risk free rates for foreign investments by one basis point, and increasing the additional basis points added to each industry considered to be of greater risk by one basis point would have decreased the December 31, 2008 fair value of our fixed maturity securities portfolio by approximately $1.1 million. We believe this range of variability is appropriate, and although the current market is very volatile, historically the inputs noted have generally not deviated outside the range provided. We regularly test the validity of the fair values determined by our valuation techniques by comparing the prices of assets sold to the fair values reported for the assets in the immediately preceding reporting period. Historically, our realized gains or losses on dispositions of investments have not varied significantly from amounts estimated under the valuation methodologies described above, which, combined with the results of our testing, indicates to us that our pricing methodologies are appropriate. Fair Value Hierarchy Financial instruments measured at fair value are categorized into a three-level classification. The lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement of a financial instrument is used to categorize the instrument and reflects the judgment of management. Financial assets and liabilities presented at fair value in our consolidated balance sheets generally are categorized as follows: Level 1 Inputs are unadjusted and represent quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities at the measurement date. Level 2 Inputs (other than quoted prices included in Level 1) are either directly or indirectly observable for the asset or liability through correlation with market data at the measurement date and for the duration of the instrument anticipated life. Level 2 inputs include, for example, indicative prices obtained from brokers or pricing services validated to other observable market data and quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities. Level 3 Inputs reflect our best estimate of what market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date. Generally, assets and liabilities carried at fair value and included in this category are comprised of certain mortgage and asset-backed securities, certain corporate fixed maturity securities, certain private equity investments, and certain derivatives. Financial assets and liabilities presented at fair value and categorized as Level 3 are generally those that are valued using unobservable inputs to extrapolate an estimated fair value. The inputs reflect our assumptions about the assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the instrument in a current period transaction, and outputs represent an exit price and expected future cash flows. Unobservable inputs are primarily internally derived credit spread assumptions and lack of liquidity assumptions and are unobservable due to the lack of an active market pertaining to these securities. As of December 31, 2008, approximately 9.4 percent of our fixed maturity securities were categorized as Level 1, 88.3 percent as Level 2, and 2.3 percent as Level 3. During 2008, we transferred $672.6 million of fixed maturity securities into Level 3 and $160.0 million of fixed maturity securities out of Level 3. The reclassifications between levels resulted primarily from a change in observability of three inputs used to determine fair values of the securities reclassified: (1) transactional data for new issuance and secondary trades, (2) broker/dealer quotes and pricing, primarily related to the lack of an active and orderly market, and (3) comparable bond metrics from which to perform an analysis. For fair value measurements of financial instruments that were transferred either into or out of Level 3, we reflect the transfers using the fair value at the beginning of the period. We believe this allows for 49 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements greater transparency as all changes in fair value that arise during the reporting period of the transfer are disclosed as a component of our Level 3 reconciliation as shown in Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8. Other than Temporary Impairment Analysis for Investments In determining other than temporary impairments for our investment portfolio, we evaluate the following factors, as applicable for each type of investment: The probability of recovering principal and interest. Our ability and intent to retain the security for a sufficient period of time for it to recover. Whether the security is current as to principal and interest payments. The significance of the decline in value. The time period during which there has been a significant decline in value. Current and future business prospects and trends of earnings. The valuation of the security underlying collateral. Relevant industry conditions and trends relative to their historical cycles. Market conditions. Rating agency actions. Bid and offering prices and the level of trading activity. Adverse changes in estimated cash flows for securitized investments. Any other key measures for the related security. Our review procedures include, but are not limited to, monthly meetings of certain members of our senior management personnel to review reports on the entire portfolio, identifying investments with changes in market value of five percent or more, investments with changes in rating either by external rating agencies or internal analysts, investments segmented by issuer, industry, and foreign exposure levels, and any other relevant investment information to help identify our exposure to possible credit losses. We also determine if our investment portfolio is overexposed to an issuer that is showing warning signs of deterioration and, if so, we make no further purchases of that issuer securities and may seek opportunities to sell securities we hold from that issuer to reduce our exposure. We monitor below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities as to individual exposures and in comparison to the entire portfolio as an additional credit risk management strategy, looking specifically at our exposure to individual securities currently classified as below-investment-grade. In determining current and future business prospects and cash availability, we consider the parental support of an issuer in our analysis but do not rely heavily on this support. We use a comprehensive rating system to evaluate the investment and credit risk of our mortgage loans and to identify specific properties for inspection and reevaluation. Mortgage loans are considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. We establish an allowance for probable losses on mortgage loans based on a review of individual loans and the overall loan portfolio, considering the value of the underlying collateral. Based on our review of the entire investment portfolio, individual investments may be added to or removed from our watch list, which is a list of investments subject to enhanced monitoring and a more intensive review. If we determine that the decline in value of an investment is other than temporary, the investment is written down to fair value, and an impairment loss is recognized in the current period to the extent of the decline in value. If the decline is considered temporary, the investment continues to be carefully monitored. These controls have been established to identify our exposure to possible credit losses and are intended to give us the ability to respond rapidly. Changes in the fair values of fixed maturity securities and derivative financial instruments designated as cash flow hedges, other than declines that are determined to be other than temporary, are reported as a component of other comprehensive income in stockholders equity. If we subsequently determine that any of these securities are other than temporarily impaired, the impairment loss is reported as a realized investment loss in our consolidated statements of income. The recognition of the impairment loss does not affect total stockholders equity to the extent that the decline in value had been previously reflected in other comprehensive income. Mortgage loans are not 50 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements reported at fair value in our consolidated balance sheets unless the decline in value is considered to be other than temporary, in which case the reduction is recognized as a realized investment loss in our consolidated statements of income. There are a number of significant risks inherent in the process of monitoring our investments for impairments and determining when and if an impairment is other than temporary. These risks and uncertainties include the following possibilities: The assessment of a borrower ability to meet its contractual obligations will change. The economic outlook, either domestic or foreign, may be less favorable or may have a more significant impact on the borrower than anticipated, and as such, the investment may not recover in value. New information may become available concerning the security, such as disclosure of accounting irregularities, fraud, or corporate governance issues. Significant changes in credit spreads may occur in the related industry. Significant increases in interest rates may occur and may not return to levels similar to when securities were initially purchased. Adverse rating agency actions may occur. Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans We sponsor several defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit (OPEB) plans for our employees, including non-qualified pension plans. The U.S. pension plans comprise the majority of our total benefit obligation and pension expense. Our U.K. operation maintains a separate defined benefit plan for eligible employees. The U.K. defined benefit pension plan was closed to new entrants on December 31, 2002. We follow Statements of Financial Accounting Standards No. 87 (SFAS 87), Employers Accounting for Pensions , No. 106 (SFAS 106), Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions , No. 132 (SFAS 132), Employers Disclosures about Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits , and No. 158 (SFAS 158), Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R) in our financial reporting and accounting for our pension and postretirement benefit plans. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion. Our net periodic benefit costs and the value of our benefit obligations for these plans are determined based on a set of economic and demographic assumptions that represent our best estimate of future expected experience. Major assumptions used in accounting for these plans include the expected discount (interest) rate and the long-term rate of return on plan assets. We also use, as applicable, expected increases in compensation levels and a weighted-average annual rate of increase in the per capita cost of covered benefits, which reflects a health care cost trend rate. The assumptions chosen for our pension and OPEB plans generally use consistent methodology but reflect the differences in the plan obligations. The assumptions are reviewed annually, and we use a December 31 measurement date for each of our plans. The discount rate assumptions and expected long-term rate of return assumptions have the most significant effect on our net periodic benefit costs associated with these plans. In addition to the effect of changes in our assumptions, the net periodic cost or benefit obligation under our pension and OPEB plans may change due to factors such as actual experience being different from our assumptions, special benefits to terminated employees, or changes in benefits provided under the plans. Discount Rate Assumptions The discount rate is an interest assumption used to convert the benefit payment stream to a present value. We set the discount rate assumption at the measurement date for each of our retirement related benefit plans to reflect the yield of a portfolio of high quality fixed income debt instruments matched against the timing and amounts of projected future benefits. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and increases our costs. 51 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The discount rate we used to determine our 2009 net periodic benefit costs for our U.S. pension plans was 6.40 percent, compared to 6.50 percent for 2008. The discount rate used for the net periodic benefit costs for 2009 and 2008 for our U.K. pension plan was 6.40 percent and 5.80 percent, respectively. The discount rate used in the net periodic benefit cost for our OPEB plan for 2009 and 2008 was 6.10 percent and 6.30 percent, respectively. Reducing the discount rate assumption by 50 basis points would have resulted in an increase in our 2008 pension expense of approximately $11.5 million, before tax, and an increase in our benefit obligation of approximately $101.1 million as of December 31, 2008, resulting in an after-tax decrease in stockholders equity of approximately $66.9 million as of December 31, 2008. A 50 basis point reduction in the discount rate assumption would not change our annual OPEB costs. Increasing the discount rate assumption by 50 basis points would have resulted in a decrease in our 2008 pension expense of approximately $10.4 million, before tax, and a decrease in our benefit obligation of approximately $89.6 million as of December 31, 2008, resulting in an after-tax increase in stockholders equity of approximately $59.3 million as of December 31, 2008. A 50 basis point increase in the discount rate assumption would not change our annual OPEB costs. Long-term Rate of Return Assumptions The long-term rate of return assumption is the best estimate of the average annual assumed return that will be produced from the pension trust assets until current benefits are paid. We use a compound interest method in computing the rate of return on pension plan assets. The investment portfolio for our U.S. pension plans contains a diversified blend of domestic and international large cap, mid cap, and small cap equity securities, investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed income securities, private equity funds of funds, and hedge funds of funds. Assets for our U.K. pension plan are invested in pooled funds, with approximately 57 percent in diversified growth assets including global equities, hedge funds, commodities, below-investment-grade fixed income securities, and currencies. The remainder of the assets for our U.K. plan is predominantly invested in fixed interest U.K. corporate bonds and index linked U.K. government bonds. Assets for our OPEB plan are invested primarily within life insurance contracts issued by one of our insurance subsidiaries. The terms of these contracts are consistent in all material respects with those the subsidiary offers to unaffiliated parties that are similarly situated. We believe our investment portfolios are well diversified by asset class and sector, with no potential risk concentrations in any one category. Our expectations for the future investment returns of the asset categories are based on a combination of historical market performance and evaluations of investment forecasts obtained from external consultants and economists. The methodology underlying the return assumption included the various elements of the expected return for each asset class such as long-term rates of return, volatility of returns, and the correlation of returns between various asset classes. The expected return for the total portfolio is calculated based on the plan strategic asset allocation. Investment risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis through annual liability measurements, periodic asset/liability studies, and quarterly investment portfolio reviews. Risk tolerance is established through consideration of plan liabilities, plan funded status, and corporate financial condition. The long-term rate of return on assets used in the net periodic pension costs for our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2009 and 2008 was 7.50 percent for both years. The long-term rate of return on asset assumption used for 2009 and 2008 for our U.K. pension plan was 7.20 percent and 6.90 percent, respectively, and for our OPEB plan, 5.75 percent for both years. The actual rate of return on plan assets is determined based on the fair value of the plan assets at the beginning and the end of the period, adjusted for contributions and benefit payments. Changing the expected long-term rate of return on the plan assets by +/-50 basis points would have changed our 2008 pension plan expense by approximately $4.9 million before tax, but our OPEB plan expense would not change. A lower rate of return on plan assets increases our expense. 52 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Benefit Obligation and Fair Value of Plan Assets The market related value equals the fair value of assets, determined as of the measurement date. The assets are not smoothed for purposes of SFAS 87. The expected return on assets, therefore, fully recognizes all asset gains and losses, including changes in fair value, through the measurement date. The fair value of our plan assets is determined in accordance with SFAS 157. During 2008, the fair value of our plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan declined $126.2 million, or approximately 16.1 percent. The fair value of plan assets for our U.K. pension plan declined 11.7 million, or approximately 12.5 percent, during 2008. Although the effect of these declines had no impact on our 2008 net periodic pension costs, the unfavorable rate of return on plan assets in 2008 increases our net periodic pension costs for 2009. We expect that our 2009 pension costs will be approximately $42.5 million higher than our pension costs for 2008. We believe our assumptions appropriately reflect the impact of a prolonged market decline. Our pension and OPEB plans have an aggregate unrecognized net actuarial loss and an unrecognized prior service credit, which represent the cumulative liability and asset gains and losses and the portion of prior service credits that have not been recognized in pension expense. As of December 31, 2008, the unrecognized net loss for these two items combined was approximately $622.0 million compared to $301.8 million at December 31, 2007. The increase is primarily due to the unfavorable rate of return on plan assets in 2008 and to the decrease in the year end discount rate for our U.S. pension plans. Prior to the adoption of SFAS 158, unrecognized actuarial gains or losses and prior service costs or credits were amortized as a component of pension expense but were not reported in companies balance sheets. SFAS 158 requires that actuarial gains or losses and prior service costs or credits that have not yet been included in net periodic benefit cost as of the adoption date of SFAS 158 be recognized as components of accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax. The unrecognized gains or losses will be amortized out of accumulated other comprehensive income and included as a component of the net benefit cost, as they were prior to the adoption of SFAS 158. Our 2008, 2007, and 2006 pension and OPEB expense includes $10.6 million, $15.3 million, and $17.8 million, respectively, of amortization of the unrecognized net actuarial loss and prior service credit. The unrecognized net actuarial loss for our pension plans, which is $625.7 million at December 31, 2008, will be amortized over the average future working life of pension plan participants, currently estimated at 12 years for U.S. participants and 15 years for U.K. participants. The unrecognized net actuarial loss of $6.2 million for our OPEB plan will be amortized over the average future working life of OPEB plan participants, currently estimated at 10 years, to the extent the loss is outside of a corridor established in accordance with GAAP. The corridor is established based on the greater of 10 percent of the plan assets or 10 percent of the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation. At December 31, 2008, none of the actuarial loss was outside of the corridor. The fair value of plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan was $658.1 million at December 31, 2008, compared to $784.3 million at year end 2007. This decline in fair value of plan assets, as well as the decrease in the discount rate, more than offset the effect of the plan contribution during 2008, resulting in a year end deficit funding level in the plan of $266.9 million as of December 31, 2008, compared to a deficit of $43.8 million as of December 31, 2007. The fair value of plan assets in our OPEB plan was $12.0 million at December 31, 2008 and 2007. These assets represent life insurance reserves to fund the life insurance benefit portion of our OPEB plan. Our OPEB plan represents a non-vested, non-guaranteed obligation, and current regulations do not require specific funding levels for these benefits, which are comprised of retiree life, medical, and dental benefits. It is our practice to use general assets to pay medical and dental claims as they come due in lieu of utilizing plan assets for the medical and dental benefit portions of our OPEB plan. We expect to receive subsidies under the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 to partially offset these payments. Our expected return on plan assets and discount rate discussed above will not affect the cash contributions we are required to make to our U.S. pension and OPEB plans because we have met all minimum funding requirements set forth by ERISA. We had no regulatory contribution requirements for 2008 and 2007; however, we elected to make voluntary contributions of $130.0 million and $110.0 million, respectively, to our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan. We expect to make a voluntary contribution of approximately $70.0 million in 2009, based on current tax law. 53 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements During 2006, the federal government enacted the Pension Protection Act of 2006 which requires companies to fully fund defined benefit pension plans over a seven year period. We have evaluated this requirement and have made estimates of amounts to be funded in the future. Based on this assessment, we do not believe that the funding requirements of the Pension Protection Act will cause a material adverse effect on our liquidity. The fair value of plan assets for our U.K. pension plan was 82.1 million at December 31, 2008, compared to 93.8 million at December 31, 2007. The U.K. pension plan has a deficit of 4.7 million at December 31, 2008, compared to 0.9 million at December 31, 2007. We contribute to the plan in accordance with a schedule of contributions which requires that we contribute to the plan at the rate of at least 15.0 percent of employee salaries, sufficient to meet the minimum funding requirement under U.K. legislation. During 2008, we made a required contribution of 4.0 million. During 2007, we made a required contribution of 5.3 million. We anticipate that we will make contributions during 2009 of approximately 3.5 million. Income Taxes We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Our valuation allowance relates primarily to assets for foreign net operating loss carryforwards and assets for our basis in certain of our foreign subsidiaries that are not likely to be realized in the future based on our expectations using currently available evidence. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we have considered all available positive and negative evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we determine that we most likely would not be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws in a multitude of jurisdictions, both domestic and foreign. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits in various jurisdictions, and a material assessment by a governing tax authority could affect profitability. FIN 48 prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns. The evaluation of a tax position under FIN 48 is a two step process. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. The second step is to measure a position that satisfies the recognition threshold at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold but that now satisfy the recognition threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not recognition threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. If a previously recognized tax position is settled for an amount that is different from the amount initially measured under FIN 48, the difference will be recognized as a tax benefit or expense in the period the settlement is effective. We believe that tax positions have been reflected in our financial statements at appropriate amounts in conformity with FIN 48. 54 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Consolidated Operating Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Revenue Premium Income $ 7,783.3 (1.5) % $ 7,901.1 (0.6) % $ 7,948.2 Net Investment Income 2,389.0 (0.9) 2,409.9 3.8 2,320.6 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) (465.9) N.M. (65.2) N.M. 2.2 Other Income 275.9 0.7 274.1 3.7 264.3 Total 9,982.3 (5.1) 10,519.9 (0.1) 10,535.3 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 6,626.4 (5.2) 6,988.2 (7.8) 7,577.2 Commissions 853.3 1.5 841.1 2.7 819.0 Interest and Debt Expense 156.7 (35.2) 241.9 11.2 217.6 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (590.9) 6.2 (556.3) 5.3 (528.2) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 519.1 8.1 480.4 0.4 478.6 Compensation Expense 772.6 6.9 722.4 6.2 680.5 Other Expenses 821.1 2.0 805.0 (2.4) 825.2 Total 9,158.3 (3.8) 9,522.7 (5.4) 10,069.9 Income from Continuing Operations Before Income Tax 824.0 (17.4) 997.2 114.3 465.4 Income Tax 270.8 (16.6) 324.8 N.M. 61.8 Income from Continuing Operations 553.2 (17.7) 672.4 66.6 403.6 Income from Discontinued Operations - (100.0) 6.9 (6.8) 7.4 Net Income $ 553.2 (18.6) $ 679.3 65.3 $ 411.0 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage The following chart lists charges in 2007 and 2006 which affect the comparability of our financial results. In describing our results, we may at times note these items and exclude the impact on financial ratios and metrics to enhance the understanding and comparability of our Company performance and the underlying fundamentals in our operations, but this exclusion is not an indication that similar items may not recur. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2007 2006 Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits Regulatory Claim Reassessment Charges $ 65.8 $ 396.4 Other Operating Expenses Regulatory Claim Reassessment Charges (12.8) 15.0 Broker Compensation Settlements - 18.5 Total Charges, Before Tax $ 53.0 $ 429.9 Total Charges, After Tax $ 34.5 $ 280.1 55 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Also affecting comparability of our financial results between years is the fluctuation in the British pound sterling to dollar exchange rate. The functional currency of our U.K. operations is the British pound sterling. In periods when the pound weakens, translating pounds into dollars decreases current period results relative to the prior period. In periods when the pound strengthens, translating pounds into dollars increases current period results in relation to the prior period. However, it is important to distinguish between translating and converting foreign currency. Except for a limited number of transactions, we do not actually convert pounds into dollars. As a result, we view foreign currency translation as a financial reporting issue and not a reflection of operations or profitability in the U.K. Because of the volatility in the weighted average pound/dollar exchange rate during the last three years, results translated into dollars are not comparable between years. Our weighted average pound/dollar exchange rate was 1.871, 2.004, and 1.851 for the years ended 2008, 2007, and 2006, respectively. Our operating revenue and operating income by segment would have been higher in 2008 by approximately $86.7 million and $24.2 million, respectively, and higher in 2006 by approximately $86.7 million and $21.3 million, respectively, if the results for our U.K. operations had been translated at a constant exchange rate of 2.004, the rate for 2007. Consolidated premium income for both 2008 and 2007 includes premium growth, relative to the preceding year, for Unum US supplemental and voluntary lines of business and Colonial Life. Unum US group disability and group life and accidental death and dismemberment lines of business experienced year over year declines in premium income during 2008 and 2007, as expected, due primarily to our continued pricing discipline for our Unum US group business and our strategy of developing a more balanced business mix. However, both premium and case persistency for these lines of business improved during 2008 relative to 2007 and 2006, indicating that persistency for these product lines has begun to stabilize as expected. Unum UK premium income, in local currency, increased in 2007 relative to the prior year but declined in 2008 due to lower persistency in the group long-term disability line of business. Premium income in the Individual Disability Closed Block segment decreased in 2008 and 2007, as expected in this closed block of business. Net investment income is marginally lower in 2008 relative to the prior year. Our portfolio yield has increased slightly year over year due to the investment of new cash at higher rates than that of prior periods, particularly during the last two quarters of 2008. We also received fewer bond call premiums in 2008 relative to prior year periods, and the level of prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities declined in 2008 relative to the preceding year. The weaker pound in 2008 relative to 2007 also unfavorably affected translated results for net investment income. Somewhat mitigating the impact of these items is continued growth in the level of invested assets. Net investment income increased in 2007 relative to the prior year. The increase was due primarily to growth in invested assets, partially offset by a lower yield due to the investment of new cash at lower rates than that of our existing portfolio yield and a decline in the level of prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities. The pound strengthened during 2007 relative to 2006, which favorably affected translated results for net investment income. We reported a net realized investment loss of $465.9 million in 2008 compared to a loss of $65.2 million in 2007 and a gain of $2.2 million in 2006. Included in 2008 realized investment losses are $174.2 million of net realized investment losses from sales and write-downs of investments. The 2008 losses relate primarily to fixed maturity securities in the financial institutions, automotive, and media sectors that we either sold or considered other than temporarily impaired during the third and fourth quarters of 2008. Also reported as realized investment gains and losses is the change in the fair value of an embedded derivative, as required under the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133 Implementation Issue B36 (DIG Issue B36), Embedded Derivatives: Modified Coinsurance Arrangements and Debt Instruments That Incorporate Credit Risk Exposure That Are Unrelated or Only Partially Related to the Creditworthiness of the Obligor Under Those Instruments . During 2008, changes in the fair value of the embedded derivative resulted in net realized losses of $291.7 million compared to net realized losses of $57.3 million and $5.3 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. The DIG Issue B36 losses in both 2008 and 2007 resulted primarily from a widening of credit spreads in the overall investment market. 56 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements DIG Issue B36 relates to one modified coinsurance arrangement entered into in 2000 wherein we assumed the profits and losses related to a closed block of individual disability business. DIG Issue B36 requires us to include in our realized investment gains and losses a calculation intended to estimate the value of the option of our reinsurance counterparty to cancel the reinsurance contract with us. However, neither party can unilaterally terminate the reinsurance agreement except in extreme circumstances resulting from regulatory supervision, delinquency proceedings, or other direct regulatory action. Cash settlements or collateral related to this embedded derivative are not required at any time during the reinsurance contract or at termination of the reinsurance contract, and any accumulated embedded derivative gain or loss reduces to zero over time as the reinsured business winds down. We therefore view DIG Issue B36 as a reporting requirement that will not result in a permanent reduction of assets or stockholders equity. See Investments contained in this Item 7 for further discussion. The reported ratio of benefits and change in reserves for future benefits to premium income was 85.1 percent in 2008 compared to 88.4 percent in 2007 and 95.3 percent for 2006, with improved risk results in each of our segments and in most lines of business within the Unum US segment. As previously discussed, our reported benefits and change in reserves for future benefits in 2007 and 2006 include charges pertaining to our claim reassessment process required by the regulatory settlement agreements. Excluding these charges, the ratio of benefits and change in reserves for future benefits to premium income was 87.6 percent for 2007 and 90.3 percent for 2006. See Segment Results as follows for discussions of line of business risk results and claims management performance in each of our segments. Interest and debt expense for 2008 is lower than 2007 due to lower rates of interest on our outstanding debt, primarily as a result of the replacement of older fixed rate debt with non-recourse floating rate debt, and due to lower cost for early retirement of debt. Interest and debt expense in 2007 increased from the level of 2006 due to an increase in cost related to early retirement of debt, offset partially by the reduction in our outstanding debt. The cost related to early retirement of debt is minimal in 2008. Costs related to early retirement of debt for 2007 and 2006 were $58.8 million and $25.8 million, respectively, and were related to our $769.5 million and $732.0 million debt repurchases during those two years. See Debt contained in this Item 7 for additional information. The deferral and amortization of deferred acquisition costs was higher in both 2008 and 2007 relative to the prior year comparable period due primarily to continued growth in certain of our product lines. Amortization also increased in 2008 due to an increase in the amortization related to Unum US internal replacement transactions that result in a policy that is substantially changed as well as slightly elevated persistency in certain policy issue years. Operating expenses have increased year over year for expenditures related to our investment in brand and product promotion and an increase in product and service development costs in our core lines of business. In addition to the adjustments to other operating expenses as noted in the preceding chart, additional expenses of note in 2008 include a $5.6 million settlement regarding broker compensation as well as litigation expenses related to two pending cases in our individual disability closed block segment. During 2007, expenses include an $11.6 million settlement related to a plan beneficiary class action. We intend to aggressively manage our expenses while continuing to increase the effectiveness of our operating processes. Income tax for 2006 includes tax benefits of $91.9 million as a result of the reversal of tax liabilities related primarily to group relief benefits recognized from the use of net operating losses in a foreign jurisdiction in which our businesses operate. 57 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Consolidated Sales Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Unum US Fully Insured Products $ 701.5 11.2 % $ 631.0 (6.1) % $ 671.8 Administrative Services Only (ASO) Products 7.2 - 7.2 (47.4) 13.7 Total Unum US 708.7 11.0 638.2 (6.9) 685.5 Unum UK 99.5 (5.6) 105.4 4.3 101.1 Colonial Life 340.2 1.6 334.9 6.3 315.1 Individual Disability - Closed Block 2.4 (20.0) 3.0 (31.8) 4.4 Consolidated $ 1,150.8 6.4 $ 1,081.5 (2.2) $ 1,106.1 Sales results shown in the preceding chart generally represent the annualized premium or annualized fee income on new sales which we expect to receive and report as premium income or fee income during the next 12 months following or beginning in the initial quarter in which the sale is reported, depending on the effective date of the new sale. Sales do not correspond to premium income or fee income reported as revenue in accordance with GAAP. This is because new annualized sales premiums reflect current sales performance and what we expect to recognize as premium or fee income over a 12 month period, while premium income and fee income reported in our financial statements are reported on an as earned basis rather than an annualized basis and also include renewals and persistency of in force policies written in prior years as well as current new sales. Premiums for fully insured products are reported as premium income. Fees for ASO products (those where the risk and responsibility for funding claim payments remain with the customer and we only provide services) are included in other income. Sales, persistency of the existing block of business, and the effectiveness of the renewal program are indicators of growth in our premium and fee income. Trends in new sales, as well as existing market share, also indicate our potential for growth in our respective markets and the level of market acceptance of price changes and new product offerings. Sales results may fluctuate significantly due to case size and timing of sales submissions. We intend to continue with our disciplined approach to pricing and also with our strategy of developing a more balanced business mix. This strategy is expected to result in a lower premium persistency or market share, particularly in the large case Unum US group market, but historically the profitability of business that terminates has generally been lower than the profitability of retained business. We do not anticipate a decline in the number of cases, or case persistency, for our Unum US group market on an aggregate basis. See Segment Results as follows for additional discussion of sales by segment. Segment Results Our reporting segments are comprised of the following: Unum US, Unum UK, Colonial Life, Individual Disability Closed Block, and Corporate and Other. Effective with the fourth quarter of 2008, we made slight modifications to our reporting segments to better align the debt of our securitizations with the business segments and to align the allocation of capital for Unum UK similar to that of Unum US and Colonial Life. Specifically, we transferred the assets, non-recourse debt, and associated capital of Tailwind Holdings, LLC (Tailwind Holdings) and Northwind Holdings, LLC (Northwind Holdings) from our former Corporate segment to Unum US group disability and Individual Disability Closed Block, respectively. We transferred excess assets, capital in excess of target, and the associated investment income from Unum UK to our Corporate and Other segment. We also modified the investment income allocation on capital supporting certain of our group disability and long-term care product lines within Unum US and have also aggregated our former Other segment and Corporate segment into one reporting segment. Financial results previously reported have been revised to reflect these reclassifications. 58 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements In the following segment financial data and discussions of segment results, operating revenue excludes net realized investment gains and losses. Operating income or operating loss excludes net realized investment gains and losses and income tax. These are considered non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures of operating revenue and operating income or operating loss differ from revenue and income (loss) from continuing operations before income tax as presented in our consolidated operating results and in income statements prepared in accordance with GAAP due to the exclusion of before tax realized investment gains and losses. We measure segment performance for purposes of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information , excluding realized investment gains and losses because we believe that this performance measure is a better indicator of the ongoing businesses and the underlying trends in the businesses. Our investment focus is on investment income to support our insurance liabilities as opposed to the generation of realized investment gains and losses, and a long-term focus is necessary to maintain profitability over the life of the business. Realized investment gains and losses depend on market conditions and do not necessarily relate to decisions regarding the underlying business of our segments. However, income or loss excluding realized investment gains and losses does not replace net income or net loss as a measure of overall profitability. We may experience realized investment losses, which will affect future earnings levels since our underlying business is long-term in nature and we need to earn the assumed interest rates in our liabilities. A reconciliation of total operating revenue by segment to total consolidated revenue and total operating income by segment to consolidated net income is as follows: (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2008 2007 2006 Operating Revenue by Segment $ 10,448.2 $ 10,585.1 $ 10,533.1 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) (465.9) (65.2) 2.2 Revenue $ 9,982.3 $ 10,519.9 $ 10,535.3 Operating Income by Segment $ 1,289.9 $ 1,062.4 $ 463.2 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) (465.9) (65.2) 2.2 Income Tax 270.8 324.8 61.8 Income from Discontinued Operations - 6.9 7.4 Net Income $ 553.2 $ 679.3 $ 411.0 As previously noted, included in the before-tax operating income by segment shown above are before-tax charges of $53.0 million and $411.4 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively, related to the claim reassessment process and $18.5 million in 2006 for the broker compensation settlement. Also as previously discussed, operating revenue and operating income by segment would have been higher in 2008 by approximately $86.7 million and $24.2 million, respectively, and higher in 2006 by approximately $86.7 million and $21.3 million, respectively, if the results for our U.K. operations had been translated at a constant exchange rate of 2.004, the rate for 2007. 59 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Unum US Segment The Unum US segment includes group long-term and short-term disability insurance, group life and accidental death and dismemberment (AD&D) products, and supplemental and voluntary lines of business. The supplemental and voluntary lines of business are comprised of recently issued disability insurance, group and individual long-term care insurance, and voluntary benefits products. Effective with the fourth quarter of 2008, we made slight modifications to our reporting segments to better align the debt of our securitizations with our business segments. The assets, non-recourse debt, and associated capital of Tailwind Holdings are now reported in our Unum US segment in the group disability line of business. The primary effect on operating results from the movement of Tailwind Holdings to Unum US is the inclusion of interest and debt expense associated with the Tailwind Holdings non-recourse debt. We also modified the investment income allocation on capital supporting certain of our group disability and long-term care product lines within Unum US. Financial results previously reported have been revised to reflect these reclassifications. Unum US Operating Results Shown below are financial results for the Unum US segment. In the sections following, financial results and key ratios are also presented for the major lines of business within the segment. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 4,963.0 (1.0) % $ 5,014.0 (3.5) % $ 5,196.0 Net Investment Income 1,136.4 2.0 1,114.0 5.3 1,057.5 Other Income 132.7 (2.1) 135.6 25.0 108.5 Total 6,232.1 (0.5) 6,263.6 (1.5) 6,362.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 3,998.4 (5.8) 4,246.4 (10.6) 4,752.1 Commissions 518.6 3.4 501.5 (0.7) 505.2 Interest and Debt Expense 4.2 (44.0) 7.5 N.M. 1.3 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (329.7) 8.4 (304.2) (0.7) (306.2) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 320.3 15.6 277.1 (8.3) 302.2 Other Expenses 1,036.2 4.3 993.2 (2.5) 1,018.7 Total 5,548.0 (3.0) 5,721.5 (8.8) 6,273.3 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 684.1 26.2 $ 542.1 N.M. $ 88.7 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage As previously discussed, included in operating income for Unum US are before-tax charges of $66.2 million and $364.2 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively, related to the claim reassessment process. We adopted the provisions of SOP 05-1 effective January 1, 2007, and recorded a cumulative effect adjustment which decreased our 2007 opening balance of Unum US DAC $589.8 million. SOP 05-1 provides guidance on accounting for DAC on internal replacements and effectively shortens the amortization period for DAC for many of our group products. 60 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Unum US Sales (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Sales by Product Fully Insured Products Group Disability, Group Life, and AD&D Group Long-term Disability $ 190.3 7.1 % $ 177.7 (14.8) % $ 208.5 Group Short-term Disability 71.5 10.5 64.7 (12.7) 74.1 Group Life 165.4 23.4 134.0 (10.5) 149.8 AD&D 17.2 24.6 13.8 0.7 13.7 Subtotal 444.4 13.9 390.2 (12.5) 446.1 Supplemental and Voluntary Individual Disability - Recently Issued 57.9 (3.0) 59.7 7.8 55.4 Group Long-term Care 32.2 (1.8) 32.8 30.7 25.1 Individual Long-term Care 8.4 (15.2) 9.9 (10.0) 11.0 Voluntary Benefits 158.6 14.6 138.4 3.1 134.2 Subtotal 257.1 6.8 240.8 6.7 225.7 Total Fully Insured Products 701.5 11.2 631.0 (6.1) 671.8 Administrative Services Only (ASO) Products 7.2 - 7.2 (47.4) 13.7 Total Sales $ 708.7 11.0 $ 638.2 (6.9) $ 685.5 Sales by Market Sector Group Disability, Group Life, and AD&D Core Market (< 2,000 lives) $ 297.2 23.7 % $ 240.3 0.6 % $ 238.9 Large Case Market 147.2 (1.8) 149.9 (27.7) 207.2 Subtotal 444.4 13.9 390.2 (12.5) 446.1 Supplemental and Voluntary 257.1 6.8 240.8 6.7 225.7 Total Fully Insured Products 701.5 11.2 631.0 (6.1) 671.8 Administrative Services Only (ASO) Products 7.2 - 7.2 (47.4) 13.7 Total Sales $ 708.7 11.0 $ 638.2 (6.9) $ 685.5 Year Ended December 31, 2008 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2007 Unum US sales increased 11.0 percent in 2008 compared to 2007. Our group core market segment, which we define for Unum US as employee groups with less than 2,000 lives, had a sales increase of 23.7 percent over the prior year, and the number of new accounts increased 16.4 percent. We had a sales mix of approximately 67 percent core market and 33 percent large case market in 2008, in line with our targeted 60 percent core/40 percent large case market distribution mix. Our supplemental and voluntary sales increased 6.8 percent in 2008 compared to last year, with a 14.6 percent increase in voluntary sales offsetting the expected decrease in sales of individual long-term care. Sales in the group large case market segment declined 1.8 percent compared to the prior year. Sales for our individual disability line of business, of which approximately 91.0 percent are in the multi-life market, decreased slightly during 2008 compared to 2007. 61 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements During 2009 we will continue to focus on our group core market segment, group long-term care, and voluntary products market, as well as disciplined growth in our group large case and individual disability markets. In order to focus more completely on the group long-term care market, we have decided to discontinue selling individual long-term care insurance on an active basis effective in 2009. Year Ended December 31, 2007 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2006 While overall sales for Unum US declined in 2007 relative to 2006, we maintained our disciplined pricing and our sales mix was generally in line with our target mix. In 2007, we had a sales mix of approximately 62 percent core market and 38 percent large case market. Although sales on an annualized premium basis declined year over year in our group core market segment, the number of new accounts in this segment increased over 2006. Sales for our individual disability line of business increased over 2006. Long-term care sales were generally in line with our strategy for this product line, with growth in the group product and a decline in sales for individual long-term care. Our voluntary benefits sales increased in 2007 relative to 2006, consistent with our focus on sales growth in our voluntary product lines. Because our focus for our 2007 renewal program was aimed primarily at improving the profitability of our large case group business, sales and persistency for the large case market segment declined during 2007, as expected. 62 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Unum US Group Disability Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group disability. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability $ 1,838.5 (3.0) % $ 1,895.7 (2.9) % $ 1,953.3 Group Short-term Disability 435.1 (10.4) 485.6 (8.4) 530.2 Total Premium Income 2,273.6 (4.5) 2,381.3 (4.1) 2,483.5 Net Investment Income 631.3 (2.7) 648.7 1.6 638.5 Other Income 100.2 0.1 100.1 21.6 82.3 Total 3,005.1 (4.0) 3,130.1 (2.3) 3,204.3 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 2,043.9 (10.3) 2,277.4 (15.7) 2,702.5 Commissions 165.9 (1.1) 167.7 (4.6) 175.8 Interest and Debt Expense 4.2 (44.0) 7.5 N.M. 1.3 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (59.4) (1.7) (60.4) (6.4) (64.5) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 76.7 15.9 66.2 (23.4) 86.4 Other Expenses 572.4 1.9 561.6 (4.6) 588.7 Total 2,803.7 (7.2) 3,020.0 (13.5) 3,490.2 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 201.4 82.9 $ 110.1 138.5 $ (285.9) Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio (1) 89.9% 95.6% 108.8% Other Expense Ratio (2) 25.2% 23.6% 23.7% Before-tax Operating Income (Loss) Ratio (3) 8.9% 4.6% (11.5)% Premium Persistency: Group Long-term Disability 87.8% 85.1% 87.8% Group Short-term Disability 82.1% 74.0% 85.6% Case Persistency: Group Long-term Disability 89.2% 88.4% 87.4% Group Short-term Disability 88.2% 87.4% 86.2% N.M. = not a meaningful percentage (1) Included in these ratios are charges of $76.5 million and $349.2 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively, related to the claim reassessment process. Excluding these charges, the benefit ratios for 2007 and 2006 would have been 92.4% and 94.8%, respectively. (2) Included in these ratios are increases (decreases) of $(10.3) million and $15.0 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively, related to the claim reassessment process. Excluding these items, the other expense ratios for 2007 and 2006 would have been 24.0% and 23.1%, respectively. (3) Included in these ratios are charges of $66.2 million and $364.2 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively, related to the claim reassessment process. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income ratio for 2007 and 2006 would have been 7.4% and 3.2%, respectively. 63 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Year Ended December 31, 2008 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2007 Premium income for group disability decreased in 2008 relative to the prior year, as expected, due primarily to our pricing, renewal, and risk selection strategy as well as the termination of one large case group in September 2007. However, premium persistency and case persistency both improved over the prior year in both the core and large case markets, indicating that persistency for these lines is beginning to stabilize as expected. Net investment income declined in 2008 in comparison to the prior year due primarily to a lower yield on assets supporting this line of business resulting from the investment of new cash at a lower yield than that of the existing portfolio and also due to a decrease in bond call premiums. The decline in yield and bond call premiums was partially offset by an increase in the level of assets in the portfolio. Other income includes ASO fees of $64.8 million and $65.2 million for 2008 and 2007, respectively. The benefit ratio for 2008 was lower than the benefit ratio for the prior year, excluding the 2007 revision to our estimate for the claim reassessment costs, due primarily to a higher rate of claim recoveries in group long-term disability and lower paid claims in short-term disability. Annual claim incidence rates for both group long-term and short-term disability are slightly lower than the prior year, with no unusual trends noted by sector or by case size. An increase in incidence rates for group short-term disability generally precedes an increase in long-term disability submitted incidence. Interest and debt expense related to the debt issued by Tailwind Holdings decreased from the prior year due to a decrease in the variable rate of interest during 2008 compared to 2007 and a decrease in the amount of outstanding debt resulting from principal payments made during 2008 and 2007. The deferral of acquisition costs was generally consistent with the prior year. Amortization was higher in 2008 relative to the prior year due to an increase in amortization related to internal replacement transactions that result in a policy that is substantially changed. These transactions are accounted for as an extinguishment of the original policy and the issuance of a new policy. The other expense ratio increased in 2008 compared to the prior year due primarily to the decline in premium income and an increase in policy maintenance expenses and product service and development costs. Also contributing to the increase in the other expense ratio was the expense related to the broker compensation settlement previously discussed, of which $4.4 million was included in 2008 expenses for group disability. As discussed under Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements, certain risks and uncertainties are inherent in group disability business. Components of claims experience, including, but not limited to, incidence and recovery rates, may be worse than we expect. Both economic and societal factors can affect claim incidence. Disability claim incidence and claim recovery rates may be influenced by, among other factors, the rate of unemployment and consumer confidence. The relationship between these and other factors and overall incidence is very complex and will vary due to contract design features and the degree of expertise within the insuring organization to price, underwrite, and adjudicate the claims. Adjustments to reserve amounts may be required if there are changes in assumptions regarding the incidence of claims or the rate of recovery, as well as persistency, mortality, and interest rates used in calculating the reserve amounts. Within the group disability market, pricing and renewal actions can be taken to react to higher claim rates. However, these actions take time to implement, and there is a risk that the market will not sustain increased prices. In addition, changes in economic and external conditions may not manifest themselves in claims experience for an extended period of time. Year Ended December 31, 2007 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2006 Premium income for group disability decreased in 2007 relative to 2006 due primarily to our strategy on pricing, renewals, and risk selection. Premium persistency and case persistency were both consistent with our expectations given our business mix strategy. Net investment income increased in 2007 in comparison to 2006 due to the growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business, partially offset by the impact of the lower yield resulting from the lower interest rate environment and a decrease in bond call premiums. Other income includes ASO fees of $65.2 million and $60.9 million for 2007 and 2006, respectively. 64 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Excluding the revisions to our estimate for claim reassessment costs, the benefit ratio for 2007 was lower than the benefit ratio for 2006 due primarily to lower paid claims in both group long-term and short-term disability and a higher rate of claim recoveries relative to 2006. Our claim operational effectiveness continued to improve during 2007 as a result of our organizational and process changes. Interest and debt expense in 2007 is related to the Tailwind Holdings debt that was issued in the fourth quarter of 2006. The net decrease in the amortization of DAC was due primarily to the decrease in the level of DAC as a result of the adoption of the new accounting policy related to DAC on internal replacements, offset somewhat by higher amortization resulting from the shorter amortization period for DAC. The other expense ratio, excluding the adjustments to our claim reassessment incremental operating expense estimate, increased in 2007 compared to 2006 due to the decline in premium income as well as an increase in advertising and branding expenses and product and service development costs. 65 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Unum US Group Life and Accidental Death and Dismemberment Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Life $ 1,062.8 (4.0) % $ 1,107.4 (11.3) % $ 1,248.1 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 127.6 (2.6) 131.0 (13.6) 151.6 Total Premium Income 1,190.4 (3.9) 1,238.4 (11.5) 1,399.7 Net Investment Income 126.0 (6.6) 134.9 (4.5) 141.3 Other Income 2.3 (4.2) 2.4 N.M. - Total 1,318.7 (4.1) 1,375.7 (10.7) 1,541.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 827.6 (8.2) 901.6 (15.5) 1,067.3 Commissions 85.4 (3.7) 88.7 (1.6) 90.1 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (40.3) 11.6 (36.1) (4.2) (37.7) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 55.0 39.6 39.4 (39.4) 65.0 Other Expenses 180.1 9.2 164.9 (7.5) 178.3 Total 1,107.8 (4.4) 1,158.5 (15.0) 1,363.0 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 210.9 (2.9) $ 217.2 22.0 $ 178.0 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 69.5% 72.8% 76.3% Other Expense Ratio 15.1% 13.3% 12.7% Before-tax Operating Income Ratio 17.7% 17.5% 12.7% Premium Persistency: Group Life 83.8% 78.8% 81.2% Accidental Death & Dismemberment 86.4% 80.8% 82.8% Case Persistency: Group Life 89.1% 87.7% 86.9% Accidental Death & Dismemberment 89.2% 88.0% 87.0% N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Year Ended December 31, 2008 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2007 Premium income for group life decreased in 2008 relative to the prior year due primarily to our pricing, renewal, and risk selection strategy. Premium persistency and case persistency both improved in comparison to the prior year. The decrease in net investment income relative to the prior year resulted from a decline in the level of assets supporting these lines of business and from a lower yield on the portfolio due to the investment of new cash at a lower yield than that of the existing portfolio. The benefit ratio decreased in 2008 due primarily to lower paid claim incidence rates for both group life and the accidental death and dismemberment lines of business. 66 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The deferral of acquisition costs increased in 2008 due primarily to increased sales in the group core market segment. Amortization of deferred acquisition costs was higher in 2008 relative to the prior year due to an increase in amortization related to internal replacement transactions. The other expense ratio increased in 2008 in comparison to the prior year due primarily to the decline in premium income as well as an increase in policy maintenance expenses and product and service development costs. Year Ended December 31, 2007 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2006 Premium income for group life decreased in 2007 relative to 2006 due primarily to our more disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection. Premium persistency and case persistency were both consistent with our expectations. The decrease in net investment income relative to 2006 resulted primarily from a decline in the level of assets supporting these lines of business. The benefit ratio decreased in 2007 due primarily to a lower submitted and paid claim incidence rate for group life, offset partially by higher paid claim incidence rates for the accidental death and dismemberment line of business. Similar to our group disability products, amortization of DAC was lower in 2007 relative to 2006 due to the adoption of SOP 05-1. The other expense ratio increased in 2007 in comparison to 2006 due to the decline in premium income. 67 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Unum US Supplemental and Voluntary Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US supplemental and voluntary product lines. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income Individual Disability - Recently Issued $ 471.5 3.2 % $ 456.7 4.2 % $ 438.5 Long-term Care 580.7 9.0 532.9 8.2 492.4 Voluntary Benefits 446.8 10.4 404.7 6.0 381.9 Total Premium Income 1,499.0 7.5 1,394.3 6.2 1,312.8 Net Investment Income 379.1 14.7 330.4 19.0 277.7 Other Income 30.2 (8.8) 33.1 26.3 26.2 Total 1,908.3 8.6 1,757.8 8.7 1,616.7 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,126.9 5.6 1,067.4 8.7 982.3 Commissions 267.3 9.1 245.1 2.4 239.3 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (230.0) 10.7 (207.7) 1.8 (204.0) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 188.6 10.0 171.5 13.7 150.8 Other Expenses 283.7 6.4 266.7 6.0 251.7 Total 1,636.5 6.1 1,543.0 8.7 1,420.1 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 271.8 26.5 $ 214.8 9.3 $ 196.6 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratios Individual Disability - Recently Issued 53.3% 56.7% 58.0% Long-term Care 106.1% 106.0% 99.2% Voluntary Benefits 58.0% 60.1% 62.7% Other Expense Ratio 18.9% 19.1% 19.2% Before-tax Operating Income Ratio 18.1% 15.4% 15.0% Interest Adjusted Loss Ratios: Individual Disability - Recently Issued 35.9% 40.0% 42.8% Long-term Care 75.5% 77.7% 73.1% Premium Persistency: Individual Disability - Recently Issued 90.7% 90.6% 90.5% Long-term Care 95.5% 95.4% 95.3% Voluntary Benefits 80.4% 79.4% 80.9% Year Ended December 31, 2008 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2007 The increase in premium income for 2008 relative to the prior year is due to sales growth in our supplemental and voluntary product lines, the impact of premium rate increases implemented for individual long-term care, and overall stable persistency. Net investment income increased relative to the prior year primarily from growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business. 68 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The decrease in the interest adjusted loss ratio for the individual disability recently issued line of business for 2008 relative to the prior year is due primarily to a decrease in paid incidence rates, partially offset by a lower claim recovery rate. The interest adjusted loss ratio for long-term care was lower in 2008 than in the prior year due primarily to higher premium income, partially offset by an increase in claim incidence rates. The benefit ratio for voluntary benefits decreased in 2008 as compared to the prior year due primarily to a lower rate of paid claim incidence for the disability line of business and a lower mortality rate for the life line of business. The increase in commissions and the deferral and amortization of acquisition costs relative to the prior year is due primarily to growth in these lines of business. The other expense ratio decreased slightly in comparison to the prior year due to a higher rate of premium growth relative to expense growth. Year Ended December 31, 2007 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2006 The increase in premium income for 2007 relative to 2006 is due to sales growth and overall stable persistency, although premium persistency for certain of the product lines declined compared to 2006. Net investment income increased relative to 2006 primarily from growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business. The interest adjusted loss ratio for the individual disability recently issued business decreased in 2007 relative to 2006 due primarily to a decrease in the submitted claim incidence rate as well as an increase in the claim recovery rate. The interest adjusted loss ratio for long-term care was higher in 2007 than in 2006 due primarily to an increase in the submitted claim incidence rate and a decrease in the claim recovery and mortality rates. The benefit ratio for voluntary benefits decreased in comparison to 2006 due primarily to a lower rate of paid claim incidence for the voluntary benefits disability line of business partially offset by a higher mortality rate for the voluntary life line of business. The amortization of DAC increased in 2007 relative to 2006 due to the acceleration of amortization for certain of the product lines with lower than anticipated persistency. The other expense ratio remained level with 2006 due to the growth in premium income and the corresponding growth in operating expenses. Segment Outlook Throughout 2008 we focused on improvement in group disability profitability and growth in our core group market and our voluntary line of business. We remained disciplined with pricing and risk selection, focusing on margin improvement and top-line growth in select markets. During 2009, we will maintain our risk discipline and culture of operating effectiveness, with a focus on talent development across our businesses. We will seek to continue to improve our financial performance, driven primarily by our group disability line, with greater product diversification through our voluntary product growth. We will continue the expansion of our growth platform our core group market, group long-term care, and voluntary lines of business. Our growth strategy includes offering a broad selection of benefits which provide cost predictability and stability over the long term for our clients through employee funding and defined employer contribution programs. We will seek to leverage capabilities being developed in our growth platform with our large case clients. We will focus on continued innovation for all of our customers and sales force, including the completion of our Simply Unum platform to be effective for larger employers. Periods of economic downturns have historically affected disability claim incidence rates and, to a lesser extent, disability claim recovery rates in certain sectors of the market. The current downturn may lead to a similar pattern of claim incidence or recoveries. We have previously taken steps to improve our risk profile. We have reduced our exposure to volatile business segments through diversification by market size, product segment, and industry segment. We believe our claims management organization is positioned for stable and sustainable performance levels. We experienced a slight increase in claim incidence levels during the fourth quarter of 2008, but not in any particular market sector or case size. It is not determinable as to whether this increase is economically related. We may experience some impact from the uncertain economic environment on premium growth due to unfavorable persistency of existing cases or lower sales, particularly if customers elect to delay expansion of existing benefits in today environment or if there is a significant reduction in the number of covered employees. We may also see some volatility in net investment income as a result of fluctuations in bond calls and other types of miscellaneous net 69 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements investment income. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risk to an economic slowdown or recession and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. Our outlook for 2009 reflects higher disability claims incidence from the weakening economy resulting in a generally flat benefit ratio for group disability on a quarterly basis, though improved on a full year comparison with 2008. We expect continued growth in our voluntary and supplemental lines of business and flat operating results relative to 2008 for our group life and accidental death and dismemberment line of business. Unum UK Segment Unum UK includes insurance for group long-term disability, group life, and individual disability products sold primarily in the United Kingdom through field sales personnel and independent brokers and consultants. Effective with the fourth quarter of 2008, we made slight modifications to our Unum UK segment to align the allocation of capital for Unum UK similar to that of Unum US and Colonial Life. We transferred excess assets, capital in excess of target, and the associated investment income from Unum UK to our Corporate and Other segment. Financial results previously reported have been revised to reflect these reclassifications. Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Unum UK segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability $ 675.9 (10.2) % $ 752.6 17.8 % $ 638.9 Group Life 174.6 (1.6) 177.4 3.7 171.0 Individual Disability 38.8 1.3 38.3 16.4 32.9 Total Premium Income 889.3 (8.2) 968.3 14.9 842.8 Net Investment Income 181.9 (2.9) 187.4 10.2 170.1 Other Income 2.0 (35.5) 3.1 N.M. 0.1 Total 1,073.2 (7.4) 1,158.8 14.4 1,013.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 511.4 (11.0) 574.3 3.8 553.5 Commissions 59.0 (11.9) 67.0 34.8 49.7 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (37.4) (9.2) (41.2) 19.8 (34.4) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 32.4 (34.4) 49.4 54.4 32.0 Other Expenses 183.8 0.2 183.5 15.5 158.9 Total 749.2 (10.1) 833.0 9.6 759.7 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 324.0 (0.6) $ 325.8 28.6 $ 253.3 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 57.5% 59.3% 65.7% Other Expense Ratio 20.7% 19.0% 18.9% Before-tax Operating Income Ratio 36.4% 33.6% 30.1% Premium Persistency: Group Long-term Disability 87.4% 88.0% 90.4% Group Life 74.9% 70.5% 69.1% Individual Disability 87.6% 89.4% 88.2% N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 70 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Foreign Currency Translation The functional currency of Unum UK is the British pound sterling. Unum UK premiums, net investment income, claims, and expenses are received or paid in pounds, and we hold pound denominated assets to support Unum UK pound denominated policy reserves and liabilities. We translate Unum UK pound-denominated financial statement items into dollars for our consolidated financial reporting. We translate income statement items using an average exchange rate for the reporting period, and we translate balance sheet items using the exchange rate at the end of the period. We report unrealized foreign currency translation gains and losses in accumulated other comprehensive income in our consolidated balance sheets. Fluctuations in the pound to dollar exchange rate have an effect on Unum UK reported financial results and our consolidated financial results. In periods when the pound weakens, as occurred during the last half of 2008 relative to 2007, translating pounds into dollars decreases current year results relative to the prior year. In periods when the pound strengthens, translating into dollars increases current year results in relation to the prior year, as was the case in 2007 compared to 2006. (in millions of pounds, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability 364.4 (3.1) % 375.9 8.5 % 346.3 Group Life 93.3 5.4 88.5 (4.2) 92.4 Individual Disability 20.9 9.4 19.1 7.3 17.8 Total Premium Income 478.6 (1.0) 483.5 5.9 456.5 Net Investment Income 98.5 5.3 93.5 1.5 92.1 Other Income 1.2 (25.0) 1.6 N.M. - Total 578.3 (0.1) 578.6 5.5 548.6 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 275.8 (3.8) 286.8 (4.5) 300.2 Commissions 31.9 (4.8) 33.5 24.1 27.0 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (20.1) (2.4) (20.6) 10.2 (18.7) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 17.9 (27.5) 24.7 44.4 17.1 Other Expenses 99.6 8.7 91.6 6.4 86.1 Total 405.1 (2.6) 416.0 1.0 411.7 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses 173.2 6.5 162.6 18.8 136.9 Weighted Average Pound/Dollar Exchange Rate 1.871 2.004 1.851 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Year Ended December 31, 2008 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2007 Premium income decreased in 2008 relative to the prior year due primarily to a decline in group long-term disability resulting from lower persistency levels and lower sales. This decline was partially offset by increases in premium income for group life due to higher sales and improved persistency and to individual disability due to the continued growth in the in-force block from higher levels of sales during 2008 and 2007. A decrease in group life ceded premiums as a result of a modification, in the fourth quarter of 2007, of a quota share reinsurance arrangement relating to new group life sales also contributed to the increase in group life premiums. Net investment income increased in 2008 relative to the prior year due primarily to the growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business and a higher yield on the portfolio due to the investment of new cash at a higher yield than that of the existing portfolio. 71 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The lower benefit ratio in 2008 in comparison to the prior year was primarily due to an increased rate of claim recoveries for group long-term disability. Also included in 2008 and 2007 results are adjustments to our long-term assumptions for claim reserves due to emerging experience and our view of future events, which increased operating income approximately 5.5 million and 8.2 million in 2008 and 2007, respectively. The decrease in amortization of acquisition costs in 2008 relative to the prior year is due primarily to a decrease in amortization related to internal replacement transactions that result in a policy that is substantially changed. These transactions are accounted for as an extinguishment of the original policy and the issuance of a new policy. The other expense ratio increased during 2008 in comparison with the prior year due primarily to expenses of 4.4 million related to the implementation of a disciplined cost management process during the fourth quarter of 2008 that is intended to reduce our operating expenses in the future by implementing expense efficiencies and aligning expenses with premium growth. During 2008, Unum UK became responsible for the ongoing administration and management of a closed block of group long-term disability claims through a reinsurance arrangement with Royal London Mutual Insurance Society Limited. At the time of the transaction, Unum UK received cash of 24.5 million, recorded 0.4 million in accrued premiums receivable, assumed reserves of 22.2 million, and recorded a deferred gain of 2.7 million. The transaction is not expected to materially impact operating results. Year Ended December 31, 2007 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2006 Premium income increased in 2007 relative to 2006 due primarily to sales of group and individual disability products and stable persistency for those two lines of business, partially offset by lower sales for group life and continued lower persistency relative to the levels of 2005 and early 2006. Net investment income increased in 2007 relative to 2006 due to continued growth in the business and the assets supporting the lines of business and an increase in portfolio yields. The lower benefit ratio in 2007 in comparison to 2006 was primarily the result of an adjustment to our long-term assumptions for claim reserves due to emerging experience and our view of future events, which increased 2007 segment operating income approximately 8.2 million. Also contributing to a lower benefit ratio for 2007 was a lower rate of claim incidence for both group long-term disability and group life, partially offset by lower claim recoveries for group long-term disability. Commissions increased in 2007 relative to 2006 primarily because of a higher portion of long-term disability business sold and renewed in 2007 on which a commission is paid. Amortization of DAC increased in 2007 due to the shorter amortization period for DAC resulting from the adoption of SOP 05-1 effective January 1, 2007. The amount of the cumulative effect adjustment decreased the 2007 opening balance of Unum UK DAC approximately 45.1 million, or $88.3 million, which resulted in decreased amortization because of the lower deferred asset level. However, the timing of policy renewals occurring during 2007 resulted in increased amortization, causing an overall net increase in expense for 2007. The other expense ratio remained consistent with 2006 due to our continued focus on expense management and the growth in premium income. 72 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Sales Shown below are sales results in dollars and in pounds for the Unum UK segment. Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 (in millions) Group Long-term Disability $ 72.7 (13.9) % $ 84.4 6.7 % $ 79.1 Group Life 19.6 48.5 13.2 (20.0) 16.5 Individual Disability 7.2 (7.7) 7.8 41.8 5.5 Total Sales $ 99.5 (5.6) $ 105.4 4.3 $ 101.1 Group Long-term Disability 39.7 (5.7) % 42.1 - % 42.1 Group Life 10.9 65.2 6.6 (26.7) 9.0 Individual Disability 3.9 - 3.9 30.0 3.0 Total Sales 54.5 3.6 52.6 (2.8) 54.1 Sales in Unum UK increased in 2008 primarily due to growth in group life sales offset partially by a decrease in sales for group long-term disability. Continued aggressive competition in the U.K. market is unfavorably affecting sales in all product lines. In the U.K., legislative changes that removed discrimination by employers on the basis of age, therefore encouraging the extension of insurance coverage, became effective in October 2006. During 2007, Unum UK took advantage of the opportunities offered by age equality legislation, with 7.4 million of additional sales during 2007 compared to only 2.0 million in 2008. Excluding sales related to the change in age equality legislation, Unum UK achieved underlying sales growth of approximately 16 percent in 2008 as compared to the prior year. Sales in 2007 declined slightly from 2006. Sales in the U.K. market were negatively impacted during 2006 by lower employee benefits purchase decisions caused by distraction in the U.K. employee benefits market due to changes in pension legislation. Sales related to the change in age equality legislation were 7.4 million during 2007 compared to 11.1 million during 2006. Excluding sales related to the change in age equality legislation, Unum UK achieved underlying sales growth of approximately 5 percent in 2007 as compared to 2006. Segment Outlook During 2008, we focused on continued profitable sales growth and improvement in our premium persistency. We will continue this focus in 2009, as we seek to achieve sustainable and profitable growth through disciplined pricing, premium persistency, risk selection, and claims management. We expect to maintain our strong leadership position in the U.K, but in the current competitive market we have a cautious outlook for premium growth. We are exploring additional market opportunities to expand our growth in the group market through new product offerings. We continue to make progress on our initiative to provide the U.K. market with industry leading services, processes, systems, and operational capability. Regarding the current economic downturn, as of year end 2008 we had not yet experienced any significant deterioration in disability claims incidence or claim recoveries. The more likely impact of a softer economic environment is on premium growth, which could be further impacted by a prolonged competitive pricing environment. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risk to an economic slowdown or recession and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. Fluctuations in the U.S. dollar relative to the British pound sterling, as occurred during the last half of 2008, impact our reported operating results. We expect that our 2009 results, when translated into dollars for consolidated reporting, will compare unfavorably to 2008 due to the weakening of the pound. 73 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Our outlook for 2009 is for the continuance of high levels of profitability, in local currency, despite the weaker economy. We expect our profit margins will continue to be strong as we invest in new growth opportunities. We completed an in-depth analysis of our expense efficiency and alignment to premium growth in 2008, and we believe the implementation of the resulting disciplined cost management process will reduce our operating expenses relative to premium income in 2009. Colonial Life Segment The Colonial Life segment includes insurance for accident, sickness, and disability products, life products, and cancer and critical illness products issued primarily by Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company and marketed to employees at the workplace through an agency sales force and brokers. Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Colonial Life segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income Accident, Sickness, and Disability $ 606.9 7.1 % $ 566.6 6.2 % $ 533.3 Life 157.4 9.7 143.5 10.0 130.5 Cancer and Critical Illness 213.0 8.1 197.1 10.5 178.3 Total Premium Income 977.3 7.7 907.2 7.7 842.1 Net Investment Income 105.7 5.8 99.9 6.7 93.6 Other Income 0.4 (55.6) 0.9 (18.2) 1.1 Total 1,083.4 7.5 1,008.0 7.6 936.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 464.0 6.0 437.8 (0.8) 441.4 Commissions 211.8 5.1 201.6 9.0 184.9 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (223.8) 6.1 (210.9) 12.4 (187.6) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 166.4 8.1 153.9 6.6 144.4 Other Expenses 196.9 9.5 179.8 16.0 155.0 Total 815.3 7.0 762.2 3.3 738.1 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 268.1 9.1 $ 245.8 23.7 $ 198.7 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 47.5% 48.3% 52.4% Other Expense Ratio 20.1% 19.8% 18.4% Before-tax Operating Income Ratio 27.4% 27.1% 23.6% Premium Persistency: Accident, Sickness, and Disability 75.8% 75.9% 74.9% Life 84.7% 83.8% 84.2% Cancer and Critical Illness 84.0% 84.1% 82.3% Year Ended December 31, 2008 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2007 Growth in premium income for 2008 compared to the prior year was attributable primarily to current and prior period sales and stable persistency. Net investment income increased in 2008 in comparison to the prior year due primarily to growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business and a higher yield on the portfolio due to the investment of new cash at a higher yield than that of the existing portfolio. 74 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The benefit ratio for this segment decreased in 2008 in comparison to the prior year due primarily to favorable risk experience in the accident, sickness, and disability line of business, offset somewhat by higher benefit ratios in the life and cancer and critical illness lines of business. The improvement in the accident, sickness, and disability line of business resulted from the continued favorable experience related to several new products introduced between 2002 and 2004. The life line of business benefit ratio was higher in 2008 relative to the prior year due to a higher level of death claims and a higher average claim cost. The cancer and critical illness product line reported a higher benefit ratio in 2008 relative to the prior year due primarily to unfavorable claim experience associated with the older cancer products. Although we continue to focus on expense management, the other expense ratio for 2008 increased in comparison to the prior year due primarily to field expansion and development. Year Ended December 31, 2007 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2006 Growth in premium income was attributable primarily to current and prior period sales growth and stable persistency. Net investment income increased in 2007 in comparison to 2006 due primarily to growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business. The benefit ratio for this segment decreased in 2007 in comparison to 2006 due primarily to favorable risk experience in the accident, sickness, and disability line of business as well as the life line of business. The improvement in the accident, sickness, and disability line of business resulted from the favorable experience related to several new products introduced between 2002 and 2004. In addition, individual short-term disability claim incidence and average claim duration decreased in 2007 compared to 2006, while the average claim payment was higher in 2007 relative to 2006. For accident products, the claim incidence rate decreased in 2007 compared to 2006, while the average claim payment remained constant in 2007 relative to 2006. The life line of business reported a decrease in the rate of incurred claims for 2007, although the aggregate claim expense increased due to the larger block of business. The cancer and critical illness product line also reported a slightly lower benefit ratio in 2007 relative to 2006. The other expense ratio for 2007 increased in comparison to 2006 due primarily to our investment in brand and product promotion and the development of additional product offerings. Also, during 2006 we reported a one-time adjustment to commissions and operating expenses that increased reported commissions and reduced other expenses for that year. Sales (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Accident, Sickness, and Disability $ 222.1 5.1 % $ 211.3 8.7 % $ 194.4 Life 64.0 (4.0) 66.7 0.2 66.6 Cancer and Critical Illness 54.1 (4.9) 56.9 5.2 54.1 Total Sales $ 340.2 1.6 $ 334.9 6.3 $ 315.1 Colonial Life 2008 sales increased in the commercial market segment for employee groups with less than 100 lives as compared to 2007 sales levels. Partially offsetting this increase was a decrease in sales in the commercial market segment for employee groups with greater than 100 lives and a decrease in the public sector markets for state and federal governments. The number of new accounts and the new account annualized sales premium per case sold both increased over the prior year. Sales in 2007 increased in comparison to 2006 primarily due to sales increases in the public sector market for educators and in the commercial market segment for employee groups with less than 100 lives. Also contributing to the sales increase was an increase in the number of new accounts over the prior year, offset partially by a decrease in the average new case size, which resulted in lower annualized premium per case sold. 75 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Segment Outlook Throughout 2008, we focused on sales and distribution growth by accelerating recruiting and development, capitalizing on sales opportunities where we have less market share, and assessing emerging distribution opportunities. During 2009, we will seek to continue to expand our distribution through recruiting, development, and training programs. We intend to focus our marketing resources on both existing accounts and new employers to maintain our in-force premium and generate sales opportunities. We believe sales and premium growth will be driven by the growth and productivity of our agency sales system, as well as continued product and brand development. We will also continue our collaboration with our Unum US business partners for marketing and product development opportunities. Periods of economic downturns have historically had minimal impact on the operations of Colonial Life, due primarily to a diversified product portfolio that is designed with short duration, indemnity benefits. As of year end 2008, we had not experienced an increase in claim incidence levels, on a seasonally adjusted basis, in the aggregate or in any particular market sector. We expect to experience some near term impact on sales and premium growth if current economic conditions affect the buying patterns of employees or cause employers to defer introduction of new plans. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risk to an economic slowdown or recession and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. Our outlook for 2009 is for the continuance of high levels of profitability in this segment, but with margins decreasing modestly over time as the benefit ratio returns to more historic levels. Premium growth in 2009 is expected to be slightly less than 2008 due to slower sales trends. Individual Disability - Closed Block Segment The Individual Disability Closed Block segment generally consists of those individual disability policies in force before the substantial changes in product offerings, pricing, distribution, and underwriting, which generally occurred during the period 1994 through 1998. A small amount of new business continued to be sold after these changes, but we stopped selling new policies in this segment at the beginning of 2004 other than update features contractually allowable on existing policies. As previously discussed, effective with the fourth quarter of 2008, we reclassified the assets, non-recourse debt, and associated capital of Northwind Holdings from our former Corporate segment to the Individual Disability Closed Block segment. The primary effect on operating results from the movement of Northwind Holdings to the Individual Disability Closed Block segment is the inclusion of interest and debt expense associated with the Northwind Holdings non-recourse debt. 76 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Individual Disability Closed Block segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 952.3 (5.7) % $ 1,009.9 (5.0) % $ 1,062.8 Net Investment Income 767.5 (7.3) 827.6 (0.1) 828.7 Other Income 98.6 (4.9) 103.7 (1.3) 105.1 Total 1,818.4 (6.3) 1,941.2 (2.8) 1,996.6 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,544.8 (4.3) 1,614.5 (5.6) 1,709.7 Commissions 62.7 (9.3) 69.1 (9.3) 76.2 Interest and Debt Expense 35.1 N.M. 8.3 N.M. - Other Expenses 148.1 5.9 139.8 0.3 139.4 Total 1,790.7 (2.2) 1,831.7 (4.9) 1,925.3 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 27.7 (74.7) $ 109.5 53.6 $ 71.3 Interest Adjusted Loss Ratio (1) 82.2% 84.1% 90.5% Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Other Expense Ratio (2) 15.6% 13.8% 13.1% Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (3) 2.9% 10.8% 6.7% Premium Persistency 93.8% 94.3% 94.4% N.M. = not a meaningful percentage (1) Included in these ratios are charges (credits) of $(10.7) million and $47.2 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively, related to the claim reassessment process. Excluding these charges and credits, the interest adjusted loss ratio for 2007 and 2006 would have been 85.2% and 86.1%, respectively. (2) Included in this ratio is a decrease of $2.5 million in 2007 related to the claim reassessment process. Excluding this item, the other expense ratio for 2007 would have been 14.1%. (3) Included in these ratios are charges (credits) of $(13.2) million and $47.2 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively, related to the claim reassessment process. Excluding these charges and credits, the before-tax operating income ratio for 2007 and 2006 would have been 9.5% and 11.1%, respectively. Year Ended December 31, 2008 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2007 The decrease in premium income for 2008 relative to the prior year is due to the expected run-off of this block of closed business due to persistency and policy maturities. Net investment income decreased in 2008 compared to the prior year due to a decrease in bond call premiums, a lower level of assets supporting this closed block of business, and a decline in the portfolio yield for this segment. During the fourth quarter of 2007, we entered into an intercompany reinsurance transaction which allowed us to release excess statutory capital previously supporting this reinsured closed block of business. As a result, the capital allocated to our Individual Disability Closed Block segment declined, with a resulting decrease in net investment income due to the lower asset levels needed to support allocated capital. Because this is an intercompany reinsurance arrangement, reported results remain unchanged for this segment other than the lower net investment income. 77 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Other income includes the underlying results of certain blocks of reinsured business, including the net investment income of portfolios held by those ceding companies to support the block we have reinsured. The net investment income for those blocks of reinsured business also declined relative to prior years, primarily due to a lower level of assets. Interest and debt expense is related to the Northwind Holdings debt issued in the fourth quarter of 2007. The interest adjusted loss ratio was lower in 2008 compared to the prior year, excluding the decrease in our claim reassessment reserve estimate, due primarily to lower average size of new claims and fewer reopened claims. The other expense ratio is higher for 2008 relative to the prior year due to a $4.7 million litigation settlement as well as higher legal fees related to two pending cases. Year Ended December 31, 2007 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2006 The decrease in premium income for 2007 relative to 2006 is due to the expected decline in this block of closed business, as well as an adjustment to premium income for a small block of ceded business for which the contract was modified during 2007. Partially offsetting these declines is an increase in premium income due to the 2007 reinsurance recapture, in the third quarter of 2007, of a small block of business, with an effective date of January 1, 2007, and annualized premium income of approximately $7.0 million. Neither the contract modification nor the recapture had a material effect on operating results for this segment. Net investment income decreased slightly in 2007 compared to 2006 due to a decrease in the level of assets supporting this business and the decline in the portfolio yield rate. The lower asset levels were primarily the result of the previously discussed intercompany reinsurance arrangement which lowered the statutory capital requirements for the reinsured block of business. The interest adjusted loss ratio was lower in 2007 than the ratio for 2006, excluding the revisions to the claim reassessment reserve estimate noted previously, due primarily to a higher rate of claim recoveries and a lower rate of submitted claims. Segment Outlook As a result of the decline in capital allocated to this segment, net investment income has decreased in 2008 relative to 2007 due to the lower asset levels needed to support allocated capital. Net investment income was also negatively impacted in 2008 by a reduced level of bond call premiums, relative to recent historical experience, as a result of the volatile capital market conditions and uncertain economic environment, and it is likely that this trend may continue in 2009. We also expect that operating revenue and income will decline over time as this closed block of business winds down. We believe that the interest adjusted loss ratio for this block of business will be relatively flat over the long term, but the segment may experience quarterly volatility. Claim resolution rates are very sensitive to operational and environmental changes and can be volatile over short periods of time. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period. It is possible, however, that variability in our reserve assumptions could result in a material impact on our reserve levels. Corporate and Other Segment As previously discussed, effective with the fourth quarter of 2008, we aggregated our former Other segment and Corporate segment into one reporting segment. Subsequent to that aggregation, additional modifications to the reporting segment included the transfer of assets, non-recourse debt, and associated capital of Tailwind Holdings and Northwind Holdings out of Corporate and Other into Unum US and Individual Disability Closed Block, respectively, and the transfer of excess assets, capital, and the associated investment income from Unum UK into Corporate and Other. Financial results previously reported have been revised to reflect these reclassifications. 78 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The Corporate and Other segment includes investment income on corporate assets not specifically allocated to a line of business, interest expense on corporate debt other than non-recourse debt, and certain other corporate income and expense not allocated to a line of business. Corporate and Other also includes results from certain Unum US insurance products not actively marketed, including individual life and corporate-owned life insurance, reinsurance pools and management operations, group pension, health insurance, and individual annuities. We expect operating revenue and income resulting from these insurance products to decline over time as these business lines wind down. Operating Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 1.4 (17.6) % $ 1.7 (62.2) % $ 4.5 Net Investment Income 197.5 9.1 181.0 6.0 170.7 Other Income 42.2 37.0 30.8 (37.8) 49.5 Total 241.1 12.9 213.5 (5.0) 224.7 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 107.8 (6.4) 115.2 (4.4) 120.5 Commissions 1.2 (36.8) 1.9 (36.7) 3.0 Interest and Debt Expense 117.4 (48.1) 226.1 4.5 216.3 Other Expenses 28.7 (7.7) 31.1 (7.7) 33.7 Total 255.1 (31.8) 374.3 0.2 373.5 Operating Loss Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ (14.0) 91.3 $ (160.8) (8.1) $ (148.8) Non-Insurance Product Results Operating revenue was $106.0 million in 2008 compared to $74.9 million and $73.2 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. Operating losses were $30.6 million in 2008 compared to $178.3 million and $173.2 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. The increase in operating revenue in 2008 compared to the prior years is due primarily to an increase in net investment income resulting from higher asset levels and $7.6 million of other income received during 2008 related to a refund of interest primarily attributable to tax years 1986 through 1996. Interest and debt expense, excluding the costs related to early retirement of debt, was $117.0 million in 2008 compared to $167.3 million and $190.5 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. Interest expense declined in 2008 relative to the prior two years due to the replacement, in the fourth quarter of 2007, of older fixed rate debt held in Corporate and Other with non-recourse debt issued in conjunction with the securitization of our closed block of individual disability reserves and held in the Individual Disability Closed Block segment. Interest expense was lower in 2007 relative to 2006 due to the reduction in our outstanding debt year over year. Costs related to the early retirement of debt were $0.4 million, $58.8 million, and $25.8 million in 2008, 2007, and 2006, respectively. See Debt contained in this Item 7 for further discussion. Included in other expenses is a securities litigation settlement accrual of $11.6 million in 2007 and broker compensation settlement expenses of $18.5 million in 2006. Insurance Product Results Reinsurance Pools and Management Our reinsurance operations include the reinsurance management operations of Duncanson & Holt, Inc. and the risk assumption, which includes reinsurance pool participation; direct reinsurance, which includes accident and health, long- 79 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements term care, and long-term disability coverages; and Lloyd of London syndicate participations. During 2008, this line of business reported an operating loss of $7.7 million compared to operating losses of $6.0 million and $6.7 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. Individual Life and Corporate-Owned Life During 2000, we reinsured substantially all of the individual life and corporate-owned life insurance blocks of business and ceded approximately $3.3 billion of reserves to the reinsurer. The $388.2 million before-tax gain on these transactions was deferred and is being amortized into income based upon expected future premium income on the traditional insurance policies ceded and estimated future gross profits on the interest-sensitive insurance policies ceded. A portion of the ceded corporate-owned life insurance block of business surrendered during 2007. The termination of this fully ceded business had no impact on our operating results and will not materially affect the amortization of the deferred gain. Total operating revenue for individual life and corporate-owned life insurance was $32.3 million, $29.4 million, and $37.8 million in 2008, 2007, and 2006, respectively. Operating income for the same periods was $26.2 million, $26.8 million, and $33.0 million. Other Group pension, health insurance, individual annuities, and other closed lines of business had combined operating revenue of $97.3 million in 2008 and $103.6 million in both 2007 and 2006. These closed lines of business had combined operating losses of $1.9 million, $3.3 million, and $1.9 million in 2008, 2007, and 2006, respectively. Segment Outlook Specific defaults within our investment portfolio are unforeseeable. We have tested whether our capital plan for 2009 has sufficient cushion to absorb possible losses. Because we currently have a margin of excess holding company liquidity and statutory capital above our capital management target guidelines, we believe we are well positioned for the economic downturn. It is possible, however, that defaults in our investment portfolio will result in realized investment losses, reduced net investment income, and lower statutory capital. Depending on the magnitude of defaults, we may need to seek additional external financing above the level anticipated in our current capital outlook. As previously noted, we expect our 2009 pension costs to be approximately $42.5 million higher than the level of 2008. This increase in expense will be charged to our Corporate and Other segment. Discontinued Operations During the first quarter of 2007, we completed the sale of GENEX and recognized an after-tax gain on the transaction of approximately $6.2 million. This gain is included with income from discontinued operations in our statements of income. Also included in discontinued operations is after-tax income for GENEX of $0.7 million and $7.4 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Investments Overview We believe that our investment portfolio, which consists primarily of fixed income securities, is positioned to moderate the potential impact of an economic slowdown on our financial position or operating results. Our portfolio is well diversified by type of investment and industry sector. Over the past few years, we have actively reduced our exposure to below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities, although additional downgrades may occur during an economic slowdown. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations and allow us to hold our securities through periods where significant decreases in fair value occur. We have no exposure to subprime mortgages, Alt-A loans, or collateralized debt obligations in our asset-backed or mortgage-backed securities portfolios. At December 31, 2008, we held $20.4 million fair value ($20.6 80 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements million amortized cost) of collateralized debt obligations within our public bond portfolio. We had $148.3 million fair value ($170.2 million amortized cost) of exposure to investments for which the payment of interest and principal is guaranteed under a financial guaranty insurance policy. The weighted average rating of the underlying securities, absent the guaranty insurance policy, is A1. We held $302.7 million fair value ($496.1 million amortized cost) of perpetual debentures, or hybrid securities, that generally have no fixed maturity date. Interest on these securities due on any payment date may be deferred by the issuer. The interest payments are generally deferrable only to the extent that the issuer has suspended dividends or other distributions or payments to any of its shareholders or any other perpetual debt instrument. Below is a summary of our formal investment policy, including the overall quality and diversification objectives. The majority of investments are in high quality publicly traded securities to ensure the desired liquidity and preserve the capital value of our portfolios. The long-term nature of our insurance liabilities also allows us to invest in less liquid investments to obtain superior returns. A maximum of 10 percent of the total investment portfolio may be invested in below-investment-grade securities, 2 percent in equity type instruments, up to 35 percent in private placements, and 5 percent in commercial mortgage loans. The remaining assets can be held in publicly traded investment-grade corporate securities, mortgage-backed securities, bank loans, asset-backed securities, government and government agencies, and municipal securities. We intend to manage the risk of losses due to changes in interest rates by matching asset duration with liabilities, in the aggregate, to within a range of +/- ten percent of the liability duration. The weighted average credit quality rating of the portfolio should be BBB or higher. The maximum investment per issuer group is limited based on internal limits reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group board of directors and approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries and is more restrictive than the five percent limit generally allowed by the state insurance departments which regulate the type of investments our insurance subsidiaries are allowed to own. These internal limits are as follows: Rating Internal Limit ($ in millions) AAA/A $150 BBB+ 125 BBB 100 BBB- 75 BB+ 60 BB/BB- 50 B 20 The portfolio is to be diversified across industry classification and geographic lines. Derivative instruments may be used to hedge interest rate risk and foreign currency risk and match liability duration and cash flows consistent with the plan reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group board of directors and approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. Asset mix guidelines and limits are established by us, reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group board of directors, and approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. The allocation of assets and the selection and timing of the acquisition and disposition of investments are subject to ratification, on a weekly basis, by an investment subcommittee appointed by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. These actions are also reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group board of directors on a quarterly basis. We review these investment policies and guidelines annually, or more frequently if deemed necessary, and recommend adjustments, as appropriate. Any revisions are reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group board of directors and must be approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. See Critical Accounting Estimates contained in this Item 7 for further discussion of our valuation of investments. 81 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Investment Results Net investment income was $2,389.0 million in 2008, a decrease of 0.9 percent relative to the prior year. The level of invested assets was higher in 2008 compared to 2007, but we received fewer bond call premiums during 2008. The weaker British pound in 2008 relative to 2007 also unfavorably affected translated results for net investment income. Our portfolio yield has increased slightly year over year due to the investment of new cash at higher rates than that of prior periods, particularly during the last two quarters of 2008. Net investment income was $2,409.9 million in 2007, an increase of 3.8 percent relative to the prior year. The increase was due primarily to growth in invested assets, partially offset by a lower yield due to the investment of new cash at lower rates than that of our existing portfolio yield and a decline in the level of prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities. The pound strengthened during 2007 relative to 2006, which favorably affected translated results for net investment income. The duration weighted book yield on the fixed income securities in our investment portfolio was 6.72 percent as of December 31, 2008, and the weighted average credit rating was A2. This compares to a yield of 6.66 percent as of December 31, 2007 and a weighted average credit rating of A2. At December 31, 2008, the weighted average duration of our policyholder liability portfolio was approximately 7.17 years, and the weighted average duration of our investment portfolio supporting those policyholder liabilities was approximately 6.51 years. Realized investment gains and losses, before tax, are as follows: (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2008 2007 2006 Gross Realized Investment Gain from Sales $ 79.1 $ 105.8 $ 82.0 Gross Realized Investment Loss Write-downs 166.1 76.2 17.2 Sales 87.2 37.5 57.3 Total 253.3 113.7 74.5 Change in Fair Value of DIG Issue B36 Derivatives (291.7) (57.3) (5.3) Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) $ (465.9) $ (65.2) $ 2.2 Realized Investment Losses $10.0 Million or Greater from Other than Temporary Impairments During 2008, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $39.3 million on a principal protected equity linked note issued by a Fortune 500 financial services company, the return of which is linked to a Vanguard S&P 500 index mutual fund. This note had an embedded derivative contract and substituted highly rated bonds in place of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund to provide principal protection if there was a significant decline in the equities market. The note derived its value from the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund. At the time of the other than temporary impairment loss recognition, the decline in the S&P 500 index had not been significant enough to trigger the substitution of the bonds, but due to the recent steep decline in the S&P 500 index, we could no longer conclude that the value of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund would equate to or exceed the par value of the security at maturity. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. During 2008, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $32.0 million on securities issued by a U.S. based automobile manufacturer and its captive finance subsidiary. The company has experienced a decline in profitability and cash flow due to the weak economic environment. Although 82 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements the company has not yet received government bailout money, the probability of receiving some form of government financial aid has significantly increased. Other U.S. automakers that have received bailout money are expected to request their bondholders to accept a significant reduction in principal. In order for this company to stay competitive with other U.S. automakers, it is likely that it, too, will seek debt relief from its bondholders and that we will not recover our entire principal for these securities. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. During 2008, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $27.8 million on securities issued by a large investment banking firm. The company experienced a rapid deterioration in its credit and derivatives portfolio, which made it impossible for the firm to raise additional capital or to sell assets to increase liquidity. The inability to raise capital forced the company to file for bankruptcy protection in the third quarter of 2008. The firm was rated A2 by Moody and A by S&P at the time of the bankruptcy filing. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. During 2008, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $21.6 million on securities issued by a large publisher of yellow page advertising. The outlook for this industry continues to worsen due to the secular change impacting the industry and due to weak economic conditions. The company third quarter earnings were down significantly as compared to prior periods, and bad debt expense and financial leverage increased significantly. These financial results increased the likelihood that the company might violate bank covenants and seek waivers from its bondholders. Additionally, the company hired external consultants to advise it on potential capital restructuring alternatives. These events increase the likelihood that the company will seek to tender its bonds at a discounted value and that our bonds will not fully recover in value. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. During 2008, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $12.9 million on securities issued by a large international chemical company. The company third quarter operating results were weak due to recessionary industry conditions and the negative impact of hurricane activity on its oil refinery operations. Due to these factors, the company experienced a significant decline in its liquidity. In late December, lenders denied the company request to obtain additional funding from its existing line of credit. As a result, the company liquidity was insufficient to fund required cash outflows, and the company hired external consultants to advise it on potential capital restructuring alternatives. We recorded an impairment loss in the fourth quarter of 2008 and subsequently sold the securities in early 2009. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. During 2008, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $12.1 million on securities issued by a large newspaper publishing company. The outlook for this industry continues to deteriorate due to the secular change away from newspaper advertising and weak economic conditions. The company reported poor third quarter operating results. The increase in leverage and lower cash flows increase the likelihood that the company may violate its bank covenants. The company has attempted to sell non-core assets to reduce its debt, but it has been unable to execute a sale. As a result, it is likely that our bonds will not fully recover in value. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. During 2007, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $15.0 million on bonds issued by a large media company. The company was the subject of a leveraged buyout that placed a large amount of debt on the balance sheet during 2007. Because of our outlook for the future business prospects of this issuer, the length of time these securities had been in an unrealized loss position, and a change in our intent to retain the security for a sufficient period of time for it to recover, we determined that an other than temporary impairment had occurred. These securities were investment grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the second quarter of 2006. At the time of the impairment, 83 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. During 2007, we recognized losses of $18.4 million related to the decline in fair value below amortized cost for certain securities for which it was determined during the third quarter of 2007 that we no longer had the intent to hold to recovery or maturity due to anticipated changes in our capital requirements resulting from the reinsurance transactions involving our Individual Disability Closed Block segment business and the related issuance of $800.0 million of notes, as well as our capital redeployment plans. During 2007, we recorded an adjustment to the book values and related unrealized loss of two securitized asset trusts acquired in 2001 to reflect the values that would have been present had we recorded the investment income as dividends rather than interest accretion. The book value adjustment of $20.2 million was recognized as a realized investment loss in the second quarter of 2007. Because the investments no longer satisfied our investment objectives, we subsequently sold the trusts in June of 2007 and recognized a realized investment gain of $24.9 million on the sale. We had no individual realized investment losses $10.0 million or greater from other than temporary impairments during 2006. Realized Investment Losses $10.0 Million or Greater from Sale of Fixed Maturity Securities During 2008, we recognized a loss of $16.2 million on the sale of securities issued by the large investment banking firm discussed above. During 2008, we recognized a loss of $10.1 million on the disposition of the principal protected equity linked note discussed above. The note substitution clause was triggered in the fourth quarter of 2008 due to the continued decline in the S&P 500 index. At the time of the triggering event, we made the decision to take ownership in the underlying Vanguard S&P 500 index mutual fund shares rather than accept the zero coupon bonds issued by the financial services company. At the time of disposition, this note had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of less than ninety days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. We had no individual realized investments losses $10.0 million or greater from the sale of fixed maturity securities during 2007. During 2006, we recognized a loss of $13.1 million on the sale of securities issued by a U.S. based automotive parts supplier. In the first quarter of 2006, the company reported third quarter 2005 results which were significantly below expectations and also withdrew guidance of positive free cash flow for its fiscal year 2005. Trade creditors put into place more stringent credit terms in response to the weaker financial results, which forced the company into bankruptcy in the first quarter of 2006. A portion of these securities had an investment-grade rating at the time of purchase, and a portion was purchased after the securities had been downgraded to below-investment-grade in the second quarter of 2001. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. Change in Fair Value of DIG Issue B36 Derivative We report changes in the fair value of an embedded derivative in a modified coinsurance arrangement as realized investment gains and losses, as required under the provisions of DIG Issue B36. Losses in both 2008 and 2007 resulted primarily from a widening of credit spreads in the overall investment market, as previously discussed. DIG Issue B36 requires us to include in our realized investment gains and losses a calculation intended to estimate the value of the option of our reinsurance counterparty to cancel the reinsurance contract with us. However, neither party can unilaterally terminate the reinsurance agreement except in extreme circumstances resulting from regulatory supervision, delinquency proceedings, or other direct regulatory action. Cash settlements or collateral related to this embedded derivative are not required at any time during the reinsurance contract or at termination of 84 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements the reinsurance contract, and any accumulated embedded derivative gain or loss reduces to zero over time as the reinsured business winds down. We therefore view DIG Issue B36 as a reporting requirement that will not result in a permanent reduction of assets or stockholders equity. The fair value of this embedded derivative was $(360.5) million and $(68.8) million at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively, and is reported in other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. Fair Value Measurements Effective January 1, 2008, we adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 (SFAS 157), Fair Value Measurements . SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. SFAS 157 is intended to increase consistency and comparability among fair value estimates used in financial reporting. It does not require any new fair value measurements. SFAS 157 clarifies a number of considerations with respect to fair value measurement objectives for financial reporting and expands disclosure about the use of fair value measurements, with particular emphasis on the inputs used to measure fair value. The adoption of SFAS 157 did not materially change the approach or methods we utilize for determining fair value measurements or the fair values derived under those methods. See Critical Accounting Estimates contained in this Item 7 and Notes 3 and 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our fair value measurements. Fixed Maturity Securities Fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2008, included $31.9 billion, or 99.4 percent, of bonds and $208.1 million, or 0.6 percent, of redeemable preferred stocks. The following table shows the fair value composition by internal industry classification of the fixed maturity bond portfolio and the associated unrealized gains and losses. Fixed Maturity Bonds By Industry Classification As of December 31, 2008 (in millions of dollars) Classification Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain (Loss) Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Gain Gross Unrealized Gain Basic Industry $ 1,789.3 $ (345.0) $ 1,423.7 $ 360.6 $ 365.6 $ 15.6 Canadian 254.2 57.5 - - 254.2 57.5 Capital Goods 2,538.4 (327.3) 1,719.1 418.6 819.3 91.3 Communications 1,945.6 (207.4) 1,095.6 285.8 850.0 78.4 Consumer Cyclical 1,210.7 (298.7) 907.8 315.9 302.9 17.2 Consumer Non-Cyclical 4,192.2 (168.7) 2,445.4 303.6 1,746.8 134.9 Energy (Oil & Gas) 2,245.2 (170.1) 1,347.1 252.0 898.1 81.9 Financial Institutions 2,577.8 (327.1) 2,185.6 340.8 392.2 13.7 Mortgage/Asset-Backed 3,945.5 253.8 346.1 55.1 3,599.4 308.9 Sovereigns 947.2 56.3 357.6 12.6 589.6 68.9 Technology 633.3 (87.9) 456.5 105.7 176.8 17.8 Transportation 888.0 (15.0) 413.0 56.0 475.0 41.0 U.S. Government Agencies and Municipalities 1,875.3 166.2 731.8 68.3 1,143.5 234.5 Utilities 6,883.3 (682.5) 4,995.8 799.1 1,887.5 116.6 Total $ 31,926.0 $ (2,095.9) $ 18,425.1 $ 3,374.1 $ 13,500.9 $ 1,278.2 85 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The following table is a distribution of the maturity dates for fixed maturity bonds in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2008. Fixed Maturity Bonds By Maturity As of December 31, 2008 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Due in 1 year or less $ 109.7 $ 3.2 Due after 1 year up to 5 years 2,080.8 207.8 Due after 5 years up to 10 years 6,315.8 1,086.7 Due after 10 years 9,572.7 2,021.3 Subtotal 18,079.0 3,319.0 Mortgage/Asset-Backed Securities 346.1 55.1 Total $ 18,425.1 $ 3,374.1 Of the $3,374.1 million in gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2008, $2,719.0 million, or 80.6 percent, are related to investment-grade fixed maturity bonds and result primarily from increases in interest rates or changes in market or sector credit spreads which occurred subsequent to acquisition of the bonds. 86 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The following two tables show the length of time our investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed maturity bonds had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2008 and at the end of the prior four quarters. The relationships of the current fair value to amortized cost are not necessarily indicative of the fair value to amortized cost relationships for the securities throughout the entire time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position nor are they necessarily indicative of the relationships after December 31, 2008. As is shown in the time period progression, the elevated level of unrealized losses occurred during the third and fourth quarters of 2008. The increase in unrealized losses during the third and fourth quarters of 2008 results primarily from the significant widening of credit spreads that occurred in the overall market. Unrealized Loss on Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Bonds Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position As of December 31, 2008 (in millions of dollars) 2008 2007 December 31 September 30 June 30 March 31 December 31 Fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost <= 90 $ 171.3 $ 286.8 $ 95.8 $ 110.7 $ 8.7 > 90 < 180 335.1 223.2 108.7 23.5 14.4 > 180 < 270 271.8 215.9 24.4 29.7 48.7 > 270 < 1 year 292.9 50.7 23.9 85.3 35.4 > 1 year < 2 years 461.4 449.7 265.4 161.6 198.5 > 2 years < 3 years 196.7 477.7 479.6 403.0 154.2 > 3 years 404.2 389.9 125.1 113.1 295.9 Sub-total 2,133.4 2,093.9 1,122.9 926.9 755.8 Fair value < 70% >= 40% of amortized cost <= 90 - 4.8 - - - > 90 < 180 1.6 1.2 - - - > 180 <= 270 35.7 18.5 - - - > 270 <= 1 year 68.9 - - - - > 1 year <= 2 years 209.6 54.3 - - - > 2 years <= 3 years 57.9 36.3 5.6 0.6 0.4 > 3 years 162.0 55.2 48.3 31.6 25.3 Sub-total 535.7 170.3 53.9 32.2 25.7 Fair Value < 40% > 270 <= 1 year 6.3 - - - - > 1 year <= 2 years 31.3 - - - - > 2 years <= 3 years 11.7 - - - - > 3 years 0.6 - - - - Sub-total 49.9 - - - - Total $ 2,719.0 $ 2,264.2 $ 1,176.8 $ 959.1 $ 781.5 87 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Unrealized Loss on Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Bonds Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position As of December 31, 2008 (in millions of dollars) 2008 2007 December 31 September 30 June 30 March 31 December 31 Fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost <= 90 $ 25.6 $ 11.5 $ 2.7 $ 7.9 $ 5.6 > 90 < 180 48.7 10.5 8.8 8.1 11.4 > 180 < 270 42.2 27.6 12.5 22.5 19.9 > 270 < 1 year 16.3 19.4 12.6 30.4 11.3 > 1 year < 2 years 39.8 88.7 46.0 23.9 19.3 > 2 years < 3 years 0.4 14.5 31.1 38.4 40.7 > 3 years 26.6 30.1 37.6 12.0 15.7 Sub-total 199.6 202.3 151.3 143.2 123.9 Fair value < 70% >= 40% of amortized cost > 90 < 180 17.5 - 2.2 - - > 180 <= 270 32.3 2.6 - 1.6 - > 270 <= 1 year 18.4 3.5 13.9 13.8 - > 1 year <= 2 years 160.8 19.9 7.5 - - > 2 years <= 3 years 28.1 8.4 25.0 39.2 7.9 > 3 years 67.5 54.7 22.0 10.5 - Sub-total 324.6 89.1 70.6 65.1 7.9 Fair Value < = 40% > 180 <= 270 6.2 - - - - > 270 <= 1 year 15.3 - - - - > 1 year <= 2 years 26.8 36.5 - - - > 2 years <= 3 years 37.1 21.8 - - - > 3 years 45.5 28.6 - - - Sub-total 130.9 86.9 - - - Total $ 655.1 $ 378.3 $ 221.9 $ 208.3 $ 131.8 88 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements As of December 31, 2008, we held 102 fixed maturity securities with a gross unrealized loss of $10.0 million or greater, as shown in the chart below. Gross Unrealized Losses on Fixed Maturity Securities $10.0 Million or Greater As of December 31, 2008 (in millions of dollars) Classification Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss Number of Issuers Investment-Grade Utilities $ 1,064.7 $ 294.6 20 Financial Institutions 326.5 239.5 11 Capital Goods 665.2 223.5 13 Consumer Cyclical 265.7 125.2 8 Consumer Non-Cyclical 509.6 112.2 8 Basic Industry 255.0 109.0 5 Communications 208.3 97.1 6 Energy 389.7 95.5 6 U.S. Government Agencies 560.2 61.2 1 Transportation 61.0 23.2 1 Technology 37.6 12.3 1 Total $ 4,343.5 $ 1,393.3 80 Below-Investment-Grade Communications $ 86.3 $ 89.7 5 Consumer Cyclical 58.8 75.6 4 Basic Industry 64.2 65.2 4 Capital Goods 68.4 22.7 2 Technology 19.1 22.0 2 Consumer Non-Cyclical 42.3 21.0 2 Financial Institutions 6.1 12.9 1 Energy 20.9 12.0 1 Utilities 42.3 10.9 1 Total $ 408.4 $ 332.0 22 Unrealized losses on investment-grade fixed maturity securities principally relate to changes in interest rates or changes in market or sector credit spreads which occurred after the acquisition of the securities. These changes are generally temporary and are not recognized as realized investment losses unless the securities are sold, it becomes unlikely that we will hold the securities until recovery based on relevant facts and circumstances, or the securities become other than temporarily impaired. Generally, below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities are more likely to develop credit concerns. In determining whether a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, we utilize a formal, well-defined, and disciplined process to monitor and evaluate our fixed income investment portfolio. The process results in a thorough evaluation of problem investments and the recording of realized losses on a timely basis for investments determined to have an other than temporary impairment. See previous discussion of our other than temporary impairment analysis under Critical Accounting Estimates contained in this Item 7. 89 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements For those fixed maturity securities with an unrealized loss and on which we have not recorded an impairment loss, we believe that the decline in fair value below amortized cost is temporary. We have the ability and intent to hold our securities to the earlier of recovery or maturity. If information becomes available that changes our assessment as to whether we will receive contractual payments related to a fixed maturity security and the security is also not projected to recover in value, the related security is generally sold. We may also in certain circumstances sell a security in an unrealized loss position because of changes in tax laws, when a merger or the disposition of a segment or product line results in positions outside of our investment guidelines, due to changes in regulatory or capital requirements, due to unexpected changes in liquidity needs, to better match portfolio cash flows, or to take advantage of relative value opportunities or tender offers that recover up to or beyond the cost of the investment. Gross Unrealized Losses on Fixed Maturity Securities $20.0 Million or Greater As of December 31, 2008 (in millions of dollars) Fixed Maturity Bonds Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss Length of Time in a Loss Position Investment-Grade Principal Protected Equity Linked Trust Certificates $ 50.3 $ 28.8 > 180 <= 270 days U.S. Based Insurance and Financial Services Company 15.6 37.6 > 1 year <= 2 years Global Building Materials Company 60.3 29.6 > 1 year <= 2 years Global Building Materials Company 38.0 26.0 > 1 year <= 2 years U.S. Based Retail Company 35.2 25.3 > 1 year <= 2 years U.S. Based Retail Company 51.1 24.0 > 1 year <= 2 years Canadian Based Railroad Company 61.0 23.2 > 1 year <= 2 years U.S. Based Forest Products Company 57.8 20.2 > 1 year <= 2 years U.K. Based Financial Institution 51.8 35.9 > 2 years <= 3 years U.K. Based Financial Institution 43.5 32.1 > 2 years <= 3 years U.S. Based Metals and Mining Company 61.8 23.8 > 2 years <= 3 years U.S. Government Sponsored Mortgage Funding Company 560.2 61.2 > 3 years Canadian Based Metals and Mining Company 64.2 36.7 > 3 years U.S. Based Media Conglomerate 42.1 30.6 > 3 years U.S. Based Building Materials Company 49.0 25.6 > 3 years U.S. Based Electric Utility Company 54.0 25.2 > 3 years Netherlands Based Financial Institution 43.1 25.2 > 3 years U.S. Based Food and Agricultural Company 106.4 22.7 > 3 years U.S. Based Electric Utility Company 57.7 22.5 > 3 years U.S. Based Power Tool Manufacturing Company 78.2 20.2 > 3 years Total $ 1,581.3 $ 576.4 Below-Investment-Grade U.S. Based Recreational Products Company $ 10.6 $ 20.8 > 270 days <= 1 year U.S. Based Media Conglomerate 4.6 35.1 > 3 years U.S. Based Automotive Supply Company 17.7 23.7 > 3 years Canadian Based Metals and Mining Company 18.8 21.0 > 3 years Total $ 51.7 $ 100.6 For those securities with a gross unrealized loss of $20.0 million or greater, further discussed as follows are (a) the factors which we believe resulted in the impairment and (b) the information we considered, both positive and negative, in reaching the conclusion that the impairments were not other than temporary. We believe the decline in 90 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements fair value of these securities is temporary, and we have the ability to hold these securities to the earlier of recovery or maturity. Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities: The principal protected equity linked trust certificates represent our investment in a trust which holds forward contracts to purchase shares of a Vanguard S&P 500 index mutual fund. This trust also holds a defeasance swap contract for U.S. Treasury bonds to provide principal protection for the investments. The trust investment derives its value from the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund. This security is currently at an unrealized loss because the fixed rate of accretion on the note has exceeded the rate of return on the underlying S&P 500 index fund since the purchase date of the note. Because we purchased this security at a price point in a previous market decline in the S&P 500 index mutual fund, we believe that the value of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund will equate to or exceed the par value of the security at maturity. The fair value of the U.S. based insurance and financial services company securities declined primarily due to liquidity concerns specific to the company and for financial institutions in general. The company balance sheet is solid, and its core businesses are profitable. The company also owns marketable assets which can be sold to increase liquidity. The company is seeking approval to participate in the U.S. Treasury Department Capital Purchase Program under the Troubled Asset Relief Program in an effort to gain access to government funding. The decline in the fair value of the global building materials company is due to the increased slowdown in commercial and infrastructure-related construction as well as a weak residential construction market. The company maintains adequate liquidity and owns marketable long-lived assets. The decline in the fair value of the global building materials company is due to the increased slowdown in commercial and infrastructure-related construction as well as a weak residential construction market. While the company has acquisition-related debt that will require refinancing in the near future, it reduced this liquidity need through new debt issuance and asset sales prior to the current market pressure on credit availability. The company also owns marketable long-lived assets. The decline in fair value of the U.S. based retail company is due to the recent decline in consumer spending and the depressed economy. While concerns surrounding the retail sector and consumer spending will continue to affect performance, the company maintains its leading market position and has adequate liquidity to withstand an economic downturn. The decline in fair value of the U.S. based retail company is due to the recent decline in consumer spending and the depressed economy. Management has reduced capital spending and has taken other appropriate steps to maintain adequate liquidity. While concerns surrounding the retail sector and consumer spending will continue to affect performance, the company has the financial strength to withstand an economic downturn. The decline in fair value of the Canadian based railroad company securities is due primarily to its weakened financial risk profile resulting from a recent debt financed acquisition. The company position is strengthened by stable industry fundamentals and a favorable regulatory environment. The company has adequate access to capital markets, and it recently implemented cash preservation policies such as suspension of its share repurchase program and freezing any shareholder dividend increases. Additionally, management has stated that it will seek to improve cash flow through the implementation of operational efficiencies and a reduction in capital expenditures. Current liquidity should provide adequate coverage for near term funding requirements. The decline in fair value of the U.S. based forest products company securities is due to lower demand and weaker pricing capabilities in the current environment. The company has adequate liquidity to meet its obligations and has a strong asset base through its ownership of 5.9 million acres of timberland. 91 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The decline in the fair value of the securities of the U.K. based financial institution is primarily the result of the global credit crisis and the slowdown in the economy. In addition, a major acquisition at the peak of the credit cycle required this institution to realize impairments in loans and other assets, resulting in the need for additional capital. This capital was initially provided by shareholders and others, but as the economic environment deteriorated further, the company participated in the U.K. government guarantee of senior debt and capital injections in the form of preferred and common equity. Currently, the company is 58 percent owned by the U.K. government. Its current strategy is to reduce risk on its balance sheet and make asset sales as the market improves. The decline in the fair value of the securities of the U.K. based financial institution is primarily the result of the global credit crisis and the slowdown in the economy. The company is well diversified and has global market operations in capital markets, asset-backed securities, wealth management, asset management, commodities, and insurance. The company has recently raised capital apart from the U.K. government program and purchased capital market businesses. The company eliminated its dividend during 2008 to accumulate additional capital. The decline in the fair value of the securities of the U.S. based metals and mining company is due to the increased slowdown in global economic activity, resulting in lower commodity prices and earnings pressure for the sector. The company continues to proactively adjust its production activities to preserve its liquidity and manage through the current economic downturn. The company also owns marketable long-lived assets. The fixed maturity securities of the U.S. government sponsored mortgage funding company were issued by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. The securities were rated AAA by S&P as of December 31, 2008, with no negative outlook by rating agencies. The decline in the fair value of these securities relates to changes in interest rates subsequent to purchase of the securities as well as concerns related to the mortgage market. The decline in fair value of the Canadian based metals and mining company securities is due to the increased slowdown in global economic activity, resulting in lower commodity prices and earnings pressure for the sector. The company credit profile has been strengthened due to its recent acquisition by a larger, more diversified metals and mining company. The company also owns marketable long-lived assets. The company has adequate liquidity and free cash flow from operations. The fair value of the U.S. based media conglomerate securities declined due to general widening of credit spreads in the media industry, particularly among companies sensitive to the cyclical advertising market. The company generates significant free cash flow, maintains a sizeable cash balance, and owns interests in various media businesses that provide additional liquidity. The decline in fair value of the U.S. based building materials company securities is due to the ongoing weakness in the residential and remodeling markets. The company has adequate liquidity and maintains free cash flow given its low capital expenditure requirements. The decline in the fair value of the U.S. based electric utility company securities is primarily due to the general widening of credit spreads in the corporate bond market. The company is located in a growing service territory, and recent regulatory decisions have been favorable to its business. The decline in the fair value of the Netherlands based financial institution securities is due to the overall widening of credit spreads in the corporate bond market. The company is one of the largest and strongest banks in the Netherlands. The company Tier 1 capital, which is seen as the core measure of a bank financial strength, is indicative of a well capitalized financial institution. The fair value of the U.S. based food and agricultural company securities declined primarily due to a general widening of credit spreads in the market, exacerbated by the securities very long-term maturity dates. The company has strong operating cash flows and is free cash flow positive. 92 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements The decline in the fair value of the U.S. based electric utility company securities is primarily due to the general widening of credit spreads in the investment-grade corporate bond market. The company operates a fully regulated business with no retail competition. The company customer base is expected to grow due to the expansion of a military base located within its service territory. Liquidity remains adequate. The decline in fair value of the U.S. based power tools manufacturing company securities results primarily from weak consumer demand. Despite declining demand, the company continues to maintain positive earnings and cash flow. The company has sufficient liquidity and no near-term refinancing needs. Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities: The decline in fair value of the U.S. based recreational products company securities results from a significant decline in consumer durable goods spending. The company operates in highly cyclical industries, and demand for its products has deteriorated rapidly. The company entered the current economic downturn with a significant cash balance and still retains adequate liquidity to manage through the current economic cycle. The fair value of the U.S. based media conglomerate securities declined due to the increase in leverage from a leveraged buyout transaction, as well as a general widening of credit spreads in the media industry. The company is expected to continue to generate sufficient cash flow to service its debt obligations, and it has ownership interests in a variety of media businesses that could be sold to further reduce leverage. The fair value of the securities of the U.S. based automotive supply company declined due to lower vehicle production from multiple domestic automobile manufacturers. The company maintains a significant amount of cash and liquidity to manage through the current economic cycle, with limited near-term debt maturities. The company has a dominant position in its markets. The decline in fair value of the Canadian based metals and mining company is due to the increased slowdown in global economic activity, resulting in lower commodity prices and earnings pressure for this sector. As part of its diversification strategy, the company recently increased its leverage due to an acquisition prior to the current market pressure on credit availability. The company has ample cash flow to significantly reduce its debt burden in the coming year, which should allow for a timely refinance or extension of its bridge debt. The company also owns marketable long-lived assets. Our mortgage/asset-backed securities were approximately $3.7 billion and $4.0 billion on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. At December 31, 2008, the mortgage/asset-backed securities had an average life of 3.79 years, effective duration of 4.04 years, and a weighted average credit rating of AAA. The mortgage/asset-backed securities are valued on a monthly basis using valuations supplied by the brokerage firms that are dealers in these securities as well as independent pricing services. The primary risk involved in investing in mortgage/asset-backed securities is the uncertainty of the timing of cash flows from the underlying loans due to prepayment of principal with the possibility of reinvesting the funds in a lower interest rate environment. We use models which incorporate economic variables and possible future interest rate scenarios to predict future prepayment rates. The timing of prepayment cash flows may also cause volatility in our recognition of investment income. We recognize investment income on these securities using a constant effective yield based on projected prepayments of the underlying loans and the estimated economic life of the securities. Actual prepayment experience is reviewed periodically, and effective yields are recalculated when differences arise between prepayments originally projected and the actual prepayments received and currently projected. The effective yield is recalculated on a retrospective basis, and the adjustment is reflected in net investment income. We have not invested in mortgage-backed derivatives, such as interest-only, principal-only, or residuals, where market values can be highly volatile relative to changes in interest rates. All of our mortgage-backed securities have fixed rate coupons. The credit quality of our mortgage-backed securities portfolio has not been negatively impacted by the recent issues in the market concerning subprime mortgage loans. The change in value of our mortgage-backed securities portfolio has moved in line with that of prime agency-backed mortgage-backed securities. 93 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements As of December 31, 2008, our exposure to below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities was $1,633.9 million, approximately 4.6 percent of the carrying value of invested assets excluding ceded policy loans. Below-investment-grade bonds are inherently more risky than investment-grade bonds since the risk of default by the issuer, by definition and as exhibited by bond rating, is higher. Also, the secondary market for certain below-investment-grade issues can be highly illiquid. Additional downgrades may occur, but we do not anticipate any liquidity problem caused by our investments in below-investment-grade securities, nor do we expect these investments to adversely affect our ability to hold our other investments to maturity. We have a significant interest in, but are not the primary beneficiary of, a special purpose entity which is a collateralized bond obligation asset trust (CBO) in which we hold interests in several of the tranches and for which we act as investment manager of the underlying high-yield securities. This entity is a cash flow CBO and was fully funded at the time of issuance. Our potential losses in this CBO are limited to our investment in the entity. Our investment in this entity is reported at fair value with fixed maturity securities in the consolidated balance sheets. The fair value of this investment was derived from the fair value of the underlying assets. The fair value and amortized cost of this investment were $2.5 million and $2.4 million, respectively, at December 31, 2008, and $12.0 million and $11.8 million, respectively, at December 31, 2007. Mortgage Loans Our mortgage loan portfolio was $1,274.8 million and $1,068.9 million on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Our mortgage loan portfolio is comprised entirely of commercial mortgage loans. We expect that we will continue to add investments in this category either through the secondary market or through loan originations. We believe our mortgage loan portfolio is well diversified geographically and among property types. The incidence of problem mortgage loans and foreclosure activity is currently low. Due to conservative underwriting, we expect the level of delinquencies and problem loans to remain low relative to the industry. At December 31, 2008, delinquent mortgage loans, or those past due more than 30 days as to interest or principal payments, totaled $5.2 million and were considered impaired loans. The impaired loans were deemed permanently impaired and are reported at the estimated net realizable value. We had no delinquent or impaired mortgage loans at December 31, 2007 and no valuation allowance for mortgage loans at December 31, 2008 or 2007. Derivative Financial Instruments We use derivative financial instruments to manage reinvestment risk, duration, and currency risk. Historically, we have utilized interest rate futures contracts, current and forward interest rate swaps and options on forward interest rate swaps, current and forward currency swaps, interest rate forward contracts, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, and forward contracts on specific fixed income securities. All of these freestanding derivative transactions are hedging in nature and not speculative. Positions under our hedging programs for derivative activity that were open during 2008 involved current and forward interest rate swaps, current and forward currency swaps, currency forward contracts, forward treasury locks, and options on forward interest rate swaps. Almost all hedging transactions are associated with the individual and group long-term care and the individual and group disability products. All other product portfolios are periodically reviewed to determine if hedging strategies would be appropriate for risk management purposes. Our current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position less collateral held, was $37.7 million at December 31, 2008. The carrying value of fixed maturity securities pledged as collateral to our counterparties was $107.9 million at December 31, 2008. We believe that our credit risk is mitigated by our use of multiple counterparties, all of whom are rated A or better by both Moody and S&P. See Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. Other Our exposure to non-current investments, on a fair value basis, totaled $11.8 million and $2.6 million at December 31, 2008 and 2007, respectively. 94 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Liquidity and Capital Resources Our liquidity requirements are met primarily by cash flows provided from operations, principally in our insurance subsidiaries. Premium and investment income, as well as maturities and sales of invested assets, provide the primary sources of cash. Debt and/or securities offerings provide an additional source of liquidity. Cash is applied to the payment of policy benefits, costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions), operating expenses, and taxes, as well as purchases of new investments. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations. We attempt to match our asset cash flows and durations with expected liability cash flows and durations to meet the funding requirements of our business. However, further deterioration in the credit market could delay our ability to sell our positions in certain of our fixed maturity securities in a timely manner, which may negatively impact our cash flows. Furthermore, if we experience defaults on securities held in the investment portfolios of our insurance subsidiaries, this will negatively impact statutory capital, which could reduce our insurance subsidiaries capacity to pay dividends to our holding companies. A reduction in dividends to our holding companies could force us to seek external financing to avoid impairing our ability to pay our stockholder dividends or meet our debt and other payment obligations. Our policy benefits are primarily in the form of claim payments, and we have minimal exposure to the policy withdrawal risk associated with deposit products such as individual life policies or annuities. A decrease in demand for our insurance products or an increase in the incidence of new claims or the duration of existing claims could negatively impact our cash flows from operations. However, our historical pattern of benefits paid to revenues is consistent, even during cycles of economic downturns, which serves to minimize liquidity risk. We have met all minimum pension funding requirements set forth by ERISA. We expect to make a voluntary contribution of approximately $70.0 million in 2009 to our U.S qualified defined benefit pension plan, based on current tax law. We have evaluated the Pension Protection Act of 2006 which requires companies to fully fund defined benefit pension plans over a seven year period and have made estimates of amounts to be funded in the future. Based on this assessment, we do not believe that the funding requirements of the Pension Protection Act will cause a material adverse effect on our liquidity. We also contribute to our U.K. pension plan sufficient to meet the minimum funding requirement under U.K. legislation. We anticipate that we will make a contribution of approximately 3.5 million during 2009. In the near term, we expect that our need for external financing is small, but changes in our business as noted above could increase our need. Our short-term debt repayment requirements for 2009 can be met through existing cash flows. We currently anticipate that we may issue long-term debt of $150.0 million to $300.0 million during 2009, depending on market conditions and the availability and cost of financing. In light of the recent credit market turmoil, we have implemented a more conservative cash management strategy with respect to our securities lending and commercial paper investment programs. In addition, we have a $250.0 million unsecured revolving credit facility and an open shelf registration that we can utilize as needed to provide additional liquidity and financial flexibility. We believe our cash resources are sufficient to meet our liquidity requirements for the next 12 months and that our current level of holding company liquidity can be utilized to mitigate potential losses from defaults. During 2009, we intend to retain sufficient capital in our traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries to maintain a weighted average RBC ratio in excess of our stated long-term objective of 300 percent. We also intend to maintain our leverage ratio at or slightly below our target levels and maintain, as a minimum threshold, liquidity at our holding companies sufficient to cover one year of fixed charges, measured as interest expense plus common stock dividends. 95 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Consolidated Cash Flows Our cash flows from discontinued operations are combined with cash flows from continuing operations within each cash flow statement category in our consolidated statements of cash flows for the applicable periods. The absence of cash flows from discontinued operations has not, nor is it expected to, materially affect liquidity and capital resources. Operating Cash Flows Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,326.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2008, compared to $1,750.3 million and $1,431.9 million for the comparable periods of 2007 and 2006, respectively. Operating cash flows are primarily attributable to the receipt of premium and investment income, offset by payments of claims, commissions, expenses, and income taxes. Premium income growth is dependent not only on new sales, but on renewals of existing business, renewal price increases, and stable persistency. Investment income growth is dependent on the growth in the underlying assets supporting our insurance reserves and on the level of portfolio yield rates. Increases in commissions and operating expenses are attributable primarily to new sales growth and the first year acquisition expenses associated with new business. The level of paid claims is due partially to the growth and aging of the block of business and also to the general economy, as previously discussed in the operating results by segment. Included in operating cash flows for 2008, 2007, and 2006 are voluntary pension contributions to our U.S. qualified defined benefit plan of $130.0 million, $110.0 million, and $92.0 million, respectively. We also had increased cash inflows of approximately $211.4 million in 2007 due to the reinsurance recapture of a small block of individual disability business. The fluctuation in the income tax adjustment to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities is due primarily to the deferred tax asset established during 2008 related to the change in the fair value of the DIG Issue B36 derivative and a tax benefit recognized during 2006 which resulted from the reversal of tax liabilities related to group relief benefits recognized from the use of net operating losses in a foreign jurisdiction. The decrease in the Other, Net adjustment to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities in 2008 compared to the prior two years is due primarily to the 2007 and 2006 reclassification of costs related to early retirement of debt to cash flows from financing activities. Investing Cash Flows Investing cash inflows consist primarily of the proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments. Investing cash outflows consist primarily of payments for purchases of investments. Net cash used by investing activities was $424.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to $1,855.0 million and $1,222.0 million for the comparable periods of 2007 and 2006, respectively. Proceeds from sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities in 2008 were consistent with the level of 2007 primarily due to an increase in bond maturities and bonds that were called at par, offset by a decrease in sales of fixed maturity securities, a lower level of proceeds from mortgage-backed securities prepayments, and the translation of investment proceeds from our U.K. operations at lower exchange rates. Proceeds from sales and maturities of other investments decreased in 2008 primarily due to lower proceeds from the sale of common stock investments and a reduction in commercial mortgage loan maturities and prepayments. The reduction in cash flows received on other investments was partially offset by higher proceeds in 2008 from terminations of derivatives within our cash flow hedging programs. Purchases of available-for-sale securities decreased during 2008 relative to 2007 in part due to the lower exchange rate for translation of purchases within our U.K. operations and to investing more heavily in short-term investments rather than fixed maturity securities during the last half of 2008. During the first half of 2008, we invested more heavily in fixed maturity securities as we continued to transition out of short-term investments into floating rate fixed maturity securities to support the floating rate debt issued during the fourth quarter of 2007. 96 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Net sales of short-term investments increased during 2008 due in part to the sale of investments to fund the $700.0 million accelerated share repurchase agreements executed one half in each of January and August 2008, as well as the transition to floating rate fixed maturity securities in lieu of short-term investments during the first half of 2008. Proceeds from acquisitions relate to the second quarter of 2008 Unum UK acquisition of a group long-term disability claims portfolio. We had lower proceeds from sales and maturities of available-for-sale securities in 2007 compared to 2006, primarily due to a decrease in scheduled maturities of fixed maturity securities as well as a lower level of proceeds from principal prepayments on mortgage-backed securities. Somewhat offsetting this decline was the sale of a block of available-for-sale securities to generate the liquidity needed to repurchase debt in the fourth quarter of 2007 as part of our capital redeployment plan. Purchases of available-for-sale securities increased during 2007 in comparison to 2006, in part due to the investing of the net cash inflows of $98.8 million from the sale of GENEX and the $211.4 million cash inflows from the reinsurance recapture. Purchases of other investments declined during 2007 relative to 2006 due to a decline in the purchase of commercial mortgage loans. During the second quarter of 2007, a portion of the proceeds from the issuance of the 17.7 million shares of common stock was invested in short-term investments, thereby contributing to the higher purchase of short-term investments in 2007. Also, during the third quarter of 2007, there was an increase in net purchases of short-term investments to provide liquidity needed for the capital redeployment plan announced in the fourth quarter of 2007 in conjunction with the issuance of the Northwind Holdings debt. Net purchases of short-term investments increased during 2007 compared to 2006 as a result of the liquidity needed for our capital redeployment plan previously discussed. During the fourth quarter of 2007, we issued $800.0 million of debt and invested the proceeds in floating rate bonds and short-term investments. Short-term investments were used as an interim investment as we sought suitable floating rate investments to support the floating rate debt. We also purchased short-term investments throughout 2007 as we anticipated the funding needed for our common stock repurchase program. Policy loans, as reported in our consolidated balance sheet, declined during 2007 in comparison to 2006 due to the surrender of a portion of our ceded corporate-owned life insurance block of business. The termination of this fully ceded business had no impact on our cash inflows or outflows. The proceeds from dispositions in 2007 relate to the sale of GENEX. Financing Cash Flows Financing cash flows consist primarily of borrowings and repayments of debt, issuance or repurchase of common stock, and dividends paid to stockholders. Net cash used by financing activities was $1,049.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2008 compared to net cash provided of $181.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2007 and net cash used of $157.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006. During 2007, Unum Group board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to $700.0 million of Unum Group common stock. In 2008, we completed our share repurchase program and purchased 29.9 million shares of Unum Group common stock for $700.0 million. During 2008, we retired the remaining $175.0 million of our 5.997% senior notes and we purchased and retired $17.8 million of our outstanding 5.859% notes. At December 31, 2008, we held $190.5 million of short-term debt, $58.3 million of which was borrowed during 2008. The remaining $132.2 million represents debt previously classified as long-term but which now has a maturity date within one year after the date of our balance sheet. During 2008, we purchased and retired $36.6 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 6.85% notes due 2015. 97 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements During 2008, Tailwind Holdings made principal payments on its floating rate, senior secured non-recourse notes due 2036 of $10.0 million. During 2008, Northwind Holdings made principal payments of $59.3 million on its floating rate, senior secured non-recourse notes due 2037. During 2007, we received proceeds of approximately $800.0 million, less debt issuance costs of $15.1 million, from the issuance of $800.0 million aggregate principal amount of debt by Northwind Holdings. We also repurchased and/or made principal payments of $769.5 million aggregate principal amount of outstanding debt during 2007, for an aggregate cash outflow of $803.7 million including the debt repurchase costs of $34.2 million. During 2007, we received proceeds of approximately $300.0 million and issued 17.7 million shares of common stock upon the settlement of the common stock purchase contract element of the 2004 units. During 2006, we received proceeds of approximately $130.0 million, less debt issuance costs of $4.1 million, from the issuance of $130.0 million aggregate principal amount of debt by Tailwind Holdings. We also repurchased and/or made principal payments of $732.0 million aggregate principal amounts of outstanding debt during 2006, for an aggregate cash outflow of $749.9 million including debt repurchase costs of $17.9 million. During 2006, we received proceeds of approximately $575.0 million and issued 43.3 million shares of common stock upon the settlement of the common stock purchase contract element of the 2003 units. See Debt contained in this Item 7 for further information. Cash Available from Subsidiaries Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries and/or finance subsidiaries depend on payments from subsidiaries to pay dividends to stockholders, to pay debt obligations, and/or to pay expenses. These payments by our insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries may take the form of interest payments on loans from the parent to a subsidiary, operating and investment management fees, and/or dividends. During 2008 and 2006, Unum Group received $100.0 million and $150.0 million, respectively, from its insurance subsidiaries for the repayment of surplus debentures previously issued to Unum Group in 1997 and in 1996. The debentures had maturity dates of October 2027 and December 2006, respectively. Restrictions under applicable state insurance laws limit the amount of ordinary dividends that can be paid to a parent company from its insurance subsidiaries in any 12-month period without prior approval by regulatory authorities. For life insurance companies domiciled in the United States, that limitation generally equals, depending on the state of domicile, either ten percent of an insurer statutory surplus with respect to policyholders as of the preceding year end or the statutory net gain from operations, excluding realized investment gains and losses, of the preceding year. The payment of ordinary dividends to a parent company from its insurance subsidiaries is generally further limited to the amount of statutory surplus as it relates to policyholders. Based on the restrictions under current law, during 2009, $653.3 million is available for the payment of ordinary dividends to Unum Group from its traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, excluding Northwind Re and Tailwind Re. Unum Group and/or certain of its finance subsidiaries may also receive dividends from its United Kingdom-based affiliate, Unum Limited, subject to applicable insurance company regulations and capital guidance in the United Kingdom. Approximately 145.5 million is available for the payment of dividends from Unum Limited during 2009, subject to regulatory approval. The amount available during 2008 for the payment of ordinary dividends from Unum Group traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries was $626.5 million, of which $165.6 million was declared and paid. The traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries also paid extraordinary dividends of $469.1 million in 2008 of which $28.2 million was declared in 2007. The amount available during 2008 from Unum Limited was 202.1 million, of which 125.0 million was declared and paid. 98 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Northwind Holdings and Tailwind Holdings ability to meet their debt payment obligations will be dependent upon the receipt of dividends from Northwind Re and Tailwind Re, respectively. The ability of Northwind Re and Tailwind Re to pay dividends to their respective parent companies will depend on their satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the reinsured business. During 2008, Northwind Re received regulatory approval from the insurance department of its state of domicile to pay dividends of $80.6 million to Northwind Holdings, and Tailwind Re received regulatory approval from the insurance department of its state of domicile to pay dividends of $24.1 million to Tailwind Holdings. The payment of dividends to the parent company from our subsidiaries also requires the approval of the individual subsidiary board of directors. The ability of Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries and/or finance subsidiaries to continue to receive dividends from their insurance subsidiaries without regulatory approval generally depends on the level of earnings of those insurance subsidiaries as calculated under law. In addition to regulatory restrictions, the amount of dividends that may be paid by insurance subsidiaries will depend on additional factors, such as RBC ratios, funding growth objectives at an affiliate level, and maintaining appropriate capital adequacy ratios to support desired ratings. Insurance regulatory restrictions do not limit the amount of dividends available for distribution from non-insurance subsidiaries except where the non-insurance subsidiaries are held directly or indirectly by an insurance subsidiary and only indirectly by Unum Group. Unum Group RBC ratio for its traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was approximately 332 percent at the end of 2008, with the individual RBC ratios for Unum Group principal traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries all in excess of our long-term target ratio of 300 percent. The individual RBC ratios for Northwind Re and Tailwind Re, our special purpose financial captive insurance companies, are calculated using the NAIC Company Action Level formula and have a target level of 200 percent. The RBC ratios for Northwind Re and Tailwind Re were each approximately equal to the 200 percent target level at the end of 2008. The individual RBC ratio for each of our insurance subsidiaries is above the range that would require state regulatory action. Debt At December 31, 2008, we had long-term debt, including senior secured notes and junior subordinated debt securities, totaling $2,259.4 million and short-term debt of $190.5 million. Short-term debt consisted of $132.2 million 5.859% senior notes due May 2009 and $58.3 million of reverse repurchase agreements. The reverse repurchase agreements were entered into during the fourth quarter of 2008, with a weighted average interest rate of 2.71 percent and a maturity date of January 20, 2009. Our leverage ratio, when calculated excluding the non-recourse debt and associated capital of Tailwind Holdings and Northwind Holdings, was 21.5 percent at December 31, 2008, compared to 21.4 percent at December 31, 2007. Our leverage ratio, when calculated using consolidated debt to total consolidated capital, was 26.6 percent at December 31, 2008 compared to 26.4 percent at December 31, 2007. We monitor our compliance with our debt covenants. There are no significant financial covenants associated with any of our outstanding debt obligations. A ratings downgrade from either S&P or Moody with respect to the shadow or underlying debt rating on the non-recourse debt issued by Tailwind Holdings or Northwind Holdings could cause an increase in the fee paid to the third party guarantor on those debt issuances but would not cause a breach. We remain in compliance with all debt covenants and have not observed any current trends that would cause a breach of any debt covenants. Purchases and Retirement of Debt During 2008, we retired the remaining $175.0 million of our 5.997% senior notes. During 2008, we made principal payments of $59.3 million and $10.0 million on our senior secured non-recourse variable rate notes issued by Northwind Holdings and Tailwind Holdings, respectively. We also purchased and retired $36.6 million of our 6.85% senior debentures due 2015 and $17.8 million of our 5.859% senior notes due May 2009. 99 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements In 2007, we purchased and retired $17.5 million of our outstanding 6.75% notes scheduled to mature in 2028. Pursuant to a cash tender offer, we purchased and retired $23.5 million aggregate liquidation amount of the 7.405% junior subordinated debt securities due 2038; $99.9 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.625% notes due 2011; $210.5 million aggregate principal amount of the 7.375% notes due 2032; and $66.1 million aggregate principal amount of the 6.75% notes due 2028. We also called and retired all $150.0 million principal amount of our outstanding 7.25% notes scheduled to mature in 2032. Also in 2007, in open market transactions, we purchased $34.5 million of our outstanding 6.85% notes due 2015 and $17.5 million of our outstanding senior secured notes issued by Tailwind Holdings. In February 2007, the scheduled remarketing of the senior note element of the 2004 units occurred, as stipulated by the terms of the original offering, and we reset the interest rate of $300.0 million of senior notes due May 15, 2009 to 5.859%. We purchased $150.0 million of the senior notes in the remarketing which were subsequently retired. In May 2007, we settled the purchase contract element of the units by issuing 17.7 million shares of common stock. We received proceeds of approximately $300.0 million from the transaction. In 2006, pursuant to a cash tender offer, we purchased and retired $50.0 million aggregate liquidation amount of our 7.405% junior subordinated debt securities due 2038 and $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 7.625% notes due 2011. Also in 2006, in open market transactions, we purchased $32.0 million of our outstanding 6.85% notes due 2015. In February 2006, the scheduled remarketing of the senior note element of the 2003 units occurred, as stipulated by the terms of the original offering, and we reset the interest rate on $575.0 million of senior notes due May 15, 2008 to 5.997%. We purchased $400.0 million of the senior notes in the remarketing which were subsequently retired. In May 2006, we settled the purchase contract element of the units by issuing 43.3 million shares of common stock. We received proceeds of approximately $575.0 million from the transaction. Issuance of Debt In 2007, Northwind Holdings issued $800.0 million floating rate, insured, senior, secured notes in a private offering. Recourse for the payment of principal, interest, and other amounts due on the notes will be limited to the assets of Northwind Holdings, consisting primarily of the stock of its sole subsidiary Northwind Re, a Vermont special purpose financial captive insurance company. Northwind Holdings ability to meet its payment obligations under the notes will be dependent principally upon its receipt of dividends from Northwind Re. The ability of Northwind Re to pay dividends to Northwind Holdings will depend on its satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the reinsured claims of Provident, Paul Revere and Unum America (the ceding insurers) reinsured by Northwind Re. None of Unum Group, the ceding insurers, Northwind Re or any other affiliate of Northwind Holdings is an obligor or guarantor on the notes. The balance outstanding on these notes was $740.7 million at December 31, 2008. In 2006, Tailwind Holdings issued $130.0 million floating rate, insured, senior, secured notes in a private offering. Recourse for the payment of principal, interest, and other amounts due on the notes will be limited to the assets of Tailwind Holdings, consisting primarily of the stock of its sole subsidiary Tailwind Re, a South Carolina special purpose financial captive insurance company. Tailwind Holdings ability to meet its payment obligations under the notes will be dependent principally upon its receipt of dividends from Tailwind Re. The ability of Tailwind Re to pay dividends to Tailwind Holdings will depend on its satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the reinsured claims of Unum America reinsured by Tailwind Re. None of Unum Group, Unum America, Tailwind Re or any other affiliate of Tailwind Holdings is an obligor or guarantor on the notes. The balance outstanding on these notes was $102.5 million at December 31, 2008. In 2005, Unum Group repatriated $454.8 million in unremitted foreign earnings from its U.K. subsidiaries, and as part of its repatriation plan, issued $400.0 million of 6.85% senior debentures due November 15, 2015 in a private offering. The aggregate principal amount outstanding was $296.7 million at December 31, 2008. 100 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements In 2002, Unum Group completed two long-term offerings, issuing $250.0 million of 7.375% senior debentures due June 15, 2032 and $150.0 million of 7.250% public income notes due June 15, 2032. The public income notes were called and retired in 2007 as previously discussed. The 7.375% notes have an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $39.5 million at December 31, 2008. In 2001, Unum Group issued $575.0 million of 7.625% senior notes due March 1, 2011. The aggregate principal amount outstanding was $225.1 million at December 31, 2008. In 1998, Unum Group completed public offerings of $200.0 million of 7.25% senior notes due March 15, 2028, $200.0 million of 7.0% senior notes due July 15, 2018, and $250.0 million of 6.75% senior notes due December 15, 2028. None of these amounts have been reduced other than the 6.75% notes, which have an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $166.4 million at December 31, 2008. In 1998, Provident Financing Trust I (the trust) issued $300.0 million of 7.405% capital securities in a public offering. These capital securities, which mature on March 15, 2038, are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Unum Group, have a liquidation value of $1,000 per capital security, and have a mandatory redemption feature under certain circumstances. Unum Group issued 7.405% junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, which mature on March 15, 2038, to the trust in connection with the capital securities offering. The securities issued by the trust have an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $226.5 million at December 31, 2008. Unum Group has debt securities with an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $62.0 million which were initially issued in three separate series in 1990, 1993, and 1996, pursuant to an indenture dated September 15, 1990. The notes are fixed maturity rate notes with fixed maturity dates ranging between nine months to thirty years from the issuance date. Credit Facility On December 8, 2008, we entered into $250.0 million unsecured revolving credit facility. Borrowings under the facility are for general corporate uses and are subject to financial covenants, negative covenants, and events of default that are customary. The facility has a 364 day tenor and a one year term out option. The facility provides for interest rates based on either the prime rate or LIBOR, as adjusted. Within this facility is a $100.0 million letter of credit sub-limit. At December 31, 2008, there were no amounts outstanding on the facility. Our previously existing $400.0 million credit facility expired as scheduled during 2008. Although we believe that maintenance of the unsecured revolving credit facility provides an important source for contingent liquidity, we do not anticipate the need to access funds through the facility as we are able to meet short-term liquidity needs from operating cash flows. Our credit facility contains financial covenants regarding our leverage, net worth, interest coverage, issuer credit rating, and risk-based capital position. We do not anticipate any violation of those covenants. However, if economic conditions worsen and we incur unexpected losses, we could violate certain of the financial covenants imposed by the credit facility and lose access to available funds through that facility. Shelf Registration We have a shelf registration, which became effective in December 2008, with the Securities and Exchange Commission to issue various types of securities, including common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depository shares, stock purchase contracts, units and warrants, or preferred securities of wholly-owned finance trusts. If utilized, the shelf registration will enable us to raise funds from the offering of any individual security covered by the shelf registration as well as any combination thereof, subject to market conditions and our capital needs. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. 101 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Commitments The following table summarizes contractual obligations and our reinsurance recoverable by period as of December 31, 2008 (in millions of dollars). Excluded from the table are tax liabilities of approximately $163.2 million for which we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of potential cash settlements, if any, with taxing authorities. Total In 1 Year or Less After 1 Year up to 3 Years After 3 Years up to 5 Years After 5 Years Payments Due Short-term Debt $ 193.4 $ 193.4 $ - $ - $ - Long-term Debt 4,926.3 143.1 497.1 251.9 4,034.2 Policyholder Liabilities 39,293.6 4,291.0 6,418.8 4,952.7 23,631.1 Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits 2,156.1 104.0 187.3 194.2 1,670.6 Payable for Collateral Under Derivative Financial Instruments 174.3 174.3 - - - Miscellaneous Liabilities 612.0 576.2 4.6 6.1 25.1 Operating Leases 95.6 26.6 37.5 18.0 13.5 Purchase Obligations 64.8 60.5 4.3 - - Total $ 47,516.1 $ 5,569.1 $ 7,149.6 $ 5,422.9 $ 29,374.5 Receipts Due Reinsurance Recoverable $ 7,636.1 $ 322.1 $ 577.0 $ 577.0 $ 6,160.0 Short-term and long-term debt includes contractual principal and interest payments and therefore exceeds the amount shown in the consolidated balance sheet. See Note 8 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. Policyholder liability maturities and the related reinsurance recoverable represent the projected payout of the current inforce policyholder liabilities and the expected cash inflows from reinsurers for liabilities ceded and therefore incorporate uncertainties as to the timing and amount of claim payments. We utilize extensive liability modeling to project future cash flows from the inforce business. The primary assumptions used to project future cash flows are claim incidence rates for mortality and morbidity, claim resolution rates, persistency rates, and interest rates. These cash flows are discounted to determine the current value of the projected claim payments. The timing and amount of payments on policyholder liabilities may vary significantly from the projections above. See our previous discussion of asset/liability management under Investments contained in this Item 7. Pensions and other postretirement benefit obligations include our defined benefit pension and postretirement plans for our employees, including non-qualified pension plans. Pension plan obligations, other than the non-qualified plans, represent our contributions to the pension plans. Amounts in the one year or less category equal our planned contributions within the next 12 months. The remaining years contributions are projected based on the expected future contributions as required under ERISA. Non-qualified pension plan and other postretirement benefit obligations represent the expected benefit payments related to these plans, discounted with respect to interest and reflecting expected future service, as appropriate. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 and Critical Accounting Estimates contained in this Item 7 for additional information. 102 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Payable for collateral represents the obligation to return unrestricted cash collateral received from our counterparties in derivative transactions. The timing of the return of the collateral is uncertain and is therefore included in the one year or less category. See Note 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. Miscellaneous liabilities include commissions due and accrued, deferred compensation liabilities, state premium taxes payable, amounts due to reinsurance companies, accounts payable, fair value of derivative obligations, and various other liabilities that represent contractual obligations. Obligations where the timing of the payment was uncertain were included in the one year or less category. Operating leases include noncancelable obligations on certain office space and equipment. Purchase obligations include commitments of $37.8 million to fund certain of our investments in private placement securities and partnerships and $4.1 million for commercial mortgage loan originations. These are shown in the table above based on the expiration date of the commitments. The funds will be due upon satisfaction of contractual notice from the partnership trustee or issuer of the private placement securities or at closing of the mortgage loans. The amounts may or may not be funded. Also included are noncancelable obligations with outside parties for computer data processing services and related functions and software maintenance agreements. The aggregate obligation remaining under these agreements was $22.9 million at December 31, 2008. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements As noted in the preceding discussion, we have operating lease commitments and purchase obligations totaling $95.6 million and $64.8 million, respectively, at December 31, 2008. We maintain a committed and unsecured credit facility and letters of credit. See Debt contained in this item 7 for further description of this arrangement. As part of our regular investing strategy, we receive collateral from unaffiliated third parties through transactions which include both securities lending and also short-term agreements to purchase securities with the agreement to resell them at a later specified date. For both types of transactions, we require that a minimum of 102 percent of the fair value of the securities loaned or securities purchased under repurchase agreements be maintained as collateral. Generally, cash is received as collateral under these agreements. In the event that securities are received as collateral, we are not permitted to sell or re-post them. We also post our fixed maturity securities as collateral to unaffiliated third parties through transactions including both securities lending and short-term agreements to sell securities with the agreement to repurchase them at a later specified date. At December 31, 2008, the carrying value of fixed maturity securities posted as collateral to third parties under these programs was $80.6 million. To help limit the credit exposure of the derivatives, we enter into master netting agreements with our counterparties whereby contracts in a gain position can be offset against contracts in a loss position. We also typically enter into bilateral, cross-collateralization agreements with our counterparties to help limit the credit exposure of the derivatives. These agreements require the counterparty in a loss position to submit acceptable collateral with the other counterparty in the event the net loss position meets or exceeds an agreed upon amount. Our current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position less collateral held, was $37.7 million at December 31, 2008. We post fixed maturity securities as collateral to our counterparties rather than cash. The carrying value of fixed maturity securities posted as collateral to our counterparties was $107.9 million at December 31, 2008. Our derivatives counterparties have posted non-cash collateral in various segregated custody accounts to which we have a security interest in the event of counterparty default. This collateral, which is not reflected in the table above, had a market value of $174.6 million at December 31, 2008. 103 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements Ratings AM Best, Fitch, Moody s, and S&P are among the third parties that assign issuer credit ratings to Unum Group and financial strength ratings to our insurance subsidiaries. Issuer credit ratings reflect an agency opinion of the overall financial capacity of a company to meet its senior debt obligations. Financial strength ratings are specific to each individual insurance subsidiary and reflect each rating agency view of the overall financial strength (capital levels, earnings, growth, investments, business mix, operating performance, and market position) of the insuring entity and its ability to meet its obligations to policyholders. Both the issuer credit ratings and financial strength ratings incorporate quantitative and qualitative analyses by rating agencies and are routinely reviewed and updated on an ongoing basis. We compete based in part on the financial strength ratings provided by rating agencies. A downgrade of our financial strength ratings can be expected to adversely affect us and could potentially, among other things, adversely affect our relationships with distributors of our products and services and retention of our sales force, negatively impact persistency and new sales, particularly large case group sales and individual sales, and generally adversely affect our ability to compete. A downgrade in the issuer credit rating assigned to Unum Group can be expected to adversely affect our cost of capital or our ability to raise additional capital. The table below reflects the issuer credit ratings for Unum Group and the financial strength ratings for each of our traditional insurance subsidiaries as of the date of this filing. AM Best Fitch Moody S&P Issuer Credit Ratings bbb- (Good) BBB- (Good) Ba1 (Speculative) BBB- (Good) Financial Strength Ratings Provident Life & Accident A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) A-(Strong) Provident Life & Casualty A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Not Rated Not Rated Unum Life of America A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) A- (Strong) First Unum Life A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) A- (Strong) Colonial Life & Accident A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) A- (Strong) Paul Revere Life A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) A- (Strong) Paul Revere Variable A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) Not Rated Unum Limited A- (Excellent) Not Rated Not Rated A- (Strong) We maintain an ongoing dialogue with the four rating agencies that evaluate us in order to inform them of progress we are making regarding our strategic objectives and financial plans, as well as other pertinent issues. A significant component of our communications involves an annual review meeting; included as well are other meetings not limited to quarterly updates regarding our business. During the second quarter of 2008, we held our annual review meetings with S&P and Moody s. In the fourth quarter 2008, we held our annual review meetings with AM Best and Fitch. On January 29, 2008, AM Best reaffirmed the ratings of Unum Group and its operating subsidiaries and upgraded the company outlook from negative to stable. The agency revised outlook was attributed to our increased financial flexibility, the quality of our investment portfolio, the operational execution of our operating segments, and the completion of the claim reassessment process. On February 4, 2008, Fitch revised its outlook for Unum Group and its operating subsidiaries to positive from stable, citing our progress in increasing profitability and decreasing risk along with our improved capitalization levels as the basis for the upgrade. On February 14, 2008, Moody revised its outlook for Unum Group and its operating subsidiaries to stable from negative, basing its revision on the overall improvement in our financial flexibility. 104 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements On July 17, 2008, S&P raised its counterparty credit and senior unsecured debt rating on Unum Group from BB+ to BBB- and raised its counterparty credit and financial strength ratings on Unum Group insurance subsidiaries from BBB+ to A- . S&P stated that the rating actions were reflective of the maintenance of our market position, the improved insurance risk profile of the company, our operating profitability, the enhanced investments quality of our portfolio, and our stronger capitalization through statutory earnings. Coincident with the ratings action, the company outlook from S&P was revised from positive to stable. There have been no other changes in any of the rating agencies outlook statements or ratings during 2008 or prior to the date of this filing. Agency ratings are not directed toward the holders of our securities and are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities. Each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and each rating should be regarded as an independent assessment, not conditional on any other rating. Given the dynamic nature of the ratings process, changes by these or other rating agencies may or may not occur in the near-term. Based on our ongoing dialogue with the rating agencies concerning our improved insurance risk profile, our financial flexibility, our operating performance, and the quality of our investment portfolio, we do not expect any negative actions from any of the four rating agencies related to either Unum Group current issuer credit ratings or the financial strength ratings of its insurance subsidiaries. However, in the event that we are unable to meet the rating agency specific guideline values to maintain our current ratings, including but not limited to maintenance of our capital management metrics at the threshold values stated and maintenance of our financial flexibility and operational consistency, we could be placed on a negative credit watch, with a potential for a downgrade to both our issuer credit ratings and our financial strength ratings. See Ratings contained herein in Item 1 and Risk Factors contained herein in Item 1A for further discussion. 105 Table of Contents Index to Financial Statements 
