CIK: 5513
Company Name: UNUM GROUP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2014-02-26


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The discussion and analysis presented in this section should be read in conjunction with the "Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" included below the Table of Contents, "Risk Factors" included in Item 1A, "Selected Financial Data" included in Item 6, and the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Item 8. Executive Summary Throughout 2013, we remained focused on profitable top-line growth in select markets and a disciplined investment strategy, as we continued to drive effectiveness in our operating performance and to generate consistent, sustainable capital available for deployment. A discussion of our operating performance and capital management follows. 2013 Operating Performance and Capital Management For 2013, we reported net income of $858.1 million , or $3.23 per diluted common share, compared to net income of $894.4 million , or $3.17 per diluted common share, in 2012. Included in these results are net realized investment gains and losses and non-operating retirement-related gains or losses. Also included are fourth quarter 2013 adjustments for a reserve increase related to unclaimed death benefits ($95.5 million before tax and $62.1 million after tax, or $0.24 per diluted common share) and a reserve reduction related to group life waiver of premium benefits ($85.0 million before tax and $55.2 million after tax, or $0.21 per diluted common share). Adjusting for these items, after-tax operating income was $882.5 million , or $3.32 per diluted common share, in 2013, compared to $887.5 million , or $3.15 per diluted common share, in 2012. Total operating revenue, which excludes net realized investment gains and losses, was 1.1 percent lower in 2013 relative to 2012, with slight declines in both premium income and net investment income. Total operating income, excluding net realized investment gains and losses, non-operating retirement-related gains or losses, and income taxes, decreased by 0.7 percent compared to 2012. Operating income, when also excluding the 2013 reserve adjustments related to unclaimed death benefits and group life waiver of premium benefits, increased slightly relative to 2012, with favorable earnings in all of our segments other than our Corporate segment. Earnings per share were also favorably impacted by our capital management strategy of returning capital to shareholders through repurchases of our common stock. See additional information in "2013 Unclaimed Death Benefits Reserve Increase," "2013 Group Life Waiver of Premium Benefit Reserve Reduction," "Consolidated Operating Results," and "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" contained herein in Item 7. Our Unum US segment reported an increase in operating income, including the 2013 reserve adjustments related to unclaimed death benefits and group life waiver of premium benefits, of 2.5 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Operating income excluding these reserve adjustments increased 1.4 percent, with growth in premium income and overall favorable risk results. Premium income increased 1.4 percent in 2013 compared to 2012, as we believe the weak pace of economic growth, low levels of employment growth, the competitive environment, and the distraction caused by political instability and the implementation of healthcare reform continued to pressure our sales and premium income growth throughout 2013. The benefit ratio for our Unum US segment for 2013 was 71.3 percent, or 71.6 percent excluding the reserve adjustments, compared to 72.7 percent in 2012. Unum US sales decreased 2.0 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Although persistency declined slightly during 2013 relative to 2012, our persistency remains strong and is generally consistent with our expectations. Our Unum UK segment reported an increase in operating income, as measured in Unum UK's local currency, of 1.7 percent in 2013 compared to 2012, with overall favorable risk results. Premium income in local currency declined 18.8 percent in 2013 relative to 2012 due primarily to reinsurance agreements entered into effective January 1, 2013 to cede an additional portion of our group life business. The reinsurance agreements significantly decreased premium income and benefit payments for group life during 2013 and also reduced volatility in this line of business. The decline in the benefit ratio for Unum UK to 74.3 percent in 2013 from 77.9 percent, in 2012 was due primarily to improved risk results in the group life product line. Unum UK sales in 2013 decreased 18.7 percent, in local currency, in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to lower group life sales as we continued to execute our plans to improve new business pricing and reposition our group life business for better margins and greater stability. Persistency declined, as expected, primarily as a result of pursuing rate increases on renewing business. 32 Our Colonial Life segment reported a decrease in operating income, including the 2013 reserve increase related to unclaimed death benefits, of 3.5 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. Operating income excluding this reserve adjustment increased 3.9 percent in 2013, with higher operating revenue and stable risk results. Premium income grew 3.2 percent in 2013 compared to 2012. The 2013 benefit ratio for Colonial Life was 54.1 percent, and excluding the reserve increase was 52.5 percent, consistent with the level of 2012. Colonial Life sales increased 1.6 percent in 2013 compared to 2012, driven by higher large case commercial market sales. Persistency in 2013 declined slightly but remains strong for all lines of business. Our Closed Block segment reported an increase in operating income of 14.6 percent in 2013 relative to 2012. Net investment income increased 3.4 percent in 2013 compared to 2012 due to higher invested asset levels. Risk results in 2013 were slightly favorable for both individual disability and long-term care relative to the prior year. Our investment portfolio continues to perform well, and our invested asset quality remains strong. The net unrealized gain on our fixed maturity securities was $4.1 billion at December 31, 2013 compared to $7.2 billion at December 31, 2012, with the decline due primarily to an increase in U.S. Treasury rates during 2013. We believe our capital and financial positions are strong. At December 31, 2013, the risk-based capital (RBC) ratio for our traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was approximately 405 percent, compared to 396 percent at December 31, 2012. During 2013, we repurchased 11.2 million shares of Unum Group common stock at a cost of $318.6 million under our share repurchase program. Cash equivalents and marketable securities held at Unum Group and our other intermediate holding companies are a significant source of liquidity for us and were approximately $514 million at December 31, 2013, relative to $805 million at December 31, 2012. The decline was due primarily to repurchases of our common stock and a capital contribution related to our 2013 re-domestication of a captive reinsurance subsidiary. 2013 Unclaimed Death Benefits Reserve Increase Beginning in 2011, a number of state regulators began requiring insurers to cross-check specified insurance policies with the Social Security Administration Death Master File to identify potential matches. If a potential match was identified, insurers were requested to determine if benefits were due, locate beneficiaries, and make payments where appropriate. We initiated this process where requested, and in 2012 we began implementing this process in all states on a forward-looking basis. We believe adopting this process, which reflects an evolving regulatory and industry practice, is in the best interest of our customers. Therefore, in addition to implementing this on a forward-looking basis, in 2013 we began an initiative to search for potential claims from previous years. During the fourth quarter of 2013, we completed our assessment of benefits which we estimate will be paid under this initiative, and as such, established additional reserves for payment of these benefits. Claim reserves were increased $49.1 million for Unum US group life, $26.3 million for Unum US voluntary life, and $20.1 million for Colonial Life voluntary life, for a total reserve increase of $95.5 million. These reserve adjustments decreased net income $62.1 million. Although the legal and regulatory environment continues to evolve, we believe our decision to adopt this claims practice and establish additional reserves is in the best interests of our customers. 2013 Group Life Waiver of Premium Benefit Reserve Reduction Within our Unum US segment, we offer group life insurance coverage which consists primarily of renewable term life insurance and includes a provision for waiver of premium, if disabled. The group life waiver of premium benefit (group life waiver) provides for continuation of life insurance coverage when an insured, or the employer on behalf of the insured, is no longer paying premium because the employee is not actively at work due to a disability. The group life waiver claim reserve is the present value of future anticipated death benefits reflecting the probability of death while remaining disabled. Claim reserves are calculated using assumptions based on past experience adjusted for current trends and any other factors that would modify past experience and are subject to revision as current claim experience emerges and alters our view of future expectations. The two fundamental assumptions in the development of the group life waiver reserve are mortality and recovery. Our emerging experience and that which continues to emerge within the industry indicate an increase in life expectancies, which decreases the ultimate anticipated death benefits to be paid under the group life waiver benefit. Emerging experience also reflects an improvement in claim recovery rates, which also lessens the likelihood of payment of a death benefit while the insured is disabled. 33 During the fourth quarter of 2013, we completed a review of our assumptions and modified our mortality and claim recovery assumptions for our Unum US group life waiver reserves and, as a result, reduced the applicable claim reserves by $85.0 million and increased net income $55.2 million. 2013 Retirement Benefit Changes In 2013, we adopted plan amendments which freeze participation and benefit accruals in our defined benefit pension plans in the U.S. and U.K., effective December 31, 2013 for the U.S. plans and June 30, 2014 for the U.K. plan. As a result of these plan amendments we recognized a net before-tax curtailment gain of $3.0 million during 2013. Because the amendments eliminate all future service accruals subsequent to the effective dates of the amendments, we were also required to remeasure the benefit obligations of our pension plans, which decreased our net pension liability approximately $330 million during 2013, with a corresponding increase in other comprehensive income, less applicable income tax of approximately $115 million. Concurrent with our amendments to our defined benefit pension plans, we adopted amendments to increase the benefits under our defined contribution plans commensurate with the effective dates of the pension plan amendments. Further discussion is included in "Consolidated Operating Results," "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures," "Segment Results," "Investments," and "Liquidity and Capital Resources" contained in this Item 7 and in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. 2011 Long-term Care Strategic Review Following a comprehensive and strategic review of our long-term care business, in February 2012 we announced that we would discontinue selling group long-term care. We discontinued selling individual long-term care during 2009. As part of the strategic review, and as is typical in the fourth quarter of each year, we analyzed our reserve assumptions for long-term care in conjunction with our annual loss recognition testing. We generally perform loss recognition tests on our deferred acquisition costs and policy reserves in the fourth quarter of each year, but more frequently if appropriate, using best estimate assumptions as of the date of the test. Included in the analysis was a review of our reserve discount rate assumptions and mortality and morbidity assumptions. Our analysis of reserve discount rate assumptions considered the significant decline in long-term interest rates which occurred late in 2011. We also considered an updated industry study for long-term care experience which was made available mid-year 2011 from the Society of Actuaries. Our analysis of this study, which was completed during the fourth quarter of 2011, showed that lower termination rates than we had previously assumed were beginning to emerge in industry and in our own company experience. Based on our analysis, as of December 31, 2011 we lowered the discount rate assumption to reflect the low interest rate environment and our expectation of future investment portfolio yield rates. We also changed our mortality assumptions to reflect emerging experience due to an increase in life expectancies which increases the ultimate number of people who will utilize long-term care benefits and also lengthens the amount of time a claimant receives long-term care benefits. We changed our morbidity assumptions to reflect emerging industry experience as well as our own company experience. While our morbidity experience is still emerging and is not fully credible, we modified our assumptions to align more closely with the recently published industry study. Using our revised best estimate assumptions, as of December 31, 2011 we determined that deferred acquisition costs of $196.0 million were not recoverable and that our policy and claim reserves should be increased by $573.6 million to reflect our current estimate of future benefit obligations. These charges decreased our net income $500.3 million. 2011 Claim Reserve Increase for Individual Disability Closed Block Business Claim reserves supporting our individual disability closed block of business are calculated using assumptions based on actual experience believed to be currently appropriate. Claim reserves are subject to revision as current claim experience emerges and alters our view of future expectations. Claim resolution rates, which measure the resolution of claims from recovery, deaths, settlements, and benefit expirations, are very sensitive to operational and environmental changes and can be volatile. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business. We are now able, with a higher degree of confidence, to assess our own experience for older ages in our long duration lifetime claim block as our data has become credible. There is very little industry experience for lifetime disability benefits, as our insurance companies were the primary disability companies in the insurance industry at the time lifetime disability benefits were offered. These benefits were offered during the 1980s and 1990s, recent enough such that claimants are just reaching the older ages and providing us with data to build our claim experience base. Emerging experience indicates a longer life expectancy for our older age, longer duration disabled claimants, which lengthens the time a claimant receives disability benefits. As a result of this experience, as of December 31, 2011 we adjusted our mortality assumption within our claim resolution rate assumption and, as a result, increased our claim reserves for our individual disability closed block of business by $183.5 million and decreased net income $119.3 million. 34 Outlook for 2014 We believe our disciplined approach to providing financial protection products at the workplace puts us in a position of strength as we seek to capitalize on the growing and largely unfilled need for our products and services. While we anticipate the environment for 2014 will be somewhat similar to modestly improving from 2013, with below-average economic growth, relatively low interest rates, and continued political uncertainty, we have strategies in place which we believe will help us navigate this environment. We believe the need for our products and services remains strong, and we intend to continue protecting our solid margins and returns through our pricing and risk actions. During 2014, we will continue to invest in our infrastructure and our employees, with a focus on quality and simplification of processes and product offerings. Our strategy will be centered on maintaining a strong customer focus while providing an innovative product portfolio of financial protection choices to deepen employee coverages, broaden e mployer relationships, and open new markets. We believe that consistent operating results, combined with the implementation of strategic initiatives and the effective deployment of capital, should allow us to meet our long-term financial objectives. Critical Accounting Estimates We prepare our financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Estimates and assumptions could change in the future as more information becomes known, which could impact the amounts reported and disclosed in our financial statements. The accounting estimates deemed to be most critical to our financial position and results of operations are those related to reserves for policy and contract benefits, deferred acquisition costs, valuation of investments, pension and postretirement benefit plans, income taxes, and contingent liabilities. For additional information, refer to our significant accounting policies in Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Reserves for Policy and Contract Benefits Reserves for policy and contract benefits are our largest liabilities and represent claims that we estimate we will eventually pay t o our policyholders. The two primary categories of reserves are policy reserves for claims not yet incurred and claim reserves for claims that have been incurred or are estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to us. Reserves for policy and contract benefits equaled $ 40.5 billion and $ 39.9 billion at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively, or approximately 79.8 percent and 74.4 percent of our total liabilities, respectively. Reserves ceded to reinsurers were $ 6.8 billion and $ 6.7 billion at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively, and are reported as a reinsurance recoverable in our consolidated balance sheets. Policy Reserves Policy reserves are established in the same period we issue a policy and equal the difference between projected future policy benefits and future premiums, allowing a margin for expenses and profit. These reserves relate primarily to our traditional non interest-sensitive products, including our individual disability and voluntary benefits products in our Unum US segment; individual disability products in our Unum UK segment; disability and cancer and critical illness policies in our Colonial Life segment; and individual disability, long-term care, and other products in our Closed Block segment. The reserves are calculated based on assumptions that were appropriate at the date the policy was issued and are not subsequently modified unless the policy reserves become inadequate (i.e. loss recognition occurs). Persistency assumptions are based on our actual historical experience adjusted for future expectations. Claim incidence and claim resolution rate assumptions related to mortality and morbidity are based on actual experience or industry standards adjusted as appropriate to reflect our actual experience and future expectations. Discount rate assumptions are based on our current and expected net investment returns. In establishing policy reserves, we use assumptions that reflect our best estimate while considering the potential for adverse variances in actual future experience, which results in a total policy reserve balance that has an embedded reserve for adverse deviation. We do not, however, establish an explicit and separate reserve as a provision for adverse deviation from our assumptions. 35 We perform loss recognition tests on our policy reserves annually, or more frequently if appropriate, using best estimate assumptions as of the date of the test, without a provision for adverse deviation. We group the policy reserves for each major product line within a segment when we perform the loss recognition tests. If the policy reserves determined using these best estimate assumptions are higher than our existing policy reserves net of any deferred acquisition cost balance, the existing policy reserves are increased or deferred acquisition costs are reduced to immediately recognize the deficiency. Thereafter, the policy reserves for the product line are calculated using the same method we used for the loss recognition testing, referred to as the gross premium valuation method, wherein we use our best estimate as of the gross premium valuation (loss recognition) date rather than the initial policy issue date to determine the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay and the expected future gross premiums we will receive. Because the key policy reserve assumptions for policy persistency, mortality and morbidity, and discount rates are all locked in at policy issuance based on assumptions appropriate at that time, policy reserve assumptions are generally not changed due to a change in claim status from active to disabled subsequent to policy issuance. Therefore, we maintain policy reserves for a policy for as long as the policy remains in-force, even after a separate claim reserve is established. Incidence rates in industry standard valuation tables for policy reserves have traditionally included all lives, active and disabled. In addition, the waiver of premium provision provides funding for the policy reserve while a policyholder is disabled. As a result, the funding mechanisms and the cost of claims are aligned and require a policy reserve to be held while on claim. In addition, most policies allow for multiple occurrences of claims, and a policy reserve is consequently still maintained at the time of claim to fund any potential future claims. The policy reserves build up and release over time based on assumptions made at the time of policy issuance such that the reserve is eliminated as policyholders reach the terminal age for coverage, die, or voluntarily lapse the policy. Policy reserves for Unum US, Unum UK, and Colonial Life products, which at December 31, 2013 represented approximately 12.1 percent, 0.1 percent, and 9.9 percent, respectively, of our total gross policy reserves, are determined using the net level premium method as prescribed by GAAP. In applying this method, we use, as applicable by product type, morbidity and mortality incidence rate assumptions, claim resolution rate assumptions, and policy persistency assumptions, among others, to determine our expected future claim payments and expected future premium income. We then apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims and claim expenses we will pay and the expected future premiums we will receive, with a provision for profit allowed. Policy reserves for our Closed Block segment include certain older policy forms for individual disability, individual and group long-term care, and certain other products, all of which are no longer actively marketed. The reserves for individual disability and individual and group long-term care, which represented approximately 41.7 percent of our total gross policy reserves at December 31, 2013, are determined using the gross premium valuation method. Reserves for individual disability are based on assumptions established as of January 1, 2004, the date of loss recognition. Reserves for long-term care are based on assumptions established as of December 31, 2011, the date of loss recognition. Key assumptions are persistency, mortality, claim incidence, claim resolution rates, commission rates, and maintenance expense rates. We apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay as well as the expected future premiums we will receive, with no provision for future profit. The interest rate is based on our expected net investment returns on the investment portfolio supporting the reserves for these blocks of business. Under the gross premium valuation method, we do not include an embedded provision for the risk of adverse deviation from these assumptions. Gross premium valuation assumptions do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient. We perform loss recognition tests on the policy reserves for this block of business annually, or more frequently if appropriate. Policy reserves for certain other products, excluding individual disability and individual and group long-term care, which are no longer actively marketed and are reported in our Closed Block segment represent $ 5.8 billion on a gross basis, or approximately 36.2 percent of our total policy reserves. We have ceded $4.6 billion of these other products' policy reserves to reinsurers. The ceded reserve balance is reported in our consolidated balance sheets as a reinsurance recoverable. We continue to service a block of group pension products, which we have not ceded, and the policy reserves for these products are based on expected mortality rates and retirement rates. Expected future payments are discounted at interest rates reflecting the anticipated investment returns for the assets supporting the liabilities. Claim Reserves Claim reserves are established when a claim is incurred or is estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported (IBNR) to us an d, as prescribed by GAAP, equals our long-term best estimate of the present value of the liability for future claim payments and claim adjustment expenses. A claim reserve is based on actual known facts regarding the claim, such as the benefits available under the applicable policy, the covered benefit period, and the age and occupation of the claimant, as well as assumptions derived from our actual historical experience and expected future changes in experience for factors such as the claim duration and discount rate. Reserves for IBNR claims, similar to incurred claim reserves, include our assumptions for 36 claim duration and discount rates but because we do not yet know the facts regarding the specific claims, are also based on historical incidence rate assumptions, including claim reporting patterns, the average cost of claims, and the expected volumes of incurred claims. Our incurred claim reserves and IBNR claim reserves do not include any provision for the risk of adverse deviation from our assumptions. Claim reserves, unlike policy reserves, are subject to revision as current claim experience and projections of future factors affecting claim experience change. Each quarter we review our emerging experience to ensure that our claim reserves are appropriate. If we believe, based on our actual experience and our view of future events, that our long-term assumptions need to be modified, we adjust our reserves accordingly with a charge or credit to our current period income. Multiple estimation methods exist to establish claim reserve liabilities, with each method having its own advantages and disadvantages. Available reserving methods utilized to calculate claim reserves include the tabular reserve method, the paid development method, the incurred loss development method, the count and severity method, and the expected claim cost method. No single method is better than the others in all situations and for all product lines. The estimation methods we have chosen are those that we believe produce the most reliable reserves. Claim reserves supporting our Unum US group and individual disability product lines and our Closed Block individual disability and individual and group long-term care product lines represent approximately 35.3 percent and 47.2 percent, respectively, of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2013. We use a tabular reserve methodology for group and individual long-term disability and group and individual long-term care claims that have been reported. Under the tabular reserve methodology, reserves for reported claims are based on certain characteristics of the actual reported claimants, such as age, length of time disabled, and medical diagnosis. We believe the tabular reserve method is the most accurate to calculate long-term liabilities and allows us to use the most available known facts about each claim. IBNR claim reserves for our long-term products are calculated using the count and severity method using historical patterns of the claims to be reported and the associated claim costs. For Unum US group short-term disability products, an estimate of the value of future payments to be made on claims already submitted, as well as IBNR claims, is determined in aggregate rather than on the individual claimant basis that we use for our long-term products, using historical patterns of claim incidence as well as historical patterns of aggregate claim resolution rates. The average length of time between the event triggering a claim under a policy and the final resolution of those claims is much shorter for these products than for our long-term liabilities and results in less estimation variability. Claim reserves supporting the Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment products represent approximately 3.7 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2013. Claim reserves for these products are related primarily to death claims reported but not yet paid, IBNR death claims, and a liability for waiver of premium benefits. The death claim reserve is based on the actual face amount to be paid, the IBNR reserve is calculated using the count and severity method, and the waiver of premium benefits reserve is calculated using the tabular reserve methodology. Claim reserves supporting our Unum UK segment represent approximately 10.0 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2013, and are calculated using generally the same methodology that we use for Unum US disability and group life reserves. The assumptions used in calculating claim reserves for this line of business are based on standard United Kingdom industry experience, adjusted for Unum UK's own experience. The majority of the Colonial Life segment lines of business have short-term benefits, which generally have less estimation variability than our long-term products because of the shorter claim payout period. Our claim reserves for Colonial Life's lines of business, which approximate 1.7 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2013, are predominantly determined using the incurred loss development method based on our own experience. The incurred loss development method uses the historical patterns of payments by loss date to predict future claim payments for each loss date. Where the incurred loss development method may not be appropriate, we estimate the incurred claims using an expected claim cost per policy or other measure of exposure. The key assumptions for claim reserves for the Colonial Life lines of business are: (1) the timing, rate, and amount of estimated future claim payments; and (2) the estimated expenses associated with the payment of claims. 37 The following table displays policy reserves, incurred claim reserves, and IBNR claim reserves by major product line, with the summation of the policy reserves and claim reserves shown both gross and net of the associated reinsurance recoverable. Incurred claim reserves represent reserves determined for each incurred claim and also include estimated amounts for litigation expenses and other expenses associated with the payment of the claims as well as provisions for claims which we estimate will be reopened for our long-term care products. IBNR claim reserves include provisions for incurred but not reported claims and a provision for reopened claims for our disability products. The IBNR and reopened claim reserves for our disability products are developed and maintained in aggregate based on historical monitoring that has only been on a combined basis. Impacting year ov er year comparability of claim reserves in the following chart are the 2013 reserve adjustments for unclaimed death benefits and group life waiver of premium benefits. See "Executive Summary" contained in this Item 7 and Note 6 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of these reserve adjustments. (in millions of dollars) December 31, 2013 Gross Total Policy Claim Reserves Reinsurance Total Reserves % Incurred IBNR % Total Ceded Net Group Disability $ % $ 6,810.3 $ 569.1 30.1 % $ 7,379.4 $ 66.6 $ 7,312.8 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 72.3 0.5 713.2 201.1 3.7 986.6 2.5 984.1 Individual Disability - Recently Issued 558.3 3.5 1,155.7 124.4 5.2 1,838.4 104.3 1,734.1 Voluntary Benefits 1,298.4 8.1 48.9 73.2 0.5 1,420.5 29.2 1,391.3 Unum US Segment 1,929.0 12.1 8,728.1 967.8 39.5 11,624.9 202.6 11,422.3 Unum UK Segment 24.9 0.1 2,286.0 171.7 10.0 2,482.6 130.1 2,352.5 Colonial Life Segment 1,577.6 9.9 274.1 134.1 1.7 1,985.8 13.9 1,971.9 Individual Disability 859.3 5.4 10,346.8 281.9 43.3 11,488.0 1,545.0 9,943.0 Long-term Care 5,791.4 36.3 865.7 94.8 3.9 6,751.9 42.6 6,709.3 Other 5,783.8 36.2 234.4 150.2 1.6 6,168.4 4,915.2 1,253.2 Closed Block Segment 12,434.5 77.9 11,446.9 526.9 48.8 24,408.3 6,502.8 17,905.5 Subtotal $ 15,966.0 100.0 % $ 22,735.1 $ 1,800.5 100.0 % 40,501.6 6,849.4 33,652.2 Adjustment to Reserves for Unrealized Gain on Securities 4,108.5 263.8 3,844.7 Consolidated $ 44,610.1 $ 7,113.2 $ 37,496.9 38 December 31, 2012 Gross Total Policy Claim Reserves Reinsurance Total Reserves % Incurred IBNR % Total Ceded Net Group Disability $ % $ 7,000.8 $ 596.0 30.9 % $ 7,596.8 $ 61.3 $ 7,535.5 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 73.8 0.5 790.1 168.1 3.9 1,032.0 1.0 1,031.0 Individual Disability - Recently Issued 557.8 3.6 1,093.2 126.0 5.0 1,777.0 91.2 1,685.8 Voluntary Benefits 1,224.3 8.0 42.4 49.4 0.4 1,316.1 28.6 1,287.5 Unum US Segment 1,855.9 12.1 8,926.5 939.5 40.2 11,721.9 182.1 11,539.8 Unum UK Segment 25.6 0.2 2,251.7 142.2 9.7 2,419.5 108.3 2,311.2 Colonial Life Segment 1,490.3 9.7 251.4 99.4 1.4 1,841.1 9.4 1,831.7 Individual Disability 985.7 6.4 10,406.2 297.3 43.6 11,689.2 1,492.7 10,196.5 Long-term Care 5,272.5 34.4 747.0 81.3 3.4 6,100.8 47.0 6,053.8 Other 5,704.5 37.2 258.8 165.7 1.7 6,129.0 4,829.9 1,299.1 Closed Block Segment 11,962.7 78.0 11,412.0 544.3 48.7 23,919.0 6,369.6 17,549.4 Subtotal $ 15,334.5 100.0 % $ 22,841.6 $ 1,725.4 100.0 % 39,901.5 6,669.4 33,232.1 Adjustment to Reserves for Unrealized Gain on Securities 6,277.5 351.5 5,926.0 Consolidated $ 46,179.0 $ 7,020.9 $ 39,158.1 Key Assumptions The calculation of policy and claim reserves involves numerous assumptions, but the primary assumptions used to calculate reserves are (1) the discount rate, (2) the claim resolution rate, and (3) the claim incidence rate for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves. Of these assumptions, our discount rate and claim resolution rate assumptions have historically had the most significant effects on our level of reserves because many of our product lines provide benefit payments over an extended period of time. 1. The discount rate , which is used in calculating both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the interest rate that we use to discount future claim payments to determine the present value. A higher discount rate produces a lower reserve. If the discount rate is higher than our future investment returns, our invested assets will not earn enough investment income to support our future claim payments. In this case, the reserves may eventually be insufficient. We set our assumptions based on our current and expected future investment yield of the assets supporting the reserves, considering current and expected future market conditions. If the investment yield on new investments that are purchased is below or above the investment yield of the existing investment portfolio, it is likely that the discount rate assumption on claims will be established to reflect the effect of the new investment yield. 2. The claim resolution rate , used for both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the probability that a disability or long-term care claim will close due to recovery or death of the insured. It is important because it is used to estimate how long benefits will be paid for a claim. Estimated resolution rates that are set too high will result in reserves that are lower than they need to be to pay the claim benefits over time. Claim resolution assumptions involve many factors, including the cause of disability, the policyholder's age, the type of contractual benefits provided, and the time since initially becoming disabled. We primarily use our own claim experience to develop our claim resolution assumptions. These assumptions are established for the probability of death and the probability of recovery from disability. Our studies review actual claim resolution experience over a number of years, with more weight placed on our experience in the more recent years. We also consider any expected future changes in claim resolution experience. 39 3. The incidence rate , used for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves, is the rate at which new claims are submitted to us. The incidence rate is affected by many factors, including the age of the insured, the insured's occupation or industry, the benefit plan design, and certain external factors such as consumer confidence and levels of unemployment. We establish our incidence assumption using a historical review of actual incidence results along with an outlook of future incidence expectations. Establishing reserve assumptions is complex and involves many factors. Reserves, particularly for policies offering insurance coverage for long-term disabilities and long-term care, are dependent on numerous assumptions other than just those presented in the preceding discussion. The impact of internal and external events, such as changes in claims operational procedures, economic trends such as the rate of unemployment and the level of consumer confidence, the emergence of new diseases, new trends and developments in medical treatments, and legal trends and legislative changes, among other factors, will influence claim incidence and resolution rates. In addition, for policies offering coverage for disability or long-term care at advanced ages, the level and pattern of mortality rates at advanced ages will impact overall benefit costs. Reserve assumptions differ by product line and by policy type within a product line. Additionally, in any period and over time, our actual experience may have a positive or negative variance from our long-term assumptions, either singularly or collectively, and these variances may offset each other. We test the overall adequacy of our reserves using all assumptions and with a long-term view of our expected experience over the life of a block of business rather than test just one or a few assumptions independently that may be aberrant ov er a short period of time. Therefore, it is not possible to bifurcate the assumptions to evaluate the sensitivity of a change in each assumption, but rather in the aggregate by product line. The following section presents an overview of our trend analysis for key assumptions and the results of variability in our assumptions, in aggregate, for the reserves which we believe are reasonably possible to have a material impact on our future financial results if actual claims yield a materially different amount than what we currently expect and have reserved for, either favorable or unfavorable. Trends in Key Assumptions Generally, we do not expect our mortality and morbidity claim incidence trends or our persistency trends to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time. We have historically experienced an increase in our group long-term disability morbidity claim incidence trends during and following a recessionary period, particularly in our Unum US operations. During 2012 and 2011, claim incidence rates for Unu m US group long-term disability were slightly elevated relative to the level of 2010, but in 2013 incidence rates improved slightly, returning to the level of 2010. We expect that claim incidence trends for Unum US group long-term disability may continue to somewhat follow general economic conditions and demographics of the general U.S. workforce. During 2013 and 2012, claims incidence was elevated for our Closed Block long-term care line of business as compared to the long-term assumptions we established at the time of loss recognition in 2011. We view the elevated incidence as temporary in nature. See "2011 Long-term Care Strategic Review" contained in this Item 7. Throughout the period 2011 to 2013, actual new money interest rates varied with the changing market conditions, and the assumptions we used to discount our reserves during this period generally trended downward slightly for all segments and product lines. In 2011, long-term interest rates declined significantly due to the European Union debt crisis and the Federal Reserve Board's actions. Interest rates improved somewhat in 2013 but continue to remain low relative to historical norms. Reserve discount rate assumptions for new policies and new claims have been adjusted to reflect our current and expected net investment returns. Changes in our average discount rate assumptions tend to occur gradually over a longer period of time because of the long-duration investment portfolio needed to support the reserves for the majority of our lines of business. During 2013, we updated our mortality and interest rate assumptions for our Closed Block group pension line of business to reflect recent trends. The updated assumptions resulted in an immaterial increase to our group pension reserves. The retirement rat e experience has remained stable and consistent with expectations. 40 Claim resolution rates have a greater chance of significant variability in a shorter period of time than our other reserve assumptions. These rates are reviewed on a quarterly basis for the death and recovery components separately. Claim resolution rates in our Unum US group and individual long-term disability product lines and our Closed Block individual disability product line have over the last several years exhibited some variability. Relative to the resolution rate we expect to experience over the life of the block of business, actual quarterly rates during 2012 and 2013 have varied by +3 and -3 percent in our Unum US group long-term disability line of business, between +8 and -10 percent in our Unum US individual disability - recently issued line of business, and between +4 and -4 percent in our Closed Block individual disability line of business. Claim resolution rates are very sensitive to operational and environmental changes and can be volatile over short periods of time. Throughout the period 2011 to 2013, our claim resolution rates were fairly consistent with or slightly favorable to our long-term assumptions. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period, both favorably and unfavorably. Regarding experience for our older age, longer duration disabled claimants in our Closed Block individual disability line of business, the claim resolution rates, primarily as pertaining to life expectancy of the insured, remained relatively consistent during 2013 and 2012 with the mortality assumptions for this particular claim block that we updated in 2011. See "2011 Claim Reserve Increase for Individual Disability Closed Block Business" contained in this Item 7. We monitor and test our reserves for adequacy relative to all of our assumptions in the aggregate. In our estimation, scenarios based on reasonably possible variations in each of our reserve assumptions, when modeled together in aggregate, could produce a potential result, either positive or negative, in our Unum US group disability line of business that would change our claim reserve balance by +/- 3.3 percent. Using our actual claim reserve balance at December 31, 2013, this variation would have resulted in an approximate change (either positive or negative) of $240 million to our claim reserves. Using the same sensitivity analysis approach for our Closed Block individual disability line of business, the claim reserve balance could potentially vary by +/- 2.3 percent of our reported balance, which at December 31, 2013, would have resulted in an approximate change (either positive or negative) of $230 million to our claim reserves. The major contributor to the variance for both the Unum US group long-term disability line of business and the Closed Block individual disability line of business is the claim resolution rate. In addition, we consider variability in our reserve assumptions related to long-term care policy reserves. These reserves are held under the gross premium valuation method with assumptions established as of December 31, 2011, the date of loss recognition. Assumptions for policy reserves do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient. As such, positive developments will result in the accumulation of reserve margin, while adverse developments would result in an additional reserve charge. Policy reserves for long-term care are based upon a number of key assumptions, and each assumption has various factors which may impact the long-term outcome. Key assumptions with respect to morbidity, mortality, persistency, interest rates, and future premium rate increases must incorporate extended views of expectations for many years into the future. Reserves are highly sensitive to these estimates. For example, a 25 basis point change in the assumed discount rate over the lifetime of this business would impact reserves by approximately $400 million, with all other factors held constant. Key assumptions and related impacts are also heavily interrelated in both their outcome and in their effects on reserves. For example, changes in the view of morbidity and mortality might be mitigated by either potential future premium rate increases and/or morbidity improvements due to general improvement in health and/or medical breakthroughs. There is potentially a wide range of outcomes for each assumption and in totality. We believe that these ranges provide a reasonable estimate of the possible changes in reserve balances for those product lines where we beli eve it is possible that variability in the assumptions, in the aggregate, could result in a material impact on our reserve levels, but we record our reserves based on our long-term best estimate. Because these product lines have long-term claim payout periods, there is a greater potential for significant variability in claim costs, either positive or negative. We closely monitor emerging experience and use these results to inform our view of long-term assumptions. Deferred Acquisition Costs (DAC) We defer incremental direct costs associated with the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance contracts and amortize (expense) these costs over the life of the related policies. Deferred costs include certain commissions, other agency compensation, selection and policy issue expenses, and field expenses. Acquisition costs that do not vary with the production of new business, uch as commissions on group products which are generally level throughout the life of the policy, are excluded from deferral. 41 Approximately 83 percent of our DAC relates to traditional non interest-sensitive products, and we amortize DAC for these products in proportion to the premium income we expect to receive over the life of the policies. DAC related to interest-sensitive policies is amortized over the lives of the policies in relation to the present value of estimated gross profits from surrender charges, mortality margins, investment returns, and expense margins. Key assumptions used in developing the future amortiz ation of DAC are persistency, premium income, and for our interest-sensitive products, mortality margins and investment returns. We use our own historical experience and expectation of the future performance of our businesses in determining our assumptions. For traditional products, the estimated premium income in the early years of the amortization period is generally higher than in the later years due to the anticipated cumulative effect of policy persistency in the early years, which results in a greater proportion of the costs being amortized in the early years of the life of the policy. During 2013, our key assumptions used to develop the future amortization of acquisition costs deferred during 2013 did not change materially from those used in 2012. Generally, we do not expect our key assumptions to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time. The following are our current assumptions regarding the length of our amortization periods, the approximate DAC balance that remains at the end of years 3, 10, and 15 as a percentage of the cost initially deferred, and our DAC balances as of December 31, 2013 and 2012. Balance Remaining as a % DAC Balances Amortization of Initial Deferral at December 31 Period Year 3 Year 10 Year 15 2013 2012 Unum US (in millions of dollars) Group Disability 6 25% 0% 0% $ 55.9 $ 47.4 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 6 30% 0% 0% 49.9 40.7 Supplemental and Voluntary: Individual Disability - Recently Issued 20 75% 50% 25% 433.4 449.1 Voluntary Benefits 15 60% 15% 0% 512.3 487.1 Unum UK Group Disability 3 7% 0% 0% 5.1 4.1 Group Life 3 7% 0% 0% 1.2 3.2 Supplemental 20 57% 17% 7% 28.0 31.5 Colonial Life Accident, Sickness, and Disability 15 46% 12% 2% 350.6 328.9 Life 25 71% 35% 17% 218.7 195.4 Cancer and Critical Illness 19 60% 27% 11% 174.1 168.1 Totals $ 1,829.2 $ 1,755.5 Amortization of DAC is adjusted to reflect actual experience for assumptions which deviate compared to the anticipated experience. Any deviations from projections may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. As an example, for our traditional products, we may experience accelerated amortization if policies terminate earlier than projected, or we may experience a slower rate of amortization if policies persist longer than projected. Our actual experience has not varied materially from our assumptions during the last three years. See Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our DAC accounting policy. 42 Fair Value of Investments All of our fixed maturity securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value. Our derivative financial instruments, including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts, are reported as either assets or liabilities and measured at fair value. We hold an immaterial amount of equity securities, which are also reported at fair value. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date and therefore represents an exit price, not an entry price. The exit price objective applies regardless of our intent and/or ability to sell the asset or transfer the liability at the measurement date. We generally use valuation techniques consistent with the market approach, and to a lesser extent, the income approach. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information from market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities and the income approach converts future amounts, such as cash flows or earnings, to a single present amount, or a discounted amount. We believe the market approach valuation technique provides more observable data than the income approach, considering the types of investments we hold. The degree of judgment utilized in measuring the fair value of financial instruments generally correlates to the level of pricing observability. Financial instruments with readily available active quoted prices or for which fair value can be measured from actively quoted prices in active markets generally have more pricing observability and less judgment utilized in measuring fair value. The market sources from which we obtain or derive the fair values of our assets and liabilities carried at market value include quoted market prices for actual trades, price quotes from third party pricing vendors, price quotes we obtain from outside brokers, matrix pricing, discounted cash flow, and observable prices for similar publicly traded or privately traded issues that incorporate the credit quality and industry sector of the issuer. Our fair value measurements could differ significantly based on the valuation technique and available inputs. Inputs to valuation techniques refer broadly to the assumptions that market participants use in pricing assets or liabilities, including assumptions about risk, for example, the risk inherent in a particular valuation technique used to measure fair value and/or the risk inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. We use observable and unobservable inputs in measuring the fair value of our financial instruments. Observable inputs are inputs that reflect the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on market data obtained from independent sources. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect our own assumptions about the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. Certain of our investments do not have readily determinable market prices and/or observable inputs or may at times be affected by the lack of market liquidity. For these securities, we use internally prepared valuations combining matrix pricing with vendor purchased software programs, including valuations based on estimates of future profitability, to estimate the fair value. Add itionally, we may obtain prices from independent third-party brokers to aid in establishing valuations for certain of these securities. Key assumptions used by us to determine fair value for these securities include risk free interest rates, risk premiums, performance of underlying collateral (if any), and other factors involving significant assumptions which may or may not reflect those of an active market. As of December 31, 2013 , the key assumptions we generally used to estimate the fair value of these types of securities included thos e listed below. Where appropriate, we have noted the assumption used for the prior period as well as the reason for the change. Risk free interest rates of 1.74 percent for five-year maturities to 3.97 percent for 30-year maturities were derived from the current yield curve for U.S. Treasury Bonds with similar maturities. This compares to interest rates of 0.72 percent for five-year maturities to 2.95 percent for 30-year maturities used at December 31, 2012 . Current Baa corporate bond spread adjustments ranging from 1.01 percent to 2.10 percent were added to the risk free rate to reflect additional credit risk and the lack of liquidity. We used spread adjustments ranging from 0.98 percent to 2.23 percent at December 31, 2012 . The changes were based on observable market spreads. Newly issued private placement securities have historically offered yield premiums higher than a similar interest rate spread on comparable newly issued public securities. Additional basis points were added as deemed appropriate for foreign investments, certain industries, and individual securities in certain industries that are considered to be of greater risk. 43 As of December 31, 2013 , approximately 6.0 percent of our fixed maturity securities were categorized as Level 1, 88.5 percent as Level 2, and 5.5 percent as Level 3. Level 1 is the highest category of the three-level fair value hierarchy classification wherein inputs are unadjusted and represent quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. The Level 2 category includes assets or liabilities valued using inputs (other than those included in the Level 1 category) that are either directly or indirectly observable for the asset or liability through correlation with market data at the measurement date and for the duration of the instrument's anticipated life. The Level 3 category is the lowest category of the fair value hierarchy and reflects the judgment of management regarding what market participants would use in pricing assets or liabilities at the measurement date using unobservable inputs to extrapolate an estimated fair value. Rapidly changing credit and equity market conditions can materially impact the valuation of securities, and the period to period changes in value can vary significantly. See Note 2 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Investment Impairments One of the significant estimates related to investments is our impairment valuation. In determining when a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, we evaluate the following factors: Whether we expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security Whether we intend to sell the security or will be required to sell the security before the recovery of its amortized cost basis Whether the security is current as to principal and interest payments The significance of the decline in value The time period during which there has been a significant decline in value Current and future business prospects and trends of earnings The valuation of the security underlying collateral Relevant industry conditions and trends relative to their historical cycles Market conditions Rating agency and governmental actions Bid and offering prices and the level of trading activity Adverse changes in estimated cash flows for securitized investments Changes in fair value subsequent to the balance sheet date Any other key measures for the related security. We evaluate available information, including the factors noted above, both positive and negative, in reaching our conclusions. In particular, we also consider the strength of the issuer balance sheet, its debt obligations and near term funding requirements, cash flow and liquidity, the profitability of its core businesses, the availability of marketable assets which could be sold to increase liquidity, its industry fundamentals and regulatory environment, and its access to capital markets. Although all available and applicable factors are considered in our analysis, our expectation of recovering the entire amortized cost basis of the security, whether we intend to sell the security, whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost, and whether the security is current on principal and interest payments are the most critical factors in determining whether impairments are other than temporary. The significance of the decline in value and the length of time during which there has been a significant decline are also important factors, but we generally do not record an impairment loss based solely on these two factors, since often other more relevant factors will impact our evaluation of a security. While determining other-than-temporary impairments is a judgmental area, we utilize a formal, well-defined, and disciplined process to monitor and evaluate our fixed income investment portfolio, supported by issuer specific research and documentation as of the end of each period. The process results in a thorough evaluation of problem investments and the recording of losses on a timely basis for investments determined to have an other-than-temporary impairment. We use a comprehensive rating system to evaluate the investment and credit risk of our mortgage loans and to identify specific properties for inspection and reevaluation. Mortgage loans are considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. We establish an allowance for probable losses on mortgage loans based on a review of individual loans, considering the value of the underlying collateral, the value of which is periodically assessed. Mortgage loans are not reported at fair value in our consolidated balance sheets unless the mortgage loan is considered impaired, in which case the impairment is recognized as a realized investment loss in our consolidated statements of income. 44 There are a number of significant risks inherent in the process of monitoring our investments for impairments and determining when and if an impairment is other than temporary. These risks and uncertainties include the following possibilities: The assessment of a borrower's ability to meet its contractual obligations will change. The economic outlook, either domestic or foreign, may be less favorable or may have a more significant impact on the borrower than anticipated, and as such, the investment may not recover in value. New information may become available concerning the security, such as disclosure of accounting irregularities, fraud, or corporate governance issues. Significant changes in credit spreads may occur in the related industry. Significant increases in interest rates may occur and may not return to levels similar to when securities were initially purchased. Adverse rating agency actions may occur. See Notes 1 and 3 o f the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans We sponsor several defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit (OPEB) plans for our employees, including non-qualified pension plans. The U.S. defined benefit pension plans comprise the majority of our total benefit obligation and pension expense. Our U.K. operation maintains a separate defined benefit plan for eligible employees. The U.S. defined benefit pension plans were closed to new entrants on December 31, 2013, and the U.K. defined benefit pension plan was closed to new entrants on December 31, 2002. In 2013, we adopted plan amendments which freeze participation and benefit accruals in our U.S. qualified and non-qualified defined benefit pension plans, effective December 31, 2013. Also in 2013, we adopted amendments to our U.K. pension plan which freeze participation in the plan effective June 30, 2014 and which reduce the maximum rate of inflation indexation from 5.0 percent to 2.5 percent for pension benefits which were earned prior to April 1997 effective at the date of adoption. Assumptions Our net periodic benefit costs and the value of our benefit obligations for these plans are determined based on a set of economic and demographic assumptions that represent our best estimate of future expected experience. Major assumptions used in accounting for these plans include the expected discount (interest) rate and the long-term rate of return on plan assets. We also use, as applicable, expected increases in compensation levels and a weighted average annual rate of increase in the per capita cost of covered benefits, which reflects a health care cost trend rate, and the U.K. pension plan also uses expected cost of living increases to plan benefits. The assumptions chosen for our pension and OPEB plans are reviewed annually, using a December 31 measurement date for each of our plans unless we are required to perform an interim remeasurement as occurred in 2013 due to our pension plans amendments. The discount rate assumptions and expected long-term rate of return assumptions have the most significant effect on our net periodic benefit costs associated with these plans. In addition to the effect of changes in our assumptions, the net periodic cost or benefit obligation under our pension and OPEB plans may change due to factors such as plan amendments, actual experience being different from our assumptions, special benefits to terminated employees, and/or changes in benefits provided under the plans. The discount rate is an interest assumption used to convert the benefit payment stream to a present value. We set the discount rate assumption at the measurement date for each of our retirement-related benefit plans to reflect the yield on a portfolio of high quality fixed income corporate debt instruments that reasonably match the timing and amounts of projected future benefits. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and increases our costs. The discount rate we used to determine our net periodic benefit costs for our U.S. pension plans for 2014 was 5.30 percent and for 2013 was 4.50 percent for the period January 1, 2013 through the date of remeasurement and 5.00 percent for the period from the date of remeasurement through December 31, 2013. The discount rate used for the net periodic benefit costs for our U.K. pension plan for 2014 was 4.40 percent and for 2013 was 4.50 percent for the period January 1, 2013 through the date of remeasurement and 4.60 percent from the date of remeasurement through December 31, 2013. The discount rate used in the net periodic benefit cost for our OPEB plan for 2014 and 2013 was 5.00 percent and 4.20 percent, respectively. 45 Regarding sensitivity analysis, reducing the discount rate assumptions by 50 basis points would have increased our 2013 pension and OPEB expenses by approximately $16.4 million, before tax, and would have increased our pension and OPEB benefit obligations by approximately $174.4 million as of December 31, 2013, resulting in an after-tax decrease in stockholders' equity of approximately $116.5 million as of December 31, 2013. An increase in the discount rate assumptions of 50 basis points would have decreased our 2013 pension and OPEB expenses by approximately $13.9 million, before tax, and would have decreased our pension and OPEB benefit obligations by approximately $156.4 million as of December 31, 2013, resulting in an after-tax increase in stockholders' equity of approximately $104.6 million as of December 31, 2013. The long-term rate of return assumption is the best estimate of the average annual assumed return that will be produced from the pension trust assets until current benefits are paid. The U.S. pension plans use a compound interest method in computing the rate of return on their pension plan assets. The investment portfolio for our U.S. qualified pension plan contains a diversified blend of domestic and international large cap, mid cap, and small cap equity securities; U.S. government and agency, corporate, and state and municipal fixed income securities; private equity direct investments, private equity funds of funds, hedge funds of funds, and cash equivalents. Assets for our U.K. pension plan are invested in pooled funds, including diversified growth funds, which invest in assets such as global equities, hedge funds, commodities, below-investment-grade fixed income securities, and currencies; as well as leveraged, interest rate, and inflation swap funds intended to broadly match part of the interest rate and inflation sensitivities of the plan's liabilities. Assets for our OPEB plan are invested primarily in life insurance contracts. We believe our investment portfolios are well diversified by asset class and sector, with no potential risk concentrations in any one category. Our expectations for the future investment returns of the asset categories are based on a combination of historical market performance, evaluations of investment forecasts obtained from external consultants and economists, and current market yields. For the U.S. pension plans, the methodology underlying the return assumption included the various elements of the expected return for each asset class such as long-term rates of return, volatility of returns, and the correlation of returns between various asset classes. The expected return for the total portfolio is calculated based on the plan's current asset allocation. Investment risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis through annual liability measurements, periodic asset/liability studies, and quarterly investment portfolio reviews. Risk tolerance is established through consideration of plan liabilities, plan funded status, and corporate financial condition. The long-term rate of return on asset assumption used in the net periodic pension costs for our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2014 and 2013 was 7.50 percent for both years. The long-term rate of return on asset assumption used for our U.K. pension plan for 2014 was 6.10 percent and for 2013 was 6.20 percent for the period from January 1, 2013 to the date of remeasurement and 6.35 percent from the date of remeasurement through December 31, 2013. The long-term rate of return on asset assumption used for our OPEB plan was 5.75 percent for both years. The actual rate of return on plan assets is determined based on the fair value of the plan assets at the beginning and the end of the period, adjusted for contributions and benefit payments. A change in the long-term rate of return on asset assumptions on the pension plan assets of +/-50 basis points would have changed our 2013 pension plan expense by approximately $7.9 million before tax, but would not materially changed our OPEB plan expense. A lower rate of return on plan assets increases our expense. Benefit Obligation and Fair Value of Plan Assets The market-related value equals the fair value of assets, determined as of the measurement date. The return on assets fully recognizes all asset gains and losses, including changes in fair value, through the measurement date. During 2013, the fair value of plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan increased $237.1 million, or approximately 17.5 percent, while the fair value of plan assets in our U.K. pension plan increased 9.9 million, or approximately 7.8 percent. Although the effect of these increases in fair value had no impact on our 2013 net periodic pension costs, the favorable rate of return on these plan assets in 2013 and the increase in the liability discount rate for the U.S. plans will have a favorable impact on our net periodic pension costs for 2014. We believe our assumptions appropriately reflect the impact of the current economic environment. 46 Our pension and OPEB plans have an aggregate unrecognized net actuarial loss of $ 368.7 million and a net unrecognized prior service credit of $ 2.4 million , which together represent the cumulative liability and asset gains and losses as well as the portion of prior service credits that have not been recognized in pension expense. As of December 31, 2013, the unrecognized net loss for these two items combined was $ 366.3 million . The unrecognized gains or losses are amortized as a component of the net benefit cost. Our 2013, 2012, and 2011 pension and OPEB expense includes $ 27.9 million , $ 43.4 million , and $28.8 million, respectively, of amortization of the unrecognized net actuarial loss and prior service credit (cost). The unrecognized net actuarial loss for our pension plans, which is $ 379.0 million at December 31, 2013, will be amortized over the average remaining life expectancy of the plan participants, which is approximately 33 years for U.S. participants and 34 years for U.K. participants, to the extent that it exceeds the 10 percent corridor, as described below. The unrecognized net actuarial gain of $ 10.3 million for our OPEB plan will be amortized over the average future working life of OPEB plan participants, estimated at five years, to the extent the loss is outside of a corridor established in accordance with GAAP. The corridor for the pension and OPEB plans is established based on the greater of 10 perce nt of the plan assets or 10 percent of the benefit obligation. At December 31, 2013, $169.1 million of the actuarial loss was outside of the corridor for the U.S. plan, and 8.7 million was outside of the corridor for the U.K. plan. At December 31, 2013, none of the actuarial gain was outside of the corridor for the OPEB plan. The fair value of plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan was $ 1,590.7 million at December 31, 2013, compared to $ 1,353.6 million at December 31, 2012. The effect of the increase in the liability discount rate and fair value of plan assets, as well as the plan amendment, contributed to the overfunded plan position of $13.4 million at December 31, 2013, compared to an underfunded position of $454.3 million at December 31, 2012. The fair value of plan assets in our OPEB plan was $ 11.4 million at December 31, 2013, compared to $ 11.5 million at December 31, 2012. These assets represent life insurance contracts to fund the life insurance benefit portion of our OPEB plan. Our OPEB plan r epresents a non-vested, non-guaranteed obligation, and current regulations do not require specific funding levels for these benefits, which are comprised of retiree life, medical, and dental benefits. It is our practice to use general assets to pay medical and dental claims as they come due in lieu of utilizing plan assets for the medical and dental benefit portions of our OPEB plan. We expect to continue to receive subsidies under the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003, based on current law, to partially offset these payments. The expected subsidy included in our consolidated balance sheets is immaterial. We discontinued offering retiree life insurance to future retirees effective December 31, 2012. We will still provide this benefit to those employees who retired prior to December 31, 2012. The fair value of plan assets in our U.K. pension plan was 136.4 million at December 31, 2013, compared to 126.5 million at December 31, 2012. The U.K. pension plan was in an overfunded position of 10.3 million and 5.3 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion. Income Taxes We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In 2011, as part of an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) settlement, we released a $4.1 million valuation allowance related to basis differences in foreign subsidiaries and net operating loss carryforwards in foreign jurisdictions for which we previously believed we would not realize a tax benefit. As of December 31, 2013 and 2012, we had no valuation allowance. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we have considered all available positive and negative evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we determine that we most likely would not be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws in a multitude of jurisdictions, both domestic and foreign. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits in various jurisdictions, and a material assessment by a governing tax authority could affect profitability. 47 GAAP prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns. The evaluation of a tax position is a two step process. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. The second step is to measure a position that satisfies the recognition threshold at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold but that now satisfy the recognition threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not recognition threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. If a previously recognized tax position is settled for an amount that is different from the amount initially measured, the difference will be recognized as a tax benefit or expense in the period the settlement is effective. See Note 7 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Contingent Liabilities On a quarterly basis, we review relevant information with respect to litigation and contingencies to be reflected in our consolidated financial statements. An estimated loss is accrued when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. It is possible that our results of operations or cash flows in a particular period could be materially affected by an ultimate unfavorable outcome of pending litigation or regulatory matters depending, in part, on our results of operations or cash flows for the particular period. See Note 14 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Accounting Developments In July 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued a proposed Accounting Standards Update (ASU) on insurance contracts that is intended to bring greater consistency to the accounting for contracts that transfer significant risk between parties and would require a current measure of insurance contracts, including the use of updated assumptions and discounting. The proposed ASU, which would supersede existing guidance on accounting for insurance contracts, calls for retrospective application and would prohibit early adoption. The proposal did not specify an effective date, but instead requested feedback on the appropriate timing. For additional information on new accounting standards and the impact, if any, on our financial position or results of operations, see Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. 48 Consolidated Operating Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Revenue Premium Income $ 7,624.7 (1.2 )% $ 7,716.1 2.7 % $ 7,514.2 Net Investment Income 2,492.1 (0.9 ) 2,515.2 (0.2 ) 2,519.6 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 6.8 (87.9 ) 56.2 N.M. (4.9 ) Other Income 230.2 1.0 227.9 (8.5 ) 249.1 Total Revenue 10,353.8 (1.5 ) 10,515.4 2.3 10,278.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 6,595.7 (1.9 ) 6,722.2 (6.8 ) 7,209.5 Commissions 909.5 (0.8 ) 917.2 4.3 879.2 Interest and Debt Expense 149.4 2.8 145.4 1.5 143.3 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (466.8 ) (0.1 ) (467.3 ) 5.6 (442.5 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 418.9 10.6 378.7 3.6 365.7 Impairment of Deferred Acquisition Costs 196.0 Compensation Expense 790.4 0.5 786.8 (2.6 ) 808.0 Other Expenses 751.5 (4.0 ) 782.9 (0.3 ) 785.5 Total Benefits and Expenses 9,148.6 (1.3 ) 9,265.9 (6.8 ) 9,944.7 Income Before Income Tax 1,205.2 (3.5 ) 1,249.5 274.9 333.3 Income Tax 347.1 (2.3 ) 355.1 N.M. 49.1 Net Income $ 858.1 (4.1 ) $ 894.4 214.7 $ 284.2 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage In describing our results, we may at times note certain items and exclude the impact on financial ratios and metrics to enhance the understanding and comparability of our operational performance and the underlying fundamentals, but this exclusion is not an indication that similar items may not recur. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" as follows for additional discussion of these items. The comparability of our financial results between years is affected by the fluctuation in the British pound sterling to dollar exchange rate. The functional currency of our U.K. operations is the British pound sterling. In periods when the pound weakens relative to the preceding period, as occurred during 2013 and 2012, translating pounds into dollars decreases current period results relative to the prior period. In periods when the pound strengthens, translating pounds into dollars increases current period results relative to the prior period. Our weighted average pound/dollar exchange rate was 1.566 , 1.584 , and 1.603 for years ended 2013, 2012, and 2011, respectively. If the 2012 and 2011 results for our U.K. operations had been translated at the exchange r ate of 2013, our operating revenue by segment in 2012 and 2011 would have been lower by approximately $10.8 million and $20.9 million, respectively, and our operating income in 2012 and 2011 would have been lower by approximately $1.4 million and $4.4 million, respectively. However, it is important to distinguish between translating and converting foreign currency. Except for a limited number of transactions, we do not actually convert pounds into dollars. As a result, we view foreign currency translation as a financial reporting item and not a reflection of operations or profitability in the U.K. Consolidated premium income for 2013 declined slightly relative to 2012. Although we experienced premium growth in our Unum US and Colonial Life segments, the level of growth remains below our long-term expectations. We believe premium growth in many of our product lines has been unfavorably impacted by the weak pace of economic growth, low levels of employment growth, the competitive environment, and the distraction caused by political instability and the implementation of healthcare reform. Offsetting the growth in premium income in Unum US and Colonial Life was a decline in premium income due to the reinsurance agreements we entered into during 2013 to cede a portion of certain product lines in Unum US individual disability - recently issued and in Unum UK. Consolidated premium income for 2012 increased relative to 2011 and included premium growth for each of our three principal operating business segments, although the growth was unfavorably impacted by the same factors pressuring 2013 growth. Premium income year over year continued to decline, as expected, in our Closed Block segment in both 2013 and 2012. Further discussion of premium income for each of our segments, as well as our outlook for future premium growth, is included in "Segment Results" as follows. 49 Net investment income was slightly lower in 2013 relative to 2012 due primarily to a decline in the yield on invested assets, partially offset by a higher level of invested assets. Miscellaneous net investment income, which includes income from bond calls and private equity partnership investments, was relatively consistent on a consolidated basis but exhibited more year-over-year volatility on an operating segment level. Net investment income was slightly lower in 2012 relative to 2011 due primarily to a decline in yield on invested assets, an increase in the amortization of the principal amount invested in our tax credit part nerships, and lower income on our Unum UK inflation index-linked bonds. These declines were mostly offset by a higher level of invested assets, higher bond call premiums, an increase in income from private equity partnership investments, and higher prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities. We recognized a net realized investment gain of $6.8 million in 2013, compared to a gain of $56.2 million in 2012 and a loss of $4.9 million in 2011. Included in the 2013 net realized gain was a realized investment loss of $30.0 million recognized on the sale of certain securities during the early part of the third quarter of 2013. When interest rates increased during that time period, we sold certain of our lower yielding fixed maturity securities to take advantage of the higher interest rate environment by reinvesting the proceeds into higher yielding securities, thereby increasing our investment yield and also improving the credit quality of our fixed maturity securities portfolio. Included in the 2011 net realized loss was an other-than-temporary impairment loss on fixed maturity securities of $19.9 million. Also included in our realized investment gains and losses is the change in the fair value of an embedded derivative in a modified coinsurance arrangement, which resulted in a realized gain of $30.7 million and $51.8 million in 2013 and 2012, respectively, and a loss of $39.4 million in 2011. The consolidated benefit ratios were 86.5 percent in 2013 compared to 87.1 percent in 2012 and 95.9 percent in 2011. Excluding the 2013 reserve adjustments in our life insurance product lines within the Unum US and Colonial Life segments, the benefit ratio for 2013 was 86.4 percent, and excluding the 2011 reserve adjustments in our Closed Block segment, the benefit ratio for 2011 was 85.9 percent. The underlying risk results in 2013 for each of our principal operating business segments, as well as for the majority of our product lines within those segments, were favorable or consistent with 2012. The year-over-year increase in the benefit ratio for 2012 relative to the level of 2011was primarily attributable to adverse risk results in our Unum UK group life line of business and in our Closed Block long-term care line of business. Risk results in our Unum US segment for 2012 were generally consistent with the level reported in 2011, and the benefit ratio for Colonial Life was only slightly elevated in 2012 compared to 2011. Further discussion of our line of business risk results for each of our segments is included in "Segment Results" as follows. Interest and debt expense for 2013 was higher than 2012 due primarily to the issuance of $250.0 million of debt in August 2012, offset partially by lower interest expense on our floating rate debt and the purchase and retirement of the debt held by Tailwind Holdings, LLC (Tailwind Holdings) in January 2013. Interest and debt expense for 2012 was slightly higher than 2011 due primarily to the issuance of $250.0 million of debt in August 2012, partially offset by the maturity of $225.1 million of debt in March 2011. The deferral of acquisition costs in 2013 was generally consistent with 2012. The deferral increased in 2012 compared to 2011, with continued growth in certain of our product lines and the associated increase in deferrable expenses more than offsetting the lower level of deferrable costs in product lines with lower growth. The amortization of acquisition costs was higher year-over-year in both 2013 and 2012 due to continued growth in the level of the deferred asset for certain of our product lines and the prospective unlocking for expected future experience relative to assumptions for our interest-sensitive life products. We also experienced a higher level of policy terminations relative to assumptions for certain issue years within some of our Unum US supplemental and voluntary product lines during 2013. At December 31, 2011, we determined that our long-term care deferred acquisition costs were not recoverable, and we recognized an impairment charge at that time. Further discussion of deferred acquisition costs and amortization by product line for each of our segments is included in "Segment Results" as follows. Other expenses, including compensation expense, were in aggregate lower in 2013 and 2012 relative to the prior year periods due in part to our continued focus on operating effectiveness and expense management. Also contributing to the decline in 2013 relative to 2012 was a reduction in the amortization of our net actuarial loss due to pension plan amendments adopted in 2013 as well as e xpense reductions associated with reinsurance agreements entered into during 2013. Partially offsetting the lower expenses resulting from active expense management were increased costs for our pension and other postretirement benefit plans in 2012 as compared to 2011. For further discussion of the 2013 pension plan amendments, see Note 9 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. 50 Our income tax for 2013, 2012, and 2011 includes reductions of $6.3 million, $9.3 million, and $6.8 million, respectively, to reflect the impact of the decrease in the U.K. corporation tax rate changes on our net deferred tax liability related to our U.K. operations. Also lowering our income tax rate in 2013 and 2012 relative to the preceding year is an increase in the level of our investments in low-income housing tax credit partnerships. Our 2012 income tax includes a release of an $11.0 million tax liability related to unrecognized tax benefits. Our 2011 income tax includes a reduction in federal income taxes of $41.3 million du e to a final settlement with the IRS and an $18.6 million tax related to the repatriation of 150.0 million of dividends from our U.K. subsidiaries. See Note 7 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information on our income tax. Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures We analyze our performance using non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company's performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The non-GAAP financial measures of "operating revenue," "before-tax operating income" or "before-tax operating loss," and "after-tax operating income" differ from total revenue, income before income tax, and net income as presented in our consolidated operating results and in income statements prepared in accordance with GAAP due to the exclusion of net realized investment gains and losses, non-operating retirement-related gains or losses, and certain other items as specified in the reconciliations below. We believe operating revenue and operating income or loss are better performance measures and better indicators of the revenue and profitability and underlying trends in our business. Realized investment gains or losses depend on market conditions and do not necessarily relate to decisions regarding the underlying business of our segments. Our investment focus is on investment income to su pport our insurance liabilities as opposed to the generation of realized investment gains or losses. Although we may experience realized investment gains or losses which will affect future earnings levels, a long-term focus is necessary to maintain profitability over the life of the business since our underlying business is long-term in nature, and we need to earn the interest rates assumed in calculating our liabilities. The amortization of prior period actuarial gains or losses, a component of the net periodic benefit cost for our pensions and other postretirement benefit plans, is driven by market performance as well as plan amendments and is not indicative of the operational results of our businesses. We believe that excluding the amortization of prior period gains or losses from operating income or loss provides investors with additional information for comparison and analysis of our operating results. Although we manage our non-operating retirement-related gains or losses separately from the operational performance of our business, these gains or losses impact the overall profitability of our company and have historically increased or decreased over time, depending on plan amendments and market conditions and the resulting impact on the actuarial gains or losses in our pensions and other postretirement benefit plans. We may at other times exclude certain other items from our discussion of financial ratios and metrics in order to enhance the understanding and comparability of our operational performance and the underlying fundamentals, but this exclusion is not an indication that similar items may not recur and does not replace net income or net loss as a measure of our overall profitability. A reconciliation of "operating revenue" to total revenue and "before-tax operating income" to income before income tax is as follows: (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2013 2012 2011 Operating Revenue $ 10,347.0 $ 10,459.2 $ 10,282.9 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 6.8 56.2 (4.9 ) Total Revenue $ 10,353.8 $ 10,515.4 $ 10,278.0 Before-tax Operating Income $ 1,241.8 $ 1,239.7 $ 1,323.2 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 6.8 56.2 (4.9 ) Non-operating Retirement-related Loss (32.9 ) (46.4 ) (31.9 ) Unclaimed Death Benefits Reserve Increase (95.5 ) Group Life Waiver of Premium Benefit Reserve Reduction 85.0 Deferred Acquisition Costs Impairment and Reserve Charges for Long-term Care Closed Block (769.6 ) Reserve Charge for Individual Disability Closed Block (183.5 ) Income Before Income Tax $ 1,205.2 $ 1,249.5 $ 333.3 51 The after-tax impacts of these items are reflected in the following reconciliation of after-tax operating income to net income. Year Ended December 31 2013 2012 2011 (in millions) per share * (in millions) per share * (in millions) per share * After-tax Operating Income $ 882.5 $ 3.32 $ 887.5 $ 3.15 $ 905.4 $ 2.98 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss), Net of Tax 3.9 0.02 37.1 0.13 (3.6 ) (0.01 ) Non-operating Retirement-related Loss, Net of Tax (21.4 ) (0.08 ) (30.2 ) (0.11 ) (20.7 ) (0.07 ) Unclaimed Death Benefits Reserve Increase, Net of Tax (62.1 ) (0.24 ) Group Life Waiver of Premium Benefit Reserve Reduction, Net of Tax 55.2 0.21 Deferred Acquisition Costs Impairment and Reserve Charges for Long-term Care Closed Block, Net of Tax (500.3 ) (1.65 ) Reserve Charge for Individual Disability Closed Block, Net of Tax (119.3 ) (0.39 ) Tax Reduction from IRS Settlement 41.3 0.14 Tax Related to U.K. Repatriation (18.6 ) (0.06 ) Net Income $ 858.1 $ 3.23 $ 894.4 $ 3.17 $ 284.2 $ 0.94 * Assuming Dilution Consolidated Sales Results Shown below are sales results for our three principal operating business segments. (in millions) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Unum US $ 745.6 (2.0 )% $ 760.5 7.5 % $ 707.3 Unum UK 48.4 (18.7 )% 59.5 (5.1 )% 62.7 Colonial Life $ 367.6 1.6 % $ 361.9 (1.1 )% $ 365.9 Sales shown in the preceding chart generally represent the annualized premium income on new sales which we expect to receive and report as premium income during the next 12 months following or beginning in the initial quarter in which the sale is reported, depending on the effective date of the new sale. Sales do not correspond to premium income reported as revenue in accordance with GAAP. This is because new annualized sales premiums reflect current sales performance and what we expect to recognize as premium income over a 12 month period, while premium income reported in our financial statements is reported on an "as earned" basis rather than an annualized basis and also includes renewals and persistency of in-force policies written in prior years as well as current new sales. Sales, persistency of the existing block of business, employment and salary growth, and the effectiveness of a renewal program are indicators of growth in premium income. Trends in new sales, as well as existing market share, also indicate the potential for growth in our respective markets and the level of market acceptance of price changes and new product offerings. Sales results may fluctuate significantly due to case size and timing of sales submissions. See "Segment Results" as follows for a discussion of sales by segment. 52 Segment Results Our reporting segments are comprised of the following: Unum US, Unum UK, Colonial Life, Closed Block, and Corporate. Financial information for each of our reporting segments is as follows. Unum US Segment The Unum US segment includes group long-term and short-term disability insurance, group life and accidental death and dismemberment products, and supplemental and voluntary lines of business, which are comprised of individual disability - recently issued insurance and voluntary benefits products. Unum US Operating Results Shown below are financial results for the Unum US segment. In the sections following, financial results and key ratios are also presented for the major lines of business within the segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 4,517.1 1.4 % $ 4,456.5 3.7 % $ 4,296.0 Net Investment Income 929.6 (2.4 ) 952.3 0.1 951.4 Other Income 128.3 3.0 124.6 2.5 121.6 Total 5,575.0 0.8 5,533.4 3.1 5,369.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 3,222.4 (0.5 ) 3,238.6 4.0 3,113.5 Commissions 505.2 (0.5 ) 507.5 7.1 474.0 Interest and Debt Expense 0.1 (90.9 ) 1.1 10.0 1.0 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (252.0 ) 1.1 (249.2 ) 13.1 (220.3 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 230.0 17.0 196.5 4.5 188.1 Other Expenses 1,000.7 0.9 991.8 (0.4 ) 995.8 Total 4,706.4 0.4 4,686.3 2.9 4,552.1 Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses 868.6 2.5 847.1 3.7 816.9 Unclaimed Death Benefits (UDB) Reserve Increase 75.4 Group Life Waiver of Premium Benefit (Waiver) Reserve Reduction (85.0 ) Operating Income $ 859.0 1.4 $ 847.1 3.7 $ 816.9 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 71.3 % 72.7 % 72.5 % Benefit Ratio Excluding the UDB and Waiver Reserve Adjustments 71.6 % Other Expense Ratio 22.2 % 22.3 % 23.2 % Income Ratio 19.2 % 19.0 % 19.0 % Operating Income Ratio 19.0 % 19.0 % 19.0 % 53 Unum US Group Disability Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group disability. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability $ 1,553.9 (1.6 )% $ 1,578.8 (0.1 )% $ 1,580.2 Group Short-term Disability 519.6 9.0 476.7 4.7 455.2 Total Premium Income 2,073.5 0.9 2,055.5 1.0 2,035.4 Net Investment Income 550.1 (4.6 ) 576.9 (4.6 ) 605.0 Other Income 95.6 2.0 93.7 4.8 89.4 Total 2,719.2 (0.3 ) 2,726.1 (0.1 ) 2,729.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,732.9 (0.5 ) 1,741.6 1.1 1,722.1 Commissions 164.0 3.0 159.3 (0.1 ) 159.5 Interest and Debt Expense 0.1 (90.9 ) 1.1 10.0 1.0 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (29.6 ) 12.5 (26.3 ) 20.1 (21.9 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 21.1 15.3 18.3 (7.6 ) 19.8 Other Expenses 532.3 (1.2 ) 539.0 (1.5 ) 547.0 Total 2,420.8 (0.5 ) 2,433.0 0.2 2,427.5 Operating Income $ 298.4 1.8 $ 293.1 (3.0 ) $ 302.3 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 83.6 % 84.7 % 84.6 % Other Expense Ratio 25.7 % 26.2 % 26.9 % Operating Income Ratio 14.4 % 14.3 % 14.9 % Persistency: Group Long-term Disability 87.2 % 90.7 % 90.2 % Group Short-term Disability 88.0 % 88.0 % 89.9 % Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2012 Premium income increased slightly in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to growth from rate increases, partially offset by a decline in persistency in the group long-term disability product line. The weak pace of economic growth, low levels of employment growth, and competitive environment continue to pressure our premium income growth, including growth from existi ng customers. Net investment income declined in 2013 relative to 2012 due to decreases in the level of invested assets, lower income from bond call premiums, and a decrease in the yield on invested assets. Other income for 2013 included fees from administrative services products of $78.5 million compared to $81.7 million in 2012. Also included in other income for 2013 is a gain of $4.0 million on the purchase and retirement of the debt issued by Tailwind Holdings. Risk results were favorable in 2013 compared to 2012 due to favorable claim incidence rates and continued strong claim recovery experience. These results were partially offset by the decrease in the discount rate which we implemented during the third quarter of 2012 for new group long-term disability claim incurrals. The deferral and amortization of acquisition costs were both higher in 2013 relative to the prior year due to an increase in deferrable expenses and the resulting continued growth in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio for 2013 was lower compared to 2012 as we continue to focus on operating effectiveness and expense management relative to our premium incom e levels. 54 Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2011 Premium income increased slightly in 2012 compared to 2011 due to sales growth and generally stable persistency levels. High unemployment levels and the competitive environment continued to pressure our premium income growth, including growth from existing customers. Net investment income declined in 2012 relative to 2011 due to a decrease in income from bond call premiums, a decrease in the level of invested assets, and a decline in yield on invested assets, partially offset by an increase in the level of prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities. Other income for 2012 included fees from administrative services products of $81.7 million compared to $77.9 million in 2011. Risk results were slightly unfavorable in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to a 50 basis point decrease in the discount rate during the third quarter of 2012 for group long-term disability new claim incurrals compared to a 25 basis point decrease during the third quarter of 2011. Long-term disability claim recoveries were favorable in 2012 relative to 2011. The deferral of acquisition costs in 2012 was higher than 2011 due primarily to a higher level of sales. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was lower in 2012 compared to the prior year due to a decrease in amortization related to internal replacement transactions. The other expense ratio was lower in 2012 relative to 2011 due primarily to higher premium income and our focus on operating effectiveness and expense management. 55 Unum US Group Life and Accidental Death and Dismemberment Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Life $ 1,213.9 2.7 % $ 1,182.1 6.8 % $ 1,106.7 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 121.6 5.5 115.3 5.6 109.2 Total Premium Income 1,335.5 2.9 1,297.4 6.7 1,215.9 Net Investment Income 142.6 (2.9 ) 146.9 8.4 135.5 Other Income 1.8 (5.3 ) 1.9 (13.6 ) 2.2 Total 1,479.9 2.3 1,446.2 6.8 1,353.6 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 909.9 (2.8 ) 936.4 9.6 854.6 Commissions 108.9 4.1 104.6 9.5 95.5 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (24.7 ) 10.3 (22.4 ) 21.1 (18.5 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 15.6 14.7 13.6 (4.2 ) 14.2 Other Expenses 198.2 2.6 193.1 (3.1 ) 199.3 Total 1,207.9 (1.4 ) 1,225.3 7.0 1,145.1 Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses 272.0 23.1 220.9 5.9 208.5 Unclaimed Death Benefits (UDB) Reserve Increase 49.1 Group Life Waiver of Premium Benefit (Waiver) Reserve Reduction (85.0 ) Operating Income $ 236.1 6.9 $ 220.9 5.9 $ 208.5 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 68.1 % 72.2 % 70.3 % Benefit Ratio Excluding the UDB and Waiver Reserve Adjustments 70.8 % Other Expense Ratio 14.8 % 14.9 % 16.4 % Income Ratio 20.4 % 17.0 % 17.1 % Operating Income Ratio 17.7 % 17.0 % 17.1 % Persistency: Group Life 88.1 % 90.6 % 88.0 % Accidental Death & Dismemberment 88.8 % 90.0 % 88.2 % Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2012 Premium income increased in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to growth in the inforce block of business as a result of sales and rate increases, partially offset by a decline in persistency. Net investment income was lower in 2013 compared to 2012 primarily due to a decrease in the yield on invested assets and lower income from bond call premiums, partially offset by an increase in investment income attributable to tax credit partnerships and the level of invested assets. Risk results were favorable compared to 2012 primarily as a result of the previously discussed reserve reduction for group life waiver of premium benefits, partially offset by the reserve increase for unclaimed death benefits charge. Excluding these reserve adjustments, risk results were favorable in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to more favorable experience related to the group life waiver of premium benefits. The deferral and amortization of acquisition costs were both higher in 2013 relative to the prior year due to an increase in deferrable expenses and the resulting continued growth in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio in 2013 was consistent with the prior year. 56 Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2011 Premium income was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to higher sales and favorable persistency. Net investment income was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to an increase in income from bond call premiums, an increase in the level of invested assets, and an increase in the level of prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities, partially offset by a decline in yield on invested assets. Risk results were unfavorable in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to a higher average claim size and a higher claim incidence rate. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to higher sales. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to a decrease in amortization related to internal replacement transactions. The other expense ratio was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due to our focus on operating effectiveness and expense management relative to our premium income levels. Unum US Supplemental and Voluntary Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US supplemental and voluntary product lines. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Premium Income Individual Disability - Recently Issued $ 465.3 (2.6 )% $ 477.6 2.8 % $ 464.7 Voluntary Benefits 642.8 2.7 626.0 7.9 580.0 Total Premium Income 1,108.1 0.4 1,103.6 5.6 1,044.7 Net Investment Income 236.9 3.7 228.5 8.3 210.9 Other Income 30.9 6.6 29.0 (3.3 ) 30.0 Total 1,375.9 1.1 1,361.1 5.9 1,285.6 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 579.6 3.4 560.6 4.4 536.8 Commissions 232.3 (4.6 ) 243.6 11.2 219.0 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (197.7 ) (1.4 ) (200.5 ) 11.5 (179.9 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 193.3 17.4 164.6 6.8 154.1 Other Expenses 270.2 4.0 259.7 4.1 249.5 Total 1,077.7 4.8 1,028.0 5.0 979.5 Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses 298.2 (10.5 ) 333.1 8.8 306.1 Unclaimed Death Benefits (UDB) Reserve Increase 26.3 Operating Income $ 324.5 (2.6 ) $ 333.1 8.8 $ 306.1 Interest Adjusted Loss Ratio: Individual Disability - Recently Issued 29.6 % 31.2 % 30.8 % Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratios: Individual Disability - Recently Issued 51.3 % 52.4 % 52.2 % Voluntary Benefits 53.0 % 49.5 % 50.7 % Benefit Ratio Excluding the UDB Reserve Increase Voluntary Benefits 48.9 % Other Expense Ratio 24.4 % 23.5 % 23.9 % Income Ratio 26.9 % 30.2 % 29.3 % Operating Income Ratio 29.3 % 30.2 % 29.3 % Persistency: Individual Disability - Recently Issued 90.5 % 91.4 % 89.3 % Voluntary Benefits 77.0 % 78.9 % 80.5 % 57 Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2012 Premium income was generally consistent in 2013 compared to 2012, with growth in voluntary benefits offset by a decrease in the individual disability - recently issued product line due to a reinsurance contract entered into during the second quarter of 2013 to cede a small block of individual disability business. Persistency for both individual disability - recently issued and voluntary benefits declined relative to the prior year due to a higher level of policy terminations in the early part of 2013. Net investmen t income was higher in 2013 compared to the prior year due to an increase in the level of invested assets, an increase in investment income attributable to tax credit partnerships, and higher income from bond call premiums, partially offset by a decline in the yield on invested assets. Risk results for the individual disability - recently issued product line were favorable during 2013 compared to 2012 due to higher claim recoveries and the impact of a release of active life reserves related to the termination of a large inforce policy in 2013. Risk results for voluntary benefits were unfavorable compared to 2012 as a result of the previously discussed reserve increase for unclaimed death benefits. Excluding this reserve increase, risk results for voluntary benefits were slightly favorable in 2013 compared to the prior year due to favorable experience in the life and critical illness product lines. Commissions were lower in 2013 relative to 2012 due primarily to amounts ceded under the individual disability reinsurance contract previously discussed. The deferral of acquisition costs was generally consistent in 2013 compared to 2012. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was higher in 2013 compared to the prior year due to a less favorable year-over-year impact from the prospective unlocking for expected future experience relative to assumptions for our interest-sensitive voluntary life products as well as a higher level of policy terminations relative to assumptions for certain issue years within certain of our product lines. The other expense ratio in 2013 was higher than 2012 due primarily to lower premium income resulting from the reinsurance contract entered into during 2013 in our individual disability - recently issued product line as well as higher expenses associated with our voluntary benefits products. The individ ual disability - recently issued product line had goodwill of approximately $187.5 million at December 31, 2013, none of which is currently believed to be at risk for future impairment. Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2011 Premium income was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to continued sales growth and stable persistency. Net investme nt income was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to an increase in the level of invested assets, an increase in bond call premiums and other fees, and an increase in the level of prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities, partially offset by a decline in yield on invested assets. Risk results for the individual disability - recently issued line of business were unfavorable in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to higher submitted incidence rates, partially offset by higher claim recoveries. Risk results for voluntary benefits were favorable in 2012 compared to 2011 driven primarily by the release of active life reserves associated with individual contracts that terminated and bought voluntary group coverage during 2012. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due to higher sales. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due to unfavorable persistency relative to assumptions for certain issue years within certain of our product lines, including the impact on persistency from individual contracts that terminated and bought voluntary group coverage during 2012. Partially offsetting this increase in amortization was a reduction in amortization due to a more favorable year-over-year impact from the prospective unlocking for expected future experience relative to as sumptions for our interest-sensitive voluntary life products. The other expense ratio decreased slightly due to a continued focus on operating effectiveness and expense management. 58 Sales (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Sales by Product Group Disability and Group Life and AD&D Group Long-term Disability $ 173.3 (4.9 )% $ 182.2 10.4 % $ 165.0 Group Short-term Disability 101.9 4.6 97.4 14.7 84.9 Group Life and AD&D 199.4 (3.9 ) 207.5 2.3 202.9 Subtotal 474.6 (2.6 ) 487.1 7.6 452.8 Supplemental and Voluntary Individual Disability - Recently Issued 52.2 (8.4 ) 57.0 2.5 55.6 Voluntary Benefits 218.8 1.1 216.4 8.8 198.9 Subtotal 271.0 (0.9 ) 273.4 7.4 254.5 Total Sales $ 745.6 (2.0 ) $ 760.5 7.5 $ 707.3 Sales by Market Sector Group Disability and Group Life and AD&D Core Market (< 2,000 lives) $ 324.4 (3.1 )% $ 334.9 4.0 % $ 322.1 Large Case Market 150.2 (1.3 ) 152.2 16.4 130.7 Subtotal 474.6 (2.6 ) 487.1 7.6 452.8 Supplemental and Voluntary 271.0 (0.9 ) 273.4 7.4 254.5 Total Sales $ 745.6 (2.0 ) $ 760.5 7.5 $ 707.3 Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2012 Sales in our Unum US group core and large case market segments declined in 2013 relative to 2012 . In both markets, sales to existing accounts increased in 2013 but this increase was more than offset by a decrease in new account sales. The decline in new sales in our group core market was driven by fewer sales opportunities in the small-size employer market segment during 2013, which we believe may be temporarily attributable to healthcare reform as well as the uncertain economic and political environment. We believe the decline in new sales in our large case market was partially due to our disciplined and opportunistic approach to sales growth. The sales mix in our group market sector in 2013 was approximately 68 percent core market and 32 percent large case market, generally consistent with 2012 . Sales of voluntary benefits were higher in 2013 compared to 2012 , with an increase in core market sales partially offset by a decrease in large case market sales. New account sales increased during 2013 but were partially offset by a decrease in sales to existin g customers, primarily in the large case market. Sales in our individual disability - recently issued line of business, which are primarily concentrated in the multi-life market, were lower in 2013 compared to 2012 due to lower sales growth from existing customers. We continue to believe that the group core market and voluntary benefits market, which combined together were approximately 73 percent of our Unum US sales for 2013 , represent significant growth opportunities. We will continue to seek disciplined and opportu nistic growth in the group large case and individual disability markets. While in the short term we expect economic trends, premium rate increases for certain of our group products, and the market distraction which we believe has resulted from the implementation of healthcare reform will continue to pressure our sales growth, we believe we are well positioned to expand existing relationships and leverage our brand and market leadership. Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2011 Unum US sales were higher in 2012 compared to 2011, with growth in each of our product lines and in each of our major market segments. Sales in our group core market segment were higher in 2012 relative to 2011, with increases in each of the product lines within this market segment. The number of new accounts added in our group core market segment during 2012 was 1.9 percent higher than the number of new accounts added during 2011. 59 Sales in our group large case market segment were higher in 2012 compared to 2011, with increases in each of the product lines within this market segment. We continued our disciplined and opportunistic approach to sales growth in the large case market during 2012, and although the level of sales in this market segment was higher than in 2011, our new business pricing was within our guidelines. Our sales mix in 2012 was approximately 69 percent core market and 31 percent large case market, generally consistent with 2011. Sales of voluntary benefits were higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to strong large case sales and increases in sales to both new and existing customers. The number of new accounts added in the voluntary benefits product line was 6.9 percent lower in 2012 than the number of new accounts added during 2011. Sales in our individual disability - recently issued line of business were 2.5 percent higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to higher sales to existing customers. Segment Outlook We believe that premium growth, particularly growth within existing customer accounts, will continue to be pressured during 2014 by the weak pace of economic growth, low levels of employment growth, the competitive environment, and the distraction caused by political instability and the implementation of healthcare reform. Although we expect to achieve marginal year-over-year growth in premium income during 2014, opportunities for further premium growth are not expected to re-emerge until the economy improves and employment growth accelerates. Our net investment income may be impacted, either favorably or unfavorably, by fluctuations in bond call premiums and other types of miscellaneous net investment income. The low interest rate environment and the tightening of credit spreads continue to place near-term pressure on our profit margins by impacting net investment income yields and claim reserve discount rates. As a result of the continued low interest rate environment and the aging of insureds, we began initiating price increases for our group disability products during 2012 and will continue with these pricing levels on new and renewal business throughout 2014. We anticipate that the 2014 benefit ratio for our group disability product line will be slightly below the level of 2013. Our amortization of deferred acquisition costs may be unfavorably impacted, particularly in our voluntary benefits product line, by higher than expected policy terminations. We believe future profit margin improvement is achievable, driven primarily by our continued product mix shift, expense efficiencies, and consistent operating effectiveness. Certain risks and uncertainties are inherent in the disability insurance business. Components of claims experience, such as incidence and recovery rates, may be worse than we expect. Disability claim incidence and claim recovery rates may be influenced by, among other factors, the rate of unemployment and consumer confidence. Within the group disability market, pricing and renewal actions can be taken to react to higher claim rates or lower discount rates, but these actions take time to implement, and there is a risk that the market will not sustain increased prices. In addition, changes in economic and external conditions may not manifest themselves in claims experience for an extended period of time. The current economic conditions may lead to a higher rate of claim incidence, lower levels of claim recoveries, or lower claim discount rates. We have previously taken steps to improve our risk profile, including reducing our exposure to volatile business segments through diversification by market size, product segment, and industry segment. Claim incidence levels may fluctuate due to the normal volatility that occurs in group disability business or may be related to economic conditions. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. We remain confident that our strategy of focusing on protecting consumers, broadening client relationships, and building collaborative partnerships will enable us to achieve our long-term financial objectives. We continue to see future growth opportunity based on employee choice, defined employer funding, superior service, and effective communication. Our focused offerings, risk management discipline, consistent benefits performance, and expense management have enabled us to deliver earnings growth. We believe we will reach our long-term sales and premium objectives by capturing opportunities emerging in our core group and voluntary markets to grow them at above-market rates, despite short-term sales pressure from healthcare reform impact and increased competition and changing distribution dynamics in the voluntary benefits market. We intend to maintain our focus on persistency of our inforce block and on increasing participation levels from existing customers. Our continued investments in partnerships and market expansion should enhance our ability to grow the market over the long term. We believe our operational excellence and the benefits derived from investments in our technology infrastructure will improve our cost position. 60 Unum UK Segment The Unum UK segment includes insurance for group long-term disability, group life, and supplemental lines of business which include individual disability and critical illness. Unum UK's products are sold primarily in the United Kingdom through field sales personnel and independent brokers and consultants. Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Unum UK segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability $ 389.9 (4.8 )% $ 409.7 (2.4 )% $ 419.6 Group Life 106.4 (51.9 ) 221.3 8.7 203.6 Supplemental 60.3 (5.2 ) 63.6 (1.2 ) 64.4 Total Premium Income 556.6 (19.9 ) 694.6 1.0 687.6 Net Investment Income 148.5 (13.1 ) 170.8 (10.1 ) 189.9 Other Income 0.1 0.1 (66.7 ) 0.3 Total 705.2 (18.5 ) 865.5 (1.4 ) 877.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 413.3 (23.7 ) 541.4 9.6 493.8 Commissions 38.0 (10.8 ) 42.6 (6.8 ) 45.7 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (9.8 ) (16.9 ) (11.8 ) (23.4 ) (15.4 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 14.7 (6.4 ) 15.7 2.6 15.3 Other Expenses 117.0 (20.0 ) 146.3 (0.9 ) 147.7 Total 573.2 (21.9 ) 734.2 6.9 687.1 Operating Income $ 132.0 0.5 $ 131.3 (31.1 ) $ 190.7 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 74.3 % 77.9 % 71.8 % Other Expense Ratio 21.0 % 21.1 % 21.5 % Operating Income Ratio 23.7 % 18.9 % 27.7 % Persistency: Group Long-term Disability 82.2 % 84.0 % 86.6 % Group Life 66.7 % 82.5 % 89.3 % Supplemental 78.8 % 84.6 % 87.3 % 61 Foreign Currency Translation The functional currency of Unum UK is the British pound sterling. Unum UK's premium income, net investment income, claims, and expenses are received or paid in pounds, and we hold pound-denominated assets to support Unum UK's pound-denominated policy reserves and liabilities. We translate Unum UK's pound-denominated financial statement items into dollars for our consolidated financial reporting. We translate income statement items using an average exchange rate for the reporting period, and we translate balance sheet items using the exchange rate at the end of the period. We report unrealized foreign currency translation gains and losses in accumulated other comprehensive income in our consolidated balance sheets. Fluctuations in the pound to dollar exchange rate have an effect on Unum UK's reported financial results and our consolidated financial results. In periods when the pound weakens relative to the preceding period, as occurred during 2013 and 2012, translating pounds into dollars decreases current period results relative to the prior period. In periods when the pound strengthens relative to the preceding period, translating pounds into dollars increases current period results relative to the prior period. (in millions of pounds, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability 249.2 (3.6 )% 258.4 (1.2 )% 261.6 Group Life 68.2 (51.1 ) 139.6 9.9 127.0 Supplemental 38.5 (4.0 ) 40.1 40.1 Total Premium Income 355.9 (18.8 ) 438.1 2.2 428.7 Net Investment Income 94.9 (11.9 ) 107.7 (9.0 ) 118.4 Other Income 0.1 0.1 Total 450.9 (17.4 ) 545.8 (0.3 ) 547.2 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 264.5 (22.5 ) 341.4 11.0 307.7 Commissions 24.3 (9.7 ) 26.9 (5.6 ) 28.5 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (6.2 ) (17.3 ) (7.5 ) (21.1 ) (9.5 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 9.3 (6.1 ) 9.9 5.3 9.4 Other Expenses 74.7 (19.0 ) 92.2 0.1 92.1 Total 366.6 (20.8 ) 462.9 8.1 428.2 Operating Income 84.3 1.7 82.9 (30.3 ) 119.0 Weighted Average Pound/Dollar Exchange Rate 1.566 1.584 1.603 Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2012 Premium income was lower in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to reinsurance agreements we entered into effective January 1, 2013 to cede an additional portion of our group life business. The reinsurance agreements significantly decreased premium i ncome and benefit payments for group life during 2013 and also reduced volatility in this line of business. Premium income in 2013 was also unfavorably impacted by continued pressure on persistency resulting from the initiation of premium rate increases, partially offset by an increase in premium income as a result of rate increases in existing customer accounts. Net investment income declined in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to decreases in the yield on invested assets and in the level of invested assets. We also reported lower income from inflation index-linked bonds which we invest in to support the claim reserves associated with certain of our group policies that provide for inflation-linked increases in benefits. Group long-term disability risk results were unfavorable in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to lower claim recoveries. Group life risk results were favorable in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to lower mortality rates on the retained business. Supplemental risk results were favorable in 2013 compared to 2012 due to lower claim incidence rates for the group critical illness product line. 62 Com missions and deferral of acquisition costs were lower in 2013 compared to 2012 due to expenses ceded under the group life reinsurance agreements and a lower level of sales in 2013. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs and the other expense ratio were generally consistent in 2013 compared to the prior year. Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2011 Premium income was higher in 2012 compared to 2011, although premium growth and persistency were unfavorably impacted by the initiation of premium rate increases in our group long-term disability and group life product lines. Group long-term disability premium income was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due to a decline in persistency resulting primarily from prem ium rate increases, partially offset by an increase in premium income due to growth in existing customer accounts. Group life premium income increased in 2012 relative to 2011 as a result of premium rate increases and higher new business sales, partially offset by lower persistency resulting primarily from premium rate increases. Net investment income declined in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to lower income on inflation index-linked bonds, a decrease in invested asset yields, and lower income from bond call premiums, partially offset by an increase in the level of invested assets. Group long-term disability risk results were unfavorable in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to less favorable claim recoveries and higher incidence rates. Group life risk results were unfavorable in 2012 compared to 2011 due to a higher average claim size and higher claim volumes. Supplemental risk results were favorable in 2012 compared to 2011 due to lower claim incidence rates in the group critical illness and individual disability products. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were both lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to a lower level of individual disability product sales. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due prim arily to an increase in internal replacement transactions. The other expense ratio was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to higher premium income and continued expense management initiatives. 63 Sales Shown below are sales results in dollars and in pounds for the Unum UK segment. (in millions) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Sales by Product Group Long-term Disability $ 50.5 (1.4 )% $ 51.2 7.1 % $ 47.8 Group Life 21.4 (43.7 ) 38.0 (13.2 ) 43.8 Supplemental 3.9 (20.4 ) 4.9 (43.0 ) 8.6 Total Sales $ 75.8 (19.4 ) $ 94.1 (6.1 ) $ 100.2 Sales by Market Sector Group Long-term Disability and Group Life Core Market (< 500 lives) $ 38.9 0.5 % $ 38.7 3.2 % $ 37.5 Large Case Market 33.0 (34.7 ) 50.5 (6.7 ) 54.1 Subtotal 71.9 (19.4 ) 89.2 (2.6 ) 91.6 Supplemental 3.9 (20.4 ) 4.9 (43.0 ) 8.6 Total Sales $ 75.8 (19.4 ) $ 94.1 (6.1 ) $ 100.2 Sales by Product Group Long-term Disability 32.2 (0.3 )% 32.3 8.4 % 29.8 Group Life 13.7 (43.2 ) 24.1 (12.4 ) 27.5 Supplemental 2.5 (19.4 ) 3.1 (42.6 ) 5.4 Total Sales 48.4 (18.7 ) 59.5 (5.1 ) 62.7 Sales by Market Sector Group Long-term Disability and Group Life Core Market (< 500 lives) 24.9 2.0 % 24.4 4.3 % 23.4 Large Case Market 21.0 (34.4 ) 32.0 (5.6 ) 33.9 Subtotal 45.9 (18.6 ) 56.4 (1.6 ) 57.3 Supplemental 2.5 (19.4 ) 3.1 (42.6 ) 5.4 Total Sales 48.4 (18.7 ) 59.5 (5.1 ) 62.7 Sales in Unum UK's group long-term disability product line during 2013 were consistent with 2012, with higher new account sales and an increase in core market sales offset by a decrease in sales to existing customers and a decline in sales in the large case market. Group life sales were lower in 2013 compared to 2012 as a result of declines in new account sales in both the core and large case markets, which more than offset higher sales to existing customers. The decrease in group life sales was due in part to pricing discipline and the initiation of rate increases on new business. Also impacting the comparability of group life sales relative to 2012 was the discontinuance of new sales of certain of our group life product lines beginning in the third quarter of 2012. Supplemental sales were lower in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to lower sales in our individual disability product line. Sales in Unum UK's group long-term disability product line were higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due to higher new account sales in both the core and large case markets, partially offset by lower sales to existing customers. Group life sales were lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due to our discontinuance of new sales of certain of our group life product lines, lower large case sales, and lower sales to existing customers, partially offset by higher core market sales. Supplemental sales were lower in 2012 compared to the 2011 due primarily to lower sales in our group critical illness and individual disability product lines. 64 Segment Outlook Our primary focus during 2014 is to build key capabilities to enable us to deliver future growth. Our shift in business mix and focus on premium rate increases for both group long-term disability and group life is expected to continue to improve our profitability. However, pressure on new sales and persistency is likely to continue, and the low interest rate environment is expected to dampen overall earnings growth. We intend to continue with our group life reinsurance program during 2014, although we have increased our retention level for our group life products that provide lump sum benefits. We expect that the challenging economic and competitive pricing environment in the U.K. which has continued to negatively impact Unum UK's premium growth may continue in the near term. The current economic conditions may lead to a higher rate of claim incidence, lower levels of claim recoveries, or lower claim discount rates. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. In our group life business, our near-term actions regarding rate increases, reinsurance, and the discontinuance of certain product lines have reduced volatility. We will continue to implement rate increases in 2014, and we believe profit margins will continue to improve. Although group life premium income may decline as a result of these actions and a shift in business mix, during 2013 the increase to premium income from rate increases largely offset the impact of policy terminations. In our group long-term disability business, we remain committed to driving growth in the U.K. market, although we continue to have a cautious outlook for growth given the current environment. We anticipate returning to more normal levels of premium growth as our rate increases continue to be placed in the market and as we continue to increase sales to new and existing customers. We have seen some positive results in terms of new to market sales and increased coverage in existing cases. In addition, we continue to focus on new market opportunities by raising awareness of the need for income protection. Expanding group long-term disability market penetration remains a significant opportunity and priority in the U.K. 65 Colonial Life Segment The Colonial Life segment includes insurance for accident, sickness, and disability products, life products, and cancer and critical illness products issued primarily by Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company and marketed to employees at the workplace through an independent contractor agency sales force and brokers. Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Colonial Life segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Premium Income Accident, Sickness, and Disability $ 738.7 2.0 % $ 724.5 4.2 % $ 695.3 Life 221.1 5.4 209.7 10.0 190.7 Cancer and Critical Illness 272.4 4.6 260.3 4.4 249.3 Total Premium Income 1,232.2 3.2 1,194.5 5.2 1,135.3 Net Investment Income 145.4 4.9 138.6 4.7 132.4 Other Income 0.2 (33.3 ) 0.3 (40.0 ) 0.5 Total 1,377.8 3.3 1,333.4 5.1 1,268.2 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 667.0 6.3 627.3 6.4 589.4 Commissions 252.5 (0.8 ) 254.5 3.5 245.9 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (205.0 ) (0.6 ) (206.3 ) 1.6 (203.1 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 174.2 4.6 166.5 10.1 151.2 Other Expenses 224.3 3.3 217.1 1.1 214.7 Total 1,113.0 5.1 1,059.1 6.1 998.1 Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses 264.8 (3.5 ) 274.3 1.6 270.1 Unclaimed Death Benefits (UDB) Reserve Increase 20.1 Operating Income $ 284.9 3.9 $ 274.3 1.6 $ 270.1 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 54.1 % 52.5 % 51.9 % Benefit Ratio Excluding the UDB Reserve Increase 52.5 % Other Expense Ratio 18.2 % 18.2 % 18.9 % Income Ratio 21.5 % 23.0 % 23.8 % Operating Income Ratio 23.1 % 23.0 % 23.8 % Persistency: Accident, Sickness, and Disability 75.2 % 75.7 % 73.8 % Life 85.2 % 85.7 % 85.0 % Cancer and Critical Illness 83.1 % 84.5 % 84.0 % Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2012 Premium income increased in 2013 relative to 2012 due to continued growth in the inforce block of business as a result of sales and stable persistency. Net investment income increased in 2013 due to an increase in the level of invested assets and higher income from bond call premiums and private equity partnership investments, partially offset by a decrease in the yield on invested assets. 66 Our reported risk results were unfavorable compared to 2012 as a result of the previously discussed reserve increase for unclaimed death benefits. Excluding this reserve increase, the benefit ratio of 52.5% was consistent with the level of 2012, with favorable risk results in the life product line, due to improved mortality experience, offsetting less favorable risk results in the accident, sickness, and disability and cancer and critical illness product lines that resulted from an increased level of incurred claims. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were generally consistent in 2013 compared to the prior year. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was higher in 2013 compared to 2012 due to continued growth in the level of the deferred asset as well as an unfavorable impact from the prospective unlocking for expected future experience relative to assumptions for our interest-sensitive life products. The increase in other expenses in 2013 compared to 2012 was commensurate with the growth in premium income. Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2011 Premium income increased in 2012 relative to 2011 due primarily to prior period sales growth and improved persistency. Net invest ment income was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 as a result of growth in the level of invested assets, an increase in income from private equity partnership investments, and a higher level of fees from mortgage loan prepayments, partially offset by a decline in income from bond call premiums and a decrease in yield. Risk results were unfavorable in 2012 compared to 2011 for the life and cancer and critical illness product lines, partially offset by favorable risk results for the accident, sickness, and disability product line. The unfavorable risk results for the life product line in 2012 were driven by higher mortality rates, which can exhibit volatility from period to period. Risk results for the cancer and critical illness product line were slightly unfavorable in 2012 due primarily to a higher level of paid claims in the cancer product line and a higher active life reserve change due to favorable persistency for certain issue years. The slightly favorable risk results in the accident, sickness, and disability product line in 2012 were due to favorable claim experience in the disability product. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were both higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to an increase in costs related to growth in new business premium. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due to an increase in the level of the deferred asset as well as a less favorable year-over-year impact from the prospective unlocking for expected future experience relative to assumptions for our interest-sensitive life product. The other expense ratio was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to higher premium income and a continued focus on expense management. Sales (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Sales by Product Accident, Sickness, and Disability $ 238.2 2.2 % $ 233.0 (4.1 )% $ 242.9 Life 68.1 1.2 67.3 2.7 65.5 Cancer and Critical Illness 61.3 (0.5 ) 61.6 7.1 57.5 Total Sales $ 367.6 1.6 $ 361.9 (1.1 ) $ 365.9 Sales by Market Sector Commercial Core Market (< 1,000 lives) $ 246.0 (0.9 )% $ 248.3 0.1 % $ 248.0 Large Case Market 49.0 19.8 40.9 (6.8 ) 43.9 Subtotal 295.0 2.0 289.2 (0.9 ) 291.9 Public Sector 72.6 (0.1 ) 72.7 (1.8 ) 74.0 Total Sales $ 367.6 1.6 $ 361.9 (1.1 ) $ 365.9 67 Colonial Life's sales for 2013 were slightly higher than 2012, with growth in existing account sales in all market segments. This growth was partially offset by a slight decrease in new account sales, with the decline primarily occurring in the core market segment. Although large case commercial market sales were significantly higher than 2012, our new business pricing was within our guidelines as we continued our disciplined yet opportunistic approach to sales growth in this market. We believe the 2013 decrease in core commercial market sales, particularly in the small employer segment, may be partially attributable to healthcare reform as well as the uncertain economic and political environment. The number of new accounts decreased 18.2 percent in 2013 compared to 2012, while the average new case size increased 20.0 percent. Colonial Life's sales were lower in 2012 relative to 2011, with a decrease in new account sales partially offset by an increase in existing account sales. Commercial market sales in 2012 were lower than 2011, with a decline in large case commercial market sales which was only partially offset by a slight increase in core commercial market sales. Sales also declined in the public sector market in 2012 compared to 2011. The number of new accounts decreased 5.0 percent in 2012 compared to 2011, while the average new case size was 4.2 percent lower. Segment Outlook Current economic conditions continue to affect employment growth and buying conditions which, in turn, impact sales and premium growth. We believe proper execution of our growth strategy and a gradual improvement in the economy will deliver sales and premium growth that are in line with long-term expectations. We see the continuing U.S. economic conditions and the increasing competition in the voluntary market as external risks to achievement of our business plans. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. We expect our sales momentum to improve during 2014 relative to the growth rate for 2013, further contributing to premium growth. Volatility in net investment income is likely to continue during 2014 as a result of fluctuations in bond calls and other types of miscellaneous net investment income. Regarding risk results, periods of economic downturns have historically had minimal impact on Colonial Life, due primarily to a diversified product portfolio that is designed with short duration, indemnity benefits. We expect our overall benefit ratio for 2014 to be generally consistent with the level of 2013, excluding the reserve increase for unclaimed death benefits, and we believe our strong profit margins will continue. We believe our success will be driven primarily by execution in the core commercial and public sector segments and through expansion of the overall market as well as further geographic expansion of our market within the United States. The market environment continues to shift at a rapid pace, and we believe our products, capabilities, and service offerings will enable us to succeed in this marketplace. We intend to continue to focus on operational excellence through a strong continuous improvement culture, risk management practices, focus on talent development, and cross-business collaboration. Closed Block Segment The Closed Block segment consists of individual disability, group and individual long-term care, and other insurance products no longer actively marketed. The individual disability line of business in this segment generally consists of policies we sold prior to the mid-1990s and entirely discontinued selling in 2004, other than update features contractually allowable on existing policies. We discontinued offering individual long-term care in 2009 and group long-term care in 2012. Other insurance products include group pension, individual life and corporate-owned life insurance, reinsurance pools and management operations, and other miscellaneous product lines. 68 Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Closed Block segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Premium Income Individual Disability $ 687.5 (6.6 )% $ 736.4 (6.4 )% $ 787.0 Long-term Care 630.6 (0.2 ) 631.9 3.9 608.1 All Other 0.7 (68.2 ) 2.2 N.M. 0.2 Total Premium Income 1,318.8 (3.8 ) 1,370.5 (1.8 ) 1,395.3 Net Investment Income 1,272.3 3.4 1,230.5 3.4 1,189.7 Other Income 93.9 (6.2 ) 100.1 (5.7 ) 106.1 Total 2,685.0 (0.6 ) 2,701.1 0.4 2,691.1 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 2,293.0 (0.9 ) 2,314.9 (23.2 ) 3,012.8 Commissions 113.8 1.1 112.6 (0.9 ) 113.6 Interest and Debt Expense 8.4 (19.2 ) 10.4 (1.0 ) 10.5 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (3.7 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 11.1 Impairment of Long-term Care Deferred Acquisition Costs 196.0 Other Expenses 160.4 (4.4 ) 167.7 (6.8 ) 180.0 Total 2,575.6 (1.2 ) 2,605.6 (26.0 ) 3,520.3 Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses 109.4 14.6 95.5 111.5 (829.2 ) Individual Disability Reserve Charge 183.5 Long-term Care Reserve Charge 573.6 Impairment of Long-term Care Deferred Acquisition Costs 196.0 Operating Income $ 109.4 14.6 $ 95.5 (22.9 ) $ 123.9 Interest Adjusted Loss Ratios: Individual Disability 82.6 % 83.0 % 108.0 % Long-term Care 89.6 % 90.1 % 179.3 % Interest Adjusted Loss Ratios Excluding the Reserve Charges: Individual Disability 84.7 % Long-term Care 84.9 % Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Other Expense Ratio 12.2 % 12.2 % 12.9 % Income (Loss) Ratio 8.3 % 7.0 % (59.4 )% Operating Income Ratio 8.3 % 7.0 % 8.9 % Persistency: Individual Disability 91.8 % 92.5 % 92.9 % Long-term Care 95.5 % 95.8 % 96.0 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 69 Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2012 Total premium income decreased in 2013 compared to 2012 due to expected policy terminations and maturities. The premium decrease resulting from persistency trends in the long-term care line of business was partially offset by the favorable impact of premium rate increases on certain policies as well as the issuance of group long-term care certificates on inforce cases. We continue to file requests with various state insurance departments for premium rate increases on certain of our individual and group long-term care policies. The rate increases reflect current interest rates and claim experience, higher expected future claims, persistency, and other factors related to pricing long-term care coverage. In states for which a rate increase is submitted and approved, customers are also given options for coverage changes or other approaches that might fit their current financial and insurance needs. Net investment income was higher in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to higher invested asset levels, partially offset by a decrease in the yield on invested assets. Other income, which includes the underlying results of certain blocks of reinsured business and the net investment income of portfolios held by those ceding companies to support the block we have reinsured, was lower in 2013 compared to 2012 due in part to lower investment income in the portfolios held by the ceding companies. Individual disability risk results for 2013 were slightly favorable compared to 2012 due primarily to lower claim incidence rates. Long-term care risk results were slightly favorable in 2013 compared to 2012 due to more favorable development in active life reserves. Interest and debt expense in 2013 was lower than 2012 due to principal repayments on the outstanding debt issued by Northwind Holdings, LLC (Northwind Holdings) and a decrease in the floating rate of interest. The other expense ratio was consistent in 2013 compared to 2012. Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2011 Total premium income decreased in 2012 compared to 2011, with lower individual disability premium income partially offset by higher long-term care premium income. The decrease in individual disability premium income was due to the run-off of this closed line of business, driven by expected policy terminations and maturities. The increase in long-term care premium income was due to issuances of group long-term care policies and the implementation of rate increases on certain of our individual long-term care policies. Although we announced in the first quarter of 2012 that we would no longer sell group long-term care, we had group cases which were already in the quoting and/or underwriting process at the time of our announcement and for which we subsequently issued the policies. Net investment income was higher in 2012 compared to 2011 due to higher asset levels, higher bond call premiums, and higher prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities and other fees, partially offset by a decline in yield on invested assets. Other income, which includes the underlying results of certain blocks of reinsured business and the net investment income of portfolios held by those ceding companies to support the block we have reinsured, was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due to lower investment income in the portfolios held by the ceding companies. Individual disability risk results for 2012 were favorable compared to 2011 due to the previously discussed 2011 reserve charge. Excluding this charge, individual disability risk results were favorable compared to 2011 due to higher claim recovery rates and a decrease in reserves for existing claims. Long-term care risk results were favorable in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to the 2011 reserve charge. Excluding this charge, risk results were unfavorable compared to 2011 due to higher claim incidence rates, partially offset by higher claim resolutions. Interest and debt expense in 2012 was generally consistent with 2011, as principal repayments on the amount of outstanding debt issued by Northwind Holdings were offset by an increase in the floating rate of interest on this debt. We had no amortization of deferred acquisition costs in 2012 due to the long-term care impairment charge recognized at December 31, 2011. The other expense ratio was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to a decrease in selling and underwriting costs due to our discontinuance of the sale of group long-term care in 2012 and our continued focus on operating effectiveness and expense management. 70 Segment Outlook Operating revenue and income for this segment will continue to decline over time as these closed blocks of business wind down, although we do expect additional premium income associated with long-term care rate increases. We also expect a small amount of group long-term care certificates to continue to be issued where we are required to do so under the terms of existing group policies. We expect that this segment may experience volatility in net investment income due to the volatility of bond call premiums relative to historical levels. During 2014, we intend to continue our focus on operational effectiveness, rate increases, and capital management. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. Profitability of our long-tailed products is affected by claims experience related to mortality and morbidity, investment returns, and persistency. We believe that the interest adjusted loss ratios for the individual disability and long-term care lines of business will be relatively flat over the long term, but these product lines may experience quarterly volatility, particularly in the near term for our long-term care product lines as our claim block matures. Claim resolution rates, which measure the resolution of claims from recovery, deaths, settlements, and benefit expirations, are very sensitive to operational and external factors and can be volatile. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period. It is possible that variability in any of our reserve assumptions, including, but not limited to, interest rates, mortality, morbidity, and persistency, could result in a material impact on our reserve levels, including adjustments to reserves previously established under loss recognition. 71 Corporate Segment The Corporate segment includes investment income on corporate assets not specifically allocated to a line of business, interest expense on corporate debt other than non-recourse debt, and certain other corporate income and expense not allocated to a line of business. Operating Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2013 % Change 2012 % Change 2011 Operating Revenue Net Investment Income $ (3.7 ) (116.1 )% $ 23.0 (59.1 )% $ 56.2 Other Income 7.7 175.0 2.8 (86.4 ) 20.6 Total 4.0 (84.5 ) 25.8 (66.4 ) 76.8 Interest and Other Expenses 147.5 9.8 134.3 (13.5 ) 155.2 Operating Loss $ (143.5 ) (32.3 ) $ (108.5 ) (38.4 ) $ (78.4 ) Year Ended December 31, 2013 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2012 Net investment income was lower in 2013 compared to 2012 due to a decrease in the yield on invested assets, a decrease in reported investment income attributable to tax credit partnerships, and lower short-term interest rates. The negative impact on net investment income and operating income attributable to tax credit partnerships is offset by a lower income tax rate due to the tax benefits recognized as a result of these investments. Other income was higher in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to $4.0 million of income recognized in 2013 related to a settlement of our appeal to the IRS for tax years 2005 to 2006. Interest and other expenses were higher in 2013 compared to 2012 due primarily to the interest expense related to the issuance of $250.0 million of 5.75% senior notes in August 2012 and a higher level of expense accruals in 2013 compared to 2012, partially offset by a lower rate of interest on fixed rate debt that we have effectively converted to floating rate debt. Year Ended December 31, 2012 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2011 Net investment income was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due to lower asset levels, a lower proportion of assets invested at long-term interest rates, a decrease in bond call premiums, and a decrease in investment income attributable to tax credit partnerships. Other income was lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to $17.5 million of interest income recognized in 2011 related to a settlement of our appeal to the IRS related to tax years 1996 to 2004. Interest and other expenses were lower in 2012 compared to 2011 due primarily to the maturity of $225.1 million of 7.625% senior notes in March 2011, a lower level of expense accruals during 2012, comparatively higher expenses in 2011 due in part to corporate initiatives, and state income taxes recognized during 2011 as a result of the repatriation of U.K. dividends from our U.K. subsidiaries in 2011. Partially offsetting these decreases was an impairment of a long-lived fixed asset recognized during 2012 and higher interest expense due to the issuance of the $250.0 million senior notes in August 2012. Segment Outlook We expect the quality of our investment portfolio to remain strong. The impact on net investment income attributable to tax credit partnerships is likely to continue to negatively impact net investment income for our Corporate segment throughout 2014. However, this is offset by a lower income tax rate due to the tax benefits recognized as a result of these investments. We are currently holding capital at our insurance subsidiaries and holding companies at levels that exceed our long-term requirements. We expect to continue to generate excess capital on an annual basis through our statutory earnings. While we intend to maintain our disciplined approach to risk management, we believe we are well positioned with substantial flexibility to preserve our capital strength and at the same time explore opportunities to deploy the excess capital that is generated each period. 72 Investments Overview Our investment portfolio is well diversified by type of investment and industry sector. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations and allow us to hold our securities through periods where significant decreases in fair value occur. We believe our emphasis on risk management in our investment portfolio, including credit and interest rate management, has positioned us well and generally reduced the volatility in our results. Below is a summary of our formal investment policy, including the overall quality and diversification objectives: The majority of investments are in high quality publicly traded securities to ensure the desired liquidity and preserve the capital value of our portfolios. The long-term nature of our insurance liabilities also allows us to invest in less liquid investments to obtain superior returns. A maximum of 10 percent of the total investment portfolio may be invested in below-investment-grade securities, 2 percent in equity securities, 3 percent in tax credit partnerships, 35 percent in private placements, and 10 percent in commercial mortgage loans. The remaining assets can be held in publicly traded investment-grade corporate securities, mortgage/asset backed securities, bank loans, government and government agencies, and municipal securities. We intend to manage the risk of losses due to changes in interest rates by matching asset duration with liabilities, in the aggregate. The weighted average credit quality rating of the portfolio should be Baa1 or higher. The maximum investment per issuer group is limited based on internal limits reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group's board of directors and approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries and is more restrictive than the five percent limit generally allowed by the state insurance departments which regulate the type of investments our insurance subsidiaries are allowed to own. These internal limits are as follows: Rating Internal Limit ($ in millions) AAA/AA $ 200 A 175 BBB+ 150 BBB 125 BBB- 90 BB+ 75 BB 60 BB- 50 B+ 30 B/B- 20 CCC 10 The portfolio is to be diversified across industry classification and geographic lines. Derivative instruments may be used to replicate permitted asset classes, hedge interest rate risk, credit risk, and foreign currency risk, and match liability duration and cash flows consistent with the plan reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group's board of directors and approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. Asset mix guidelines and limits are established by us, reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group's board of directors, and approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. The allocation of assets and the selection and timing of the acquisition and disposition of investments are subject to ratification, on a weekly basis, by an investment subcommittee appointed by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. These actions are also reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group's board of directors on a quarterly basis. 73 We review these investment policies and guidelines annually, or more frequently if deemed necessary, and recommend adjustments, as appropriate. Any revisions or exceptions are reviewed by the finance committee of Unum Group's board of directors and must be approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. See "Critical Accounting Estimates" contained in this Item 7 for further discussion of our valuation of investments. Investment Results Net investment income was slightly lower in 2013 relative to 2012 due primarily to a decline in the yield on invested assets, partially offset by a higher level of invested assets. Miscellaneous net investment income, which includes income from bond calls and private equity partnership investments, was relatively consistent on a consolidated basis but exhibited more year-over-year volatility on an operating segment level. Net investment income was slightly lower in 2012 relative to 2011 due primarily to a decline in yield on invested assets, an increase in the amortization of the principal amount invested in our tax credit partnerships, and lower income on our Unum UK inflati on index-linked bonds. These declines were mostly offset by a higher level of invested assets, higher bond call premiums, an increase in income from private equity partnership investments, and higher prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities. The duration weighted book yield on the fixed income securities in our investment portfolio was 6.28 percent as of December 31, 2013 , compared to a yield of 6.47 percent as of December 31, 2012 . Duration is a measure of the percentage change in the fair values of assets and liabilities for a given change in interest rates. Cash flows from the in-force asset and liability portfolios are projected at varying interest rate levels to obtain a range of projected cash flows under different interest rate scenarios. To assess the impact of a duration mismatch which may occur under the different interest rate scenarios, we measure the potential changes in estimated fair value based on a hypothetical change in interest rates to quantify a dollar value change. Although we test the asset and liability portfolios under various interest rate scenarios as part of our modeling, the majority of our liabilities related to insurance contracts are not interest rate sensitive, and we therefore have minimal exposure to policy withdrawal risk. Our determination of investment strategy relies more on long-term measures such as reserve adequacy analysis and the relationship between the portfolio yields supporting our various product lines and the aggregate discount rates embedded in the reserves. Realized investment gains and losses, before tax, are as follows: (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2013 2012 2011 Fixed Maturity Securities Gross Gains on Sales $ 15.8 $ 29.3 $ 74.0 Gross Losses on Sales (45.7 ) (20.4 ) (24.0 ) Other-Than-Temporary Impairment Loss (0.8 ) (19.9 ) Mortgage Loans and Other Invested Assets Gross Gains on Sales 15.6 5.0 7.1 Gross Losses on Sales (4.3 ) (0.5 ) Impairment Loss (2.0 ) (1.9 ) (0.6 ) Embedded Derivative in Modified Coinsurance Arrangement 30.7 51.8 (39.4 ) Other Derivatives (1.9 ) Foreign Currency Transactions (4.9 ) (3.3 ) (1.6 ) Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) $ 6.8 $ 56.2 $ (4.9 ) During the third quarter of 2013, when interest rates increased during the early part of the quarter, we sold certain of our lower yielding fixed maturity securities to take advantage of the higher interest rate environment by reinvesting the proceeds into higher yielding mortgage-backed and corporate securities, thereby increasing our investment yield and also improving the credit quality of our fixed maturity securities portfolio. The securities sold had a book value of $408.9 million and generated a realized loss of $30.0 million. 74 We had no individual realized investment losses of $10.0 million or greater from other-than-temporary impairments during 2013, 2012, or 2011. We had no individual realized investment losses of $10.0 million or greater from the sale of fixed maturity securities during 2013 or 2011. During 2012, we recognized a loss of $11.2 million on the sale of securities issued by a large U.S. department store chain. In 2011, the company's management was replaced by a new team of executives that embarked on a radically different retailing strategy. While the company had ample liquidity and sizable value in real estate assets, initial operating results under this new strategy had been significantly below market expectations, and there was uncertainty as to whether this new strategy would be successful. Because of this, we had concerns that liquidity could be compromised over an extended period of time. At the time of disposition, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. We have an embedded derivative in a modified coinsurance arrangement for which we include in our realized investment gains and losses a calculation intended to estimate the fair value of the option of our reinsurance counterparty to cancel the reinsurance contract with us. The change in fair value of this embedded derivative during 2013, 2012, and 2011 resulted primarily from a change in credit spreads in the overall investment market. Fixed Maturity Securities The fair values and associated unrealized gains and losses of our fixed maturity securities portfolio, by industry classification, are as follows: Fixed Maturity Securities - By Industry Classification As of December 31, 2013 (in millions of dollars) Classification Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain Fair Value of Fixed Maturity Securities with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Fair Value of Fixed Maturity Securities with Gross Unrealized Gain Gross Unrealized Gain Basic Industry $ 2,446.5 $ 153.9 $ 543.4 $ 38.1 $ 1,903.1 $ 192.0 Capital Goods 3,677.9 333.7 517.0 18.2 3,160.9 351.9 Communications 2,829.7 318.9 323.1 21.4 2,506.6 340.3 Consumer Cyclical 1,190.8 110.6 153.3 8.0 1,037.5 118.6 Consumer Non-Cyclical 5,617.7 539.7 836.1 52.5 4,781.6 592.2 Energy (Oil & Gas) 3,706.9 452.0 371.3 21.5 3,335.6 473.5 Financial Institutions 3,435.0 269.8 267.9 8.6 3,167.1 278.4 Mortgage/Asset-Backed 2,039.3 180.6 343.5 4.0 1,695.8 184.6 Sovereigns 1,373.2 146.8 87.2 2.8 1,286.0 149.6 Technology 1,138.1 73.2 389.1 21.4 749.0 94.6 Transportation 1,469.3 152.1 218.5 9.0 1,250.8 161.1 U.S. Government Agencies and Municipalities 2,979.3 244.7 496.0 45.6 2,483.3 290.3 Public Utilities 10,403.0 1,074.1 929.3 52.8 9,473.7 1,126.9 Redeemable Preferred Stocks 37.7 4.7 37.7 4.7 Total $ 42,344.4 $ 4,054.8 $ 5,475.7 $ 303.9 $ 36,868.7 $ 4,358.7 75 The following two tables show the length of time our investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2013 and at the end of the prior four quarters. The relationships of the current fair value to amortized cost are not necessarily indicative of the fair value to amortized cost relationships for the securities throughout the entire time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position nor are they necessarily indicative of the relationships after December 31, 2013 . The increase in the unrealized loss on both investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities during 2013 was due primarily to an increase in U.S. Treasury rates which occurred during the period. We held no fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2013 with a gross unrealized loss of $10.0 million or greater. Unrealized Loss on Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position (in millions of dollars) 2013 2012 December 31 September 30 June 30 March 31 December 31 Fair Value < 100% >= 70% of Amortized Cost <= 90 days $ 20.0 $ 12.3 $ 176.6 $ 9.7 $ 3.9 > 90 <= 180 days 11.5 175.7 12.6 6.3 0.4 > 180 <= 270 days 183.3 12.3 12.3 0.4 0.4 > 270 days <= 1 year 12.6 9.5 0.1 0.1 0.3 > 1 year <= 2 years 11.0 1.0 1.7 0.5 0.2 > 2 years <= 3 years 0.1 3.4 3.3 5.9 > 3 years 6.9 10.2 9.1 7.5 12.3 Sub-total 245.3 221.1 215.8 27.8 23.4 Fair Value < 70% >= 40% of Amortized Cost > 3 years 2.5 Total $ 247.8 $ 221.1 $ 215.8 $ 27.8 $ 23.4 Unrealized Loss on Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position (in millions of dollars) 2013 2012 December 31 September 30 June 30 March 31 December 31 Fair Value < 100% >= 70% of Amortized Cost <= 90 days $ 2.6 $ 4.3 $ 33.3 $ 3.0 $ 0.3 > 90 <= 180 days 2.5 38.1 1.6 0.4 1.4 > 180 <= 270 days 29.9 2.0 0.6 2.6 > 270 days <= 1 year 1.7 0.5 0.3 2.5 > 1 year <= 2 years 0.9 6.8 3.9 4.9 6.8 > 2 years <= 3 years 4.1 1.2 1.0 6.2 > 3 years 14.1 15.0 12.7 8.0 12.5 Sub-total 55.8 66.2 53.2 18.2 32.3 Fair Value < 70% >= 40% of Amortized Cost > 3 years 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 Total $ 56.1 $ 66.5 $ 53.5 $ 18.5 $ 32.6 76 At December 31, 2013 , we had minimal exposure to investments for which the payment of interest and principal is guaranteed under a financial guaranty insurance policy, and all such securities are rated investment-grade absent the guaranty insurance policy. At December 31, 2013 , we held $201.4 million fair value ($185.7 million amortized cost) of perpetual debentures, or "hybrid" securities, that generally have no fixed maturity date. Interest on these securities due on any payment date may be deferred by the issuer. The interest payments are generally deferrable only to the extent that the issuer has suspended dividends or other distributions or payments to any of its shareholders or any other perpetual debt instrument. At December 31, 2013 , our mortgage/asset-backed securities had an average life of 5.23 years, effective duration of 4.31 years, and a weighted average credit rating of Aa1. The mortgage/asset-backed securities are valued on a monthly basis using valuations supplied by the brokerage firms that are dealers in these securities as well as independent pricing services. One of the risks involved in investing in mortgage/asset-backed securities is the uncertainty of the timing of cash flows from the underlying loans due to prepayment of principal with the possibility of reinvesting the funds in a lower interest rate environment. We use models which incorporate economic variables and possible future interest rate scenarios to predict future prepayment rates. The timing of prepayment cash flows may also cause volatility in our recognition of investment income. We recognize investment income on these securities using a constant effective yield based on projected prepayments of the underlying loans and the estimated economic life of the securities. Actual prepayment experience is reviewed periodically, and effective yields are recalculated when differences arise between prepayments originally projected and the actual prepayments received and currently projected. The effective yield is recalculated on a retrospective basis, and the adjustment is reflected in net investment income. We have no exposure to subprime mortgages, "Alt-A" loans, or collateralized debt obligations in our investment portfolios. We have not invested in mortgage-backed derivatives, such as interest-only, principal-only, or residuals, where market values can be highly volatile relative to changes in interest rates. The credit quality of our mortgage-backed securities portfolio has not been negatively impacted by the issues in the market concerning subprime mortgage loans. The change in value of our mortgage-backed securities portfolio has moved in line with that of prime agency-backed mortgage-backed securities. As of December 31, 2013 , the amortized cost and fair value of our below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities was $3,101.7 million and $3,199.3 million , respectively. Below-investment-grade securities are inherently more risky than investment-grade securities since the risk of default by the issuer, by definition and as exhibited by bond rating, is higher. Also, the secondary market for certain below-investment-grade issues can be highly illiquid. Additional downgrades may occur, but we do not anticipate any liquidity problems resulting from our investments in below-investment-grade securities, nor do we expect these investments to adversely affect our ability to hold our other investments to maturity. Our investments in issuers in foreign countries are chosen for specific portfolio management purposes, including asset and liability management and portfolio diversification across geographic lines and sectors to minimize non-market risks. In our approach to investing in fixed maturity securities, specific investments within approved countries and industry sectors are evaluated for their market position and specific strengths and potential weaknesses. For each security, we consider the political, legal, and financial environment of the sovereign entity in which an issuer is domiciled and operates. The country of domicile is based on consideration of the issuer's headquarters, in addition to location of the assets and the country in which the majority of sales and earnings are derived. We continually evaluate our foreign investment risk exposure. We do not have foreign currency risk, as the cash flows from these investments are either denominated in currencies or hedged into currencies to match the related liabilities. We have no direct exposure to sovereign debt of these countries, no unfunded commitments to issuers domiciled in these countries, and have not used credit derivatives to hedge our exposure or to sell credit protection. Our monitoring is heightened for investments in certain countries due to our concerns over the current economic and political environments as well as the banking crisis, and we believe these investments are more vulnerable to potential credit problems. For those countries for which we have heightened our monitoring, the following table lists our exposure by country, together with a discussion on each exposure. We have neither direct nor indirect exposure to sovereign debt of any other countries for which we believe there is a heightened risk of sovereign default. 77 European Fixed Maturity Securities Exposure - By Country As of December 31, 2013 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value Amortized Cost Italy $ 233.4 $ 228.6 Portugal 50.9 47.1 Spain 245.4 224.1 Total $ 529.7 $ 499.8 Italy We have no direct exposure to Italian financial institutions. We believe there are risks associated with the debt sustainability of Italy given its political and economic pressures. As of December 31, 2013 , all of our Italian investments were current on their obligations to us, and we believe they will continue to meet their debt obligations. For those securities in an unrealized loss position, we have the intent to hold these investments to recovery in value. As a result, we did not recognize any other-than-temporary impairment losses on these investments during the year ended December 31, 2013 . Portugal We have no direct exposure to Portuguese financial institutions. In May 2011, Portugal received a support package valued at 78 billion from the International Monetary Fund/European Union. As of December 31, 2013 , our holding domiciled in Portugal is a geographically diversified utility company that was downgraded to below-investment-grade during the first quarter of 2012. As of December 31, 2013 , this company was current on its obligations to us, and we believe it will continue to meet its debt obligations. Spain We have no direct exposure to Spanish financial institutions, although we do own fixed maturity securities of a certain United Kingdom subsidiary of a Spanish financial institution. We believe there are risks associated with Spain's high unemployment, budget deficit, banking sector issues, recessionary pressures, and potential regional secession issues. All but one of our Spanish domiciled securities were rated investment-grade as of December 31, 2013 , and all were current on their obligations to us. We believe they will continue to have the ability to meet their debt obligations. For those securities in an unrealized loss position, we have the intent to hold these investments to recovery in value. As a result, we did not recognize any other-than-temporary impairment losses on these investments during the year ended December 31, 2013 . Risk Management While we have no direct sovereign holdings in the aforementioned countries, we have performed comprehensive stress testing and scenario analyses on all of our corporate holdings of issuers domiciled in these countries. We have performed stress tests under a number of scenarios including deep recession, liquidity crisis, and currency redenomination with significant devaluation. We continue to closely monitor this situation. Potential risks for these corporate holdings include a lack of access to credit in their countries of domicile and redenomination risk as it pertains to their outstanding liabilities. Under either of these scenarios, we believe the risk is largely mitigated because our holdings in these countries are non-financial and operate in defensive industries that provide essential services. Most are market leaders with access to diverse, global capital markets. Current developments regarding ratings downgrades, bailout packages, or higher sovereign interest rates have not had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. 78 Mortgage Loans Our mortgage loan po rtfolio was $1,815.1 million and $1,712.7 million on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2013 and 2012 , respectively. Our mortgage loan portfolio is comprised entirely of commercial mortgage loans. We believe our mortgage loan portfolio is well diversified geographically and among property types. The incidence of problem mortgage loans and foreclosure activity continues to be low. Due to conservative underwriting, we expect the level of problem loans to remain low relative to the industry. We held one mortgage loan at December 31, 2013 that was considered impaired and was carried at the estimated net realizable value of $13.1 million, net of a valuation allowance of $1.5 million. We held two mortgage loans at December 31, 2012 which were considered impaired and were carried at the estimated net realizable value of $17.4 million, net of a valuation allowance of $1.5 million. Derivative Financial Instruments We use derivative financial instruments primarily to manage reinvestment, duration, foreign currency, and credit risks. Historically, we have utilized current and forward interest rate swaps and options on forward interest rate swaps and U.S. Treasury rates, current and forward currency swaps, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, forward contracts on specific fixed income securities, and credit default swaps. Our current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position less collateral held, was $5.5 million at December 31, 2013 . We held $1.1 million of cash collateral from our counterparties at December 31, 2013 . The carrying value of fixed maturity securities posted as collateral to our counterparties was $95.6 million at December 31, 2013 . We had no cash collateral posted to our counterparties at December 31, 2013 . We believe that our credit risk is mitigated by our use of multiple counterparties, all of which have a median credit rating of A3 or better, and by our use of cross-collateralization agreements. Other Our exposure to non-current investments, defined as foreclosed real estate and invested assets which are delinquent as to interest and/or principal payments, totaled $39.9 million and $63.3 million on a fair value basis at December 31, 2013 and December 31, 2012 , respectively. See Notes 3 and 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our investments and our derivative financial instruments. Liquidity and Capital Resources Overview Our liquidity requirements are met primarily by cash flows provided from operations, principally in our insurance subsidiaries. Premium and investment income, as well as maturities and sales of invested assets, provide the primary sources of cash. Debt and/or securities offerings provide an additional source of liquidity. Cash is applied to the payment of policy benefits, costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions), operating expenses, and taxes, as well as purchases of new investments. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations. We attempt to match our asset cash flows and durations with expected liability cash flows and durations to meet the funding requirements of our business. However, deterioration in the credit market may delay our ability to sell our positions in certain of our fixed maturity securities in a timely manner and adversely impact the price we receive for such securities, which may negatively impact our cash flows. Furthermore, if we experience defaults on securities held in the investment portfolios of our insurance subsidiaries, this will negatively impact statutory capital, which could reduce our insurance subsidiaries' capacity to pay dividends to our holding companies. A reduction in dividends to our holding companies could force us to seek external financing to avoid impairing our ability to pay dividends to our stockholders or meet our debt and other payment obligations. As requirements of Dodd-Frank continue to take effect in 2014 and in subsequent years, to the extent that we enter into derivatives that are subject to centralized exchanges and cleared through a regulated clearinghouse, we may be subject to stricter collateral requirements which could have an adverse effect on our overall liquidity. 79 Our policy benefits are primarily in the form of claim payments, and we have minimal exposure to the policy withdrawal risk associated with deposit products such as individual life policies or annuities. A decrease in demand for our insurance products or an increase in the incidence of new claims or the duration of existing claims could negatively impact our cash flows from operations. However, our historical pattern of benefits paid to revenues is consistent, even during cycles of economic downturns, which serves to minimize liquidity risk. Cash equivalents and marketable securities held at Unum Group and our other intermediate holding companies are a significant source of liquidity for us and were approximately $514 million and $805 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The decline during 2013 was due primarily to repurchases of our common stock and a capital contribution of approximately $300 million related to our 2013 re-domestication of UnumProvident International Ltd. (UPIL) a captive reinsurance subsidiary, from Bermuda to the United States. The December 31, 2013 balance, of which approximately $230 million was held in certain of our foreign subsidiaries in the U.K., was comprised primarily of commercial paper, fixed maturity securities with a current average maturity of 1.7 years, and various money-market funds. No significant restrictions exist on our ability to use or access these funds. We currently have no intent, nor do we foresee a need, to repatriate funds from our foreign subsidiaries in the U.K. We believe we hold domestic resources sufficient to fund our liquidity requirements for the next 12 months. If we repatriate additional funds from our subsidiaries in the U.K., the amounts repatriated would be subject to repatriation tax effects which generally equal the difference in the U.S. tax rate and the U.K. tax rate. As part of our capital deployment strategy, we have in recent years repurchased shares of Unum Group's common stock, as authorized by our board of directors. Our current share repurchase program was approved by our board of directors in December 2013 and authorizes the repurchase of up to $750 million of common stock through June 2015, with the pace of repurchase activity to depend upon various factors such as the level of available cash, alternative uses for cash, and our stock price. This new authorization replaced the previous authorization of $750 million that was scheduled to expire in January 2014. The dollar value of shares remaining under the current repurchase program was approximately $730 million at December 31, 2013. Cash Available from Subsidiaries Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries depend on payments from subsidiaries to pay dividends to stockholders, to pay debt obligations, and/or to pay expenses. These payments by our insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries may take the form of dividends, operating and investment management fees, and/or interest payments on loans from the parent to a subsidiary. Restrictions under applicable state insurance laws limit the amount of dividends that can be paid to a parent company from its insurance subsidiaries in any 12-month period without prior approval by regulatory authorities. For life insurance companies domiciled in the U.S., that limitation generally equals, depending on the state of domicile, either ten percent of an insurer's statutory surplus with respect to policyholders as of the preceding year end or the statutory net gain from operations, excluding realized investment gains and losses, of the preceding year. The payment of dividends to a parent company from a life insurance subsidiary is generally further limited to the amount of unassigned funds. Certain of our domestic insurance subsidiaries cede blocks of business to Northwind Reinsurance Company (Northwind Re), Tailwind Reinsurance Company (Tailwind Re), and UPIL, all of which are affiliated captive reinsurance subsidiaries (captive reinsurers) with Unum Group as the ultimate parent. The captive reinsurers are all domiciled in the United States as of December 31, 2013. The ability of Northwind Re, Tailwind Re, and UPIL to pay dividends to their respective parent companies will depend on their satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the business reinsured by Northwind Re, Tailwind Re, and UPIL. See "Debt" contained herein in this Item 7 and Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of dividend restrictions for Northwind Re. Unum Group and/or certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries may also receive dividends from our U.K. subsidiaries, the payment of which may be subject to applicable insurance company regulations and capital guidance in the U.K. Unum Limited will be impacted by new capital requirements and risk management standards under Solvency II which is to be adopted January 1, 2016. Solvency II requirements have not been fully finalized, but the current proposals contain amended requirements on capital adequacy and risk management for insurers. Although the impact of Solvency II cannot be fully determined at this time, its implementation will result in changes to the capital, supervisory, and disclosure requirements applicable to our U.K. subsidiaries. The payment of dividends to the parent company from our subsidiaries also requires the approval of the individual subsidiary's board of directors. 80 The ability of Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries to continue to receive dividends from their insurance subsidiaries also depends on additional factors such as RBC ratios and capital adequacy and/or solvency requirements, funding growth objectives at an affiliate level, and maintaining appropriate capital adequacy ratios to support desired ratings. Unum Group's RBC ratio for its traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was approximately 405 percent at December 31, 2013, compared to 396 percent at December 31, 2012. The capital adequacy and/or individual RBC ratios for each of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries, including our captive reinsurers, is above the range that would require state regulatory action. During 2014, we intend to maintain a level of capital in our U.S. and U.K. insurance subsidiaries above the applicable capital adequacy requirements and minimum solvency margins. The amount available during 2013 for the payment of ordinary dividends from Unum Group's traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, which excludes our captive reinsurers, was $623.7 million, of which $550.4 million was declared and paid. The amount available during 2013 from Unum Limited was 144.7 million, of which 37.5 million was declared and paid to one of our U.K. holding companies. During 2013, Tailwind Re and Northwind Re paid dividends of $12.4 million and $43.3 million to Tailwind Holdings and Northwind Holdings, respectively. UPIL paid no dividends during 2013. Although we may not utilize the entire amount of available dividends, based on applicable restrictions under current law, approximately $591 million is available, without prior approval by regulatory authorities, during 2014 for the payment of dividends from our traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, which excludes our captive reinsurers. Approximately 188 million is available for the payment of dividends from Unum Limited during 2014, subject to regulatory approval. Insurance regulatory restrictions do not limit the amount of dividends available for distribution from non-insurance subsidiaries except where the non-insurance subsidiaries are held directly or indirectly by an insurance subsidiary and only indirectly by Unum Group. Funding for Employee Retirement Benefits In 2013, we adopted plan amendments which freeze participation and benefit accruals in our defined benefit pension plans in the U.S. and U.K., effective December 31, 2013 for the U.S. plans and June 30, 2014 for the U.K. plan. Because the amendments eliminate all future service accruals subsequent to the effective dates of the amendments, we were required to remeasure the benefit obligations of our pension plans, which decreased our net pension liability approximately $330 million with a corresponding increase in other comprehensive income, less applicable income tax of approximately $115 million as of the respective dates of remeasurement. Concurrent with our amendments to our defined benefit pension plans, we adopted amendments to increase the benefits under our defined contribution plans commensurate with the effective dates of the pension plan amendments. We have met all minimum pension funding requirements set forth by ERISA. We made a voluntary contribution of $50.0 million to our U.S. qualified defined benefit plan during 2013, but we do not expect to make any additional contributions during 2014. We contribute to our U.K. pension plan sufficient to meet the minimum funding requirement under U.K. legislation. We made required contributions of 2.5 million during 2013, and we expect to make contributions of approximately 1.4 million during 2014. We made contributions during 2013 of approximately $ 18.8 million and 1.9 million to our U.S. and U.K. defined contribution plans, respectively, and expect to make contributions of approximately $71.5 million and 2.5 million during 2014. We have estimated our future funding requirements under the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and under applicable U.K. law, considering the effects of the retirement benefit changes described herein, and do not believe that any future funding requirements will cause a material adverse effect on our liquidity. See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our employee benefit plans. Debt At December 31, 2013 , we had short-term debt of $76.5 million , consisting entirely of securities lending agreements, and long-term debt of $2,612.0 million , consisting primarily of senior secured notes and junior subordinated debt securities. There are no significant financial covenants associated with any of our outstanding debt obligations. We continually monitor our compliance with our debt covenants and remain in compliance. We have not observed any current trends that would cause a breach of any debt covenants. 81 Purchases and Retirement of Debt In January 2013, we purchased and retired the outstanding principal of $62.5 million on the floating rate, senior secured non-recourse notes issued by Tailwind Holdings, resulting in a before-tax gain of $4.0 million. During 2012 and 2011 , Tailwind Holdings made principal payments of $10.0 million each year. Northwind Holdings made principal payments on its floating rate, senior secured notes of $60.0 million in both 2013 and 2012 and $74.4 million in 2011. In 2011, we made debt repayments of $225.1 million at the maturity date of our remaining 7.625% senior notes due March 2011. Issuance of Debt In August 2012, we issued $250.0 million of unsecured senior notes in a public offering. These notes, due 2042, bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.75% and are payable semi-annually. The notes are callable at or above par and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt. The balance outstanding on these notes was $250.0 million at December 31, 2013 . In 2010, we issued $400.0 million of unsecured senior notes in a public offering. These notes, due in 2020, bear interest at a fixed rate of 5.625% and are payable semi-annually. The notes are callable at or above par and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt. In addition, these notes are effectively subordinated to any indebtedness of our subsidiaries. The balance outstanding on these notes was $400.0 million at December 31, 2013 . In 2009, we issued $350.0 million of unsecured senior notes in a public offering. These notes, due in 2016, bear interest at a fixed rate of 7.125% and are payable semi-annually. The notes are callable at or above par and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt. The balance outstanding on these notes was $350.0 million at December 31, 2013 . In 2007, Northwind Holdings issued $800.0 million floating rate, insured, senior, secured notes, due 2037, in a private offering. Recourse for the payment of principal, interest, and other amounts due on the notes will be limited to the collateral for the notes and other assets of Northwind Holdings, consisting primarily of the stock of its sole subsidiary Northwind Re. Northwind Holdings' ability to meet its payment obligations under the notes will be dependent principally upon its receipt of dividends from Northwind Re. The ability of Northwind Re to pay dividends to Northwind Holdings will depend on its satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the reinsured claims of Provident, Paul Revere and Unum America (the ceding insurers) reinsured by Northwind Re. None of Unum Group, the ceding insurers, Northwind Re or any other affiliate of Northwind Holdings is an obligor or guarantor with respect to the notes. The balance outstanding on these notes was $440.0 million at December 31, 2013 . In 2006, Tailwind Holdings issued $130.0 million floating rate, insured, senior, secured notes, due 2036, in a private offering. Recourse for the payment of principal, interest, and other amounts due on the notes was limited to the collateral for the notes and the other assets of Tailwind Holdings, consisting primarily of the stock of its sole subsidiary Tailwind Re. These notes were purchased and retired in January 2013. In 2005, Unum Group repatriated $454.8 million in unremitted foreign earnings from its U.K. subsidiaries, and as part of its repatriation plan, UnumProvident Finance Company plc, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Unum Group, issued $400.0 million of 6.85% senior debentures, due 2015, in a private offering. The debentures are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Unum Group. The aggregate principal amount outstanding was $296.9 million at December 31, 2013 . In 2002, Unum Group issued $250.0 million of 7.375% senior debentures due 2032, in a public offering. The 7.375% notes have an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $39.5 million at December 31, 2013 . 82 In 1998, Unum Group completed public offerings of $200.0 million of 7.25% senior notes due 2028, $200.0 million of 7.0% senior notes due 2018, and $250.0 million of 6.75% senior notes due 2028. None of these amounts have been reduced other than the 6.7 5% notes, which have an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $165.8 million at December 31, 2013 . In 1998, Provident Financing Trust I (the trust), a 100 percent-owned finance subsidiary of Unum Group, issued $300.0 million of 7.405% capital securities in a public offering. These capital securities, which mature in 2038, are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Unum Group, have a liquidation value of $1,000 per capital security, and have a mandatory redemption feature under certain circumstances. Unum Group issued 7.405% junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, which mature in 2038, to the trust in connection with the capital securities offering. The securities issued by the trust have an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $226.5 million at December 31, 2013 . Unum Group has medium-term notes with an aggregate principal amount outstanding of $50.8 million at December 31, 2013 which were initially issued in three separate series in 1990, 1993, and 1996, pursuant to an indenture dated September 15, 1990. The notes are fixed maturity rate notes with fixed maturity dates ranging between nine months to thirty years from the issuance date. Credit Facility In August 2013, we entered into a five-year, $400 million unsecured revolving credit facility. Under the terms of the agreement, we may request that the credit facility be increased up to $600 million. Borrowings under the facility are for general corporate uses and are subject to financial covenants, negative covenants, and events of default that are customary. The facility provides for interest rates based on either the prime rate or LIBOR. Our credit facility's financial covenants contain provisions regarding our leverage and net worth. We do not anticipate any violation of those covenants. However, if economic conditions worsen and we incur unexpected losses, we could violate certain of the financial covenants imposed by the credit facility and lose access to available funds through that facility. At December 31, 2013 , no amount was outstanding on the facility. While maintenance of the unsecured revolving credit facility provides a valuable source of contingent liquidity, we believe operating cash flows are sufficient to support our short-term liquidity needs. Shelf Registration We have a shelf registration, which we renewed in 2011, with the Securities and Exchange Commission to issue various types of securities, including common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depository shares, stock purchase contracts, units and warrants, or preferred securities of wholly-owned finance trusts. The shelf registration enables us to raise funds from the offering of any securities covered by the shelf registration as well as any combination thereof, subject to market conditions and our capital needs. See Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. 83 Commitments The following table summarizes contractual obligations and our reinsurance recoverable by period as of December 31, 2013 : (in millions of dollars) Total In 1 Year or Less After 1 Year up to 3 Years After 3 Years up to 5 Years After 5 Years Payments Due Short-term Debt $ 76.5 $ 76.5 $ $ $ Long-term Debt 4,357.3 143.2 905.5 400.2 2,908.4 Policyholder Liabilities 42,573.8 4,585.6 6,822.5 5,176.2 25,989.5 Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits 647.8 22.1 39.7 39.2 546.8 Miscellaneous Liabilities 567.2 510.2 16.3 11.7 29.0 Operating Leases 213.9 40.7 50.3 34.3 88.6 Purchase Obligations 331.3 321.3 9.8 0.2 Total $ 48,767.8 $ 5,699.6 $ 7,844.1 $ 5,661.8 $ 29,562.3 Receipts Due Reinsurance Recoverable $ 7,692.6 $ 295.3 $ 653.8 $ 534.3 $ 6,209.2 Long-term debt includes contractual principal and interest payments and therefore exceeds the amount shown in the consolidated balance sheets. See Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on our debt. Policyholder liability maturities and the related reinsurance recoverable represent the projected payout of the current in-force policyholder liabilities and the expected cash inflows from reinsurers for liabilities ceded and therefore incorporate uncertainties as to the timing and amount of claim payments. We utilize extensive liability modeling to project future cash flows from the in-force busin ess. The primary assumptions used to project future cash flows are claim incidence rates for mortality and morbidity, claim resolution rates, persistency rates, and interest rates. These cash flows are discounted to determine the current value of the projected claim payments. The timing and amount of payments on policyholder liabilities may vary significantly from the projections above. See our previous discussion of asset and liability management under "Investments" contained in this Item 7 and Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. Pensions and other postretirement benefit obligations include our defined benefit pension and postretirement plans for our employee s, including non-qualified pension plans. Pension plan obligations, other than the non-qualified plans, represent our expected required regulatory contributions which at December 31, 2013 totaled $2.3 million . Non-qualified pension plan and other postretirement benefit obligations represent the expected benefit payments related to these plans. See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 and "Critical Accounting Estimates" contained in this Item 7 for additional information. 84 Miscellaneous liabilities include commissions due and accrued, deferred compensation liabilities, state premium taxes payable, amounts due to reinsurance companies, accounts payable, obligations to return unrestricted cash collateral to our derivatives counterparties, commitments to fund tax credit partnership investments, and various other liabilities that represent contractual obligations. Obligations where the timing of the payment was uncertain are included in the one year or less category. See Note 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on our derivatives. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements Operating leases include noncancelable obligations on certain office space, equipment, and software. Purchase obligations include non-binding commitments of $ 58.0 million to fund certain of our investments in private placement securities, $ 158.4 million to fund certain private equity partnerships, and $ 83.9 million to fund certain commercial mortgage loans. These are shown in the preceding table based on the expiration date of the commitments. The funds will be due upon satisfaction of contractual notice from the partnership trustee, issuer of the private placement securities, or borrower. The amounts may or may not be funded. Also included are obligations with outside parties for computer data processing services, software maintenance agreements, and consulting services. The aggregate obligation remaining under these agreements was $ 28.3 million at December 31, 2013 . As part of our regular investing strategy, we receive collateral from unaffiliated third parties through transactions which include both securities lending and also short-term agreements to purchase securities with the agreement to resell them at a later specified date. For both types of transactions, we require that a minimum of 102 percent of the fair value of the securities loaned or securities purchased under repurchase agreements be maintained as collateral. Generally, cash is received as collateral under these agreements. In the event that securities are received as collateral, we are not permitted to sell or re-post them. We also post our fixed maturity securities as collateral to unaffiliated third parties through transactions including both securities lending and also short-term agreements to sell securities with the agreement to repurchase them at a later specified date. See "Transfers of Financial Assets" as follows for further discussion. To help limit the credit exposure of derivatives, we enter into master netting agreements with our counterparties whereby contracts in a gain position can be offset against contracts in a loss position. We also typically enter into bilateral, cross-collateralization agreements with our counterparties to help limit the credit exposure of the derivatives. These agreements require the counterparty in a loss position to submit acceptable collateral with the other counterparty in the event the net loss position meets or exceeds an agreed upon amount. Our current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position, including accrued interest receivable less collateral held, was $ 5.5 million at December 31, 2013 . We held $ 1.1 million cash collateral from our counterparties at December 31, 2013 . We posted fixed maturity securities with a carrying value of $ 95.6 million as collateral to our counterparties at December 31, 2013 . See Notes 3 and 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. Transfers of Financial Assets Our investment policy permits us to lend fixed maturity securities to unaffiliated financial institutions in short-term securities len ding agreements, which increase our investment income with minimal risk. We account for all of our securities lending agreements and repurchase agreements as collateralized financings. We had $76.5 million of securities lending agreements outstanding which were collateralized by cash at December 31, 2013 and were reported as short-term debt in our consolidated balance sheets. The cash received as collateral was reinvested in short-term investments. The average balance during the year ended December 31, 2013 was $159.0 million, and the maximum amount outstanding at any month end was $292.3 million. In addition, at December 31, 2013 , we had $132.9 million of off-balance sheet securities lending agreements which were collateralized by securities that we were neither permitted to sell nor control. The average balance of these off-balance sheet transactions during the year ended December 31, 2013 was $67.0 million, and the maximum amount outstanding at any month end was $137.7 million. We had no repurchase agreements outstanding at December 31, 2013 . The average balance during the year ended December 31, 2013 was $0.7 million, and the maximum amount outstanding at any month end was $12.8 million. Our use of repurchase agreements and securities lending agreements can fluctuate during any given period and will depend on our liquidity position, the availability of long-term investments that meet our purchasing criteria, and our general business needs. See Note 3 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. 85 Consolidated Cash Flows Operating Cash Flows Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,031.5 million for 2013 , compared to $1,379.6 million and $1,193.7 million for 2012 and 2011 , respectively. Operating cash flows are primarily attributable to the receipt of premium and investment income, offset by payments of claims, commissions, expenses, and income taxes. Premium income growth is dependent not only on new sales, but on renewals and growth of existing business, renewal price increases, and persistency. Investment income growth is dependent on the growth in the underlying assets supporting our insurance reserves and capital and on the earned yield. The level of commissions and operating expenses is attributable to the level of sales and the first year acquisition expenses associated with new business as well as the maintenance of existing business. The level of paid claims is affected partially by the growth and aging of the block of business and also by the general economy, as previously discussed in the operating results by segment. Operating cash flows also included contributions of $70.4 million, $74.3 million, and $20.3 million to our defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans for 2013, 2012, and 2011, respectively. The variance in the change in insurance reserves and liabilities and change in income tax adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities for 2011 compared to 2013 and 2012 was due primarily to the 2011 charges for our long-term care and individual disability closed blocks of business. Investing Cash Flows Investing cash inflows consist primarily of the proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments. Investing cash outflows consist primarily of payments for purchases of investments. Net cash used by investing activities was $39.9 million for 2013 , compared to $1,113.4 million and $410.3 million for 2012 and 2011 , respectively. Our investment strategy is to match the cash flows and durations of our assets with the cash flows and durations of our liabilities to meet the funding requirements of our business. Currently, when our fixed maturity securities mature, the proceeds may be reinvested at a yield below that assumed in the pricing of our insurance products. When market opportunities arise, as occurred during the third quarter of 2013, we may sell selected securities and reinvest the proceeds to improve the yield and credit quality of our portfolio. We may at times also sell selected securities and reinvest the proceeds to improve the duration matching of our assets and liabilities and/or re-balance our portfolio. As a result, sales before maturity may vary from period to period. The sale and purchase of short-term investments is influenced by our securities lending program and by the amount of cash which is at times held in short-term investments to facilitate the availability of cash to fund the purchase of appropriate long-term investments and/or to fund our capital deployment program. See Notes 3 and 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information on our investing cash flows. Financing Cash Flows Financing cash flows consist primarily of borrowings and repayments of debt, issuance or repurchase of common stock, and dividends paid to stockholders. Net cash used by financing activities was $974.8 million in 2013 , compared to $305.5 million and $720.4 million in 2012 and 2011 , respectively. The balance outstanding under our securities lending program decreased by $379.3 million in 2013 and increased by $143.5 million and $312.3 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. During 2013 , we purchased and retired the outstanding principal of $62.5 million on our floating rate, senior secured non-recourse notes issued by Tailwind Holdings for $56.2 million and made principal payments of $60.0 million on our senior secured non-recourse notes issued by Northwind Holdings. Aggregate principal payments on the Tailwind Holdings and Northwind Holdings notes were $70.0 million and $84.4 million during 2012 and 2011, respectively. During 2012, we issued $250.0 million of 5.75% senior notes and received proceeds of $246.4 million, excluding the associated debt issuance costs and discounts. During 2011, we made short-term debt repayments of $225.1 million at the maturity date of our senior notes due March 2011. 86 Cash used to repurchase shares of Unum Group's common stock during 2013 , 2012, and 2011 was $317.2 million, $496.7 million, and $619.9 million, respectively. During 2013, 2012, and 2011, we paid dividends of $146.5 million , $133.8 million , and $121.0 million , respectively, to holders of Unum Group's common stock. See "Debt" contained in this Item 7, and Notes 8 and 10 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information on our financing cash flows. Ratings AM Best, Fitch, Moody's, and S&P are among the third parties that assign issuer credit ratings to Unum Group and financial strength ratings to our insurance subsidiaries. We compete based in part on the financial strength ratings provided by rating agencies. A downgrade of our financial strength ratings can be expected to adversely affect us and could potentially, among other things, adversely affect our relationships with distributors of our products and services and retention of our sales force, negatively impact persistency and new sales, particularly large case group sales and individual sales, and generally adversely affect our ability to compete. A downgrade in the issuer credit rating assigned to Unum Group can be expected to adversely affect our cost of capital or our ability to raise additional capital. The table below reflects the issuer credit ratings for Unum Group and the financial strength ratings for each of our traditional insurance subsidiaries as of the date of this filing. AM Best Fitch Moody's S&P Issuer Credit Ratings bbb (Good) BBB (Good) Baa2 (Adequate) BBB (Adequate) Financial Strength Ratings Provident Life and Accident A (Excellent) A (Strong) A2 (Good) A (Strong) Provident Life and Casualty A (Excellent) A (Strong) Not Rated Not Rated Unum Life of America A (Excellent) A (Strong) A2 (Good) A (Strong) First Unum Life A (Excellent) A (Strong) A2 (Good) A (Strong) Colonial Life & Accident A (Excellent) A (Strong) A2 (Good) A (Strong) Paul Revere Life A (Excellent) A (Strong) A2 (Good) A (Strong) Paul Revere Variable B++ (Good) A (Strong) A2 (Good) Not Rated Unum Limited Not Rated Not Rated Not Rated A- (Strong) We maintain an ongoing dialogue with the four rating agencies that evaluate us in order to inform them of progress we are making regarding our strategic objectives and financial plans as well as other pertinent issues. A significant component of our communications involves our annual review meeting with each of the four agencies. We hold other meetings throughout the year regarding our business, including, but not limited to, quarterly updates. On January 30, 2013 and again on December 8, 2013, AM Best affirmed its A rating of Unum Group's primary domestic insurance subsidiaries and affirmed the bbb issuer credit rating for Unum Group. AM Best's outlook for all ratings is "stable." On February 11, 2013 and again on September 30, 2013, Fitch affirmed its A rating of Unum Group's domestic insurance subsidiaries and affirmed the senior debt rating of Unum Group at BBB. Fitch's rating outlook for all ratings is "stable." On June 24, 2013, S&P affirmed its A rating of Unum Group's primary domestic insurance subsidiaries and affirmed the BBB counterparty credit rating for Unum Group. S&P's and Moody's outlooks for all ratings are "stable." There have been no other changes in any of the rating agencies' outlook statements or ratings during 2013 or during 2014 prior to the date of this filing. 87 Agency ratings are not directed toward the holders of our securities and are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities. Each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and each rating should be regarded as an independent assessment, not conditional on any other rating. Given the dynamic nature of the ratings process, changes by these or other rating agencies may or may not occur in the near-term. Based on our ongoing dialogue with the rating agencies concerning our improved insurance risk profile, our financial flexibility, our operating performance, and the quality of our investment portfolio, we do not expect any negative actions from any of the four rating agencies related to either Unum Group's current issuer credit ratings or the financial strength ratings of its insurance subsidiaries. However, in the event that we are unable to meet the rating agency specific guideline values to maintain our current ratings, including but not limited to maintenance of our capital management metrics at the threshold values stated and maintenance of our financial flexibility and operational consistency, we could be placed on a negative credit watch, with a potential for a downgrade to both our issuer credit ratings and our financial strength ratings. See "Ratings" contained herein in Item 1 and "Risk Factors" contained herein in Item 1A for further discussion. 88 
