CIK: 5513
Company Name: UNUMPROVIDENT CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-03-03


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Introduction The following management assessment of the Company financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained herein in Item 8. Executive Summary Segment operating performance improved during 2005 relative to the prior year, with the Unum Limited segment, the Colonial segment, and many of the lines of business in the U.S. Brokerage segment reporting stable or improving operating performance. The Company believes that its U.S. Brokerage segment group income protection business continues to exhibit long-term improvement with respect to underwriting, pricing, and expense management due to the actions taken over the past several quarters to increase the profitability in this business. Claims management results for U.S. Brokerage group long-term income protection during 2005 were below the Company long-term expectations for this business. Combined statutory capital and surplus for the Company U.S. insurance subsidiaries was approximately $4.270 billion at December 31, 2005, compared to $4.105 billion at December 31, 2004, maintaining the desired capital strength and dividend capacity. The Company 2005 priorities were as follows: Continued profitability improvement in the U.S. Brokerage segment lines of business, particularly in the group income protection line of business; Successful implementation of the changes required by the multistate market conduct regulatory settlement agreements and restoration of greater consistency in the timing of claim decisions and better claim management performance; Maintaining solid performance and profitable growth in the Company Unum Limited and Colonial segments; Managing the investment portfolio to match the effective asset and liability cash flows and durations while seeking to maximize investment income and total return and actively manage credit risk; Focusing on operational excellence, continuous improvement, and process innovation while aggressively managing expenses; Responding to the industry-wide focus on broker compensation and related matters and resolving the California market conduct examination; Producing improvements in financial and operating performance which meet or exceed the expectations of the rating agencies, thereby increasing the opportunity for improved debt and financial strength ratings over time; and Maintaining a strong balance sheet and capital position, including reducing the Company leverage. Progress in 2005 included the following: For the U.S. Brokerage segment, 2005 operating performance with respect to sales and pricing continued to exhibit evidence of long-term improvement. The Company began to restore sales momentum in its core markets while maintaining its commitment to a disciplined pricing approach for new business and believes that this strategy of focusing on the more profitable market segments will result in increased future profitability. While total sales in 2005 for fully insured products in the U.S. Brokerage group income protection line of business were down slightly relative to 2004, sales in the group income protection core small and mid-employer markets increased in 2005 compared to the prior year, as did sales for the supplemental and voluntary product lines, reflecting achievement of the Company strategy of developing a more balanced business mix through diversification. Persistency in the group long-term income protection line of business was consistent with the level of 2004 and was higher than the Company expectations. 28 Table of Contents The Company implemented the procedural and organizational changes outlined in the multistate settlement agreements and resulting from other process improvement initiatives. Implementation of the procedural and organizational changes temporarily reduced the operating effectiveness of the Company U.S. Brokerage claims management performance. Improving the claim management results was a major operational focus during 2005. Management assessed the causes of the lower than expected underlying performance and has been taking appropriate corrective actions. While progress was made during 2005 in improving operational effectiveness, the claims management results did not improve to the anticipated level. Management expects to restore the claim operational effectiveness during 2006 to reflect greater consistency in the timing of claim decisions, confirm management current belief concerning long-term expectations for recovery rates, and reflect any other more permanent effects of the changes, while maintaining the level of quality desired. To the extent that the operational improvement the Company has projected occurs at a slower rate, the Company may incur additional costs in its claim operations during 2006. See Settlement of Multistate Market Conduct Examination contained herein for further discussion of the multistate settlement agreements. The Company Unum Limited and Colonial segments produced favorable operating results in 2005 relative to 2004, with segment operating income increasing $36.4 million, or 24.1 percent, for Unum Limited and $12.5 million, or 8.0 percent, for Colonial. Sales for Colonial increased marginally compared to 2004, but gained growth momentum in the fourth quarter of 2005. Sales for Unum Limited decreased relative to the prior year due primarily to higher sales during 2004 that resulted from the exit of a major insurer from the U.K. market, but group life sales were also negatively impacted due to the competitive environment in the U.K. for group life products and the Company decision to maintain its pricing discipline. The continued low level of new money rates and the limited supply of longer duration quality investments currently available in the marketplace continued to pressure the Company investment results in 2005. The Company believes its portfolios are well positioned from an asset-liability management perspective and that an increase in interest rates, even slightly, will improve the Company ability to grow the profitability of its businesses. Despite this continued low interest rate environment and flat yield curve, all of the reserve interest margins in the Company primary business lines remained above the Company target range at year-end 2005, and in the current interest rate environment, the Company believes its margins will remain adequate. The Company continues to focus on operating effectiveness through short-term actions, continual improvement, and operational transformations such as integrated customer administration technology, web-enabled self service solutions, centralized account management technology, and local enrollment technology. The consolidated ratio of operating expenses to premium income was 21.4 percent for both 2005 and 2004. Excluding the fines and the charges for incremental direct operating expenses of $22.3 million resulting from the California Department of Insurance (DOI) settlement agreement in 2005 and $42.5 million resulting from the multistate settlement agreements in 2004, as discussed herein, the operating expense ratio increased slightly to 21.1 percent for 2005 compared to 20.8 percent for 2004. Premium income has been negatively impacted by the Company targeted rate increases in its group lines of business. The Company is aggressively managing its expenses against this expected decline in premium income while at the same time continuing to provide innovative and high quality service to its customers. In October 2005, the Company entered into a settlement agreement with the California DOI, which did not join the 2004 multistate settlement agreements, and also continues to cooperate and provide information in response to other regulatory investigations, as discussed more fully herein and in Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8. Following the announcement of the settlement agreement with the California DOI, and again subsequent to the issuance of the senior notes in November 2005, all four rating agencies reaffirmed the Company existing senior debt ratings, as more fully discussed in Ratings contained herein. The Company repaid $227.0 million of maturing debt in 2005. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company repatriated $454.8 million in unremitted foreign earnings from its U.K. subsidiaries, and as part of its repatriation plan, issued $400.0 million of ten-year senior notes. In order to maintain its current debt leverage ratio, the Company reduced its outstanding debt $400.0 million during the first quarter of 2006 by participating in the remarketing of the senior note element of the Company adjustable conversion-rate equity security units in February 2006. 29 Table of Contents During 2006, the Company priorities are: Operating improvement, particularly in its U.S. Brokerage group income protection line of business; Capital management and financial strength; Improvement of the perception of the Company with regulators and the media; and Continued reduction in its business volatility. 2005 Significant Transactions and Events California Settlement Agreement and Amendment of the Multistate Market Conduct Examination Settlement Agreements On October 3, 2005, certain of the Company insurance subsidiaries entered into a settlement agreement with the California DOI, concluding a market conduct examination and investigation of the subsidiaries disability claims handling practices. The California DOI had chosen not to join the fourth quarter of 2004 multistate settlement agreements the Company insurance subsidiaries entered into with state insurance regulators of 48 states upon conclusion of a multistate market conduct examination. See Settlement of Multistate Market Conduct Examination contained herein for further discussion of the multistate settlement agreements. As part of the settlement with the California DOI, the Company paid a civil penalty of $8.0 million and agreed to change certain practices and policy provisions related to its California business. The settlement also incorporates claims handling practices previously covered by the multistate settlement agreements and includes certain additional claim handling changes. In entering the settlement, the Company did not agree with the allegations and characterization of the Company past claims handling practices made by the California DOI. During the past two years, the Company has undertaken broad changes designed to improve the quality of claims decisions and its service levels to policyholders, including changes made as a result of the multistate settlement agreements. Because of this, the Company does not believe that the California DOI allegations or its market conduct examination report provide an accurate portrayal of the Company claim practices today. Under the terms of the settlement, the Company will change certain provisions specific to California disability policies. Additionally as part of the settlement, the Company received approval from the California DOI for the use of new individual and group disability policy forms, which became available for sale on November 1, 2005. The California settlement also incorporates the claim reassessment process contained in the 2004 multistate settlement agreements. California claimants were included in the 2004 multistate settlement agreements and could choose to participate in that claim reassessment process even though California did not join the multistate settlement agreements. Under the California agreement, reassessment notices are being mailed to approximately 26,000 individuals whose claims were denied or terminated between January 1, 1997, and September 30, 2005. Many of these individuals had already received reassessment notices under the multistate settlement agreements. Additionally, as part of the California agreement, an individual whose claim denial or termination is upheld by the Company reassessment unit may request an independent review by a member of a panel established for that purpose. Following such review, the final decision on the claim is that of the Company reassessment unit; however, if there is information that the reviewer believes is appropriate relating to the handling of the claim, the reviewer may add a report to the claim file. The Company amended the multistate settlement agreements to include mailing a notice of eligibility to participate in the claim reassessment process to approximately 29,500 individuals whose claims were denied or terminated between January 1, 1997, and December 31, 1999. Under the original multistate settlement agreements, claimants during this period could request participation in the reassessment process, but they were not sent a notice. Those claimants who are eligible to participate but do not receive notice pursuant to the amendment remain eligible to request participation until June 30, 2006. 30 Table of Contents Separately, the Company is offering to reassess private label, acquired, and reinsured block claims, as well as claims administered on behalf of certain employers from January 1, 1997, through January 18, 2005 (and through September 30, 2005 for California residents). These approximately 24,000 claims were not included in the 2004 multistate settlement agreements, but the offer being made generally follows the reassessment procedures contained in those agreements. Based on the settlement agreement and related matters, in the third quarter of 2005 the Company recorded a charge of $75.0 million before tax, or $51.6 million after tax, comprised of four elements: $14.3 million of incremental direct operating expenses to conduct the reassessment process; $37.3 million for benefit costs and reserves from claims reopened from the reassessment; $15.4 million for additional benefit costs and reserves for claims already incurred and currently in inventory that are anticipated as a result of the claim process changes being implemented; and the $8.0 million civil penalty. The charge decreased before-tax operating results for the U.S. Brokerage segment group income protection line of business and supplemental and voluntary lines of business $37.4 million and $3.3 million, respectively, and the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment $34.3 million. The ongoing costs of changes in the claims handling process and governance improvements will be included in the Company operating expenses as incurred going forward. These ongoing costs are not anticipated to materially affect the Company results of operations. Status of the Settlement Agreements In connection with the settlement agreements related to the multistate market conduct examination and the California DOI market conduct examination and investigation, as of mid-February 2006, the Company had completed the mailing of approximately 90 percent of the total required claim reassessment notices. Those individuals who want their claims reviewed have the opportunity to request a claim reassessment information form and have 60 days to complete the form once it is received. Through mid-February 2006, approximately 29 percent of the recipients of the reassessment notice have requested claim reassessment information forms. The rate of response for reassessment is likely to increase over time as many of the individuals have unexpired time remaining to request and complete the necessary information forms. The Company believes that total reserves for the reassessment process are adequate based on the reassessment results to date; however, actual results of the reassessment process may differ from the Company initial expectations. Other Regulatory Investigations Beginning in 2004, several of the Company insurance subsidiaries insurance regulators requested information relating to the subsidiaries policies and practices on one or more aspects of broker compensation, quoting insurance business, and related matters. Additionally, the Company has responded to investigations about certain of these same matters by state attorneys general and the U.S. Department of Labor. Following highly publicized litigation involving the alleged practices of a major insurance broker, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) has undertaken to provide a uniform Compensation Disclosure Amendment to the Producer Licensing Model Act that can be adopted by states in an effort to provide uniform guidance to insurers, brokers, and customers relating to disclosure of broker compensation. The Company expects there to be continued uncertainty surrounding this matter until clearer regulatory guidelines are established. In June 2004, the Company received a subpoena from the NYAG requesting documents and information relating to compensation arrangements between insurance brokers or intermediaries and the Company and its subsidiaries. The Company has received additional subpoenas or requests for additional information from the NYAG concerning its relations with insurance brokers. The NYAG has filed several lawsuits against brokers arising out of its investigation. Several insurers were cited in the complaints but not named as defendants one such complaint cited the Company but did not name it as a defendant. The Company is cooperating with the NYAG investigations and inquiries. Since October 2004, the Company and/or its insurance subsidiaries have received subpoenas or information requests from the Office of the NYAG, a Federal Grand Jury in San Diego, the District Attorney for the County of San Diego, insurance departments, and/or other state regulatory or investigatory agencies of at least eight additional states including California, Connecticut, Florida, Maine, Massachusetts, North Carolina, Oklahoma, and South Carolina. 31 Table of Contents The subpoenas and information requests sought information regarding, among other things, quoting processes, producer compensation, solicitation activities, policies sold to state or municipal entities, and information regarding compensation arrangements with brokers, particularly with regard to Universal Life Resources, Inc. The Company is cooperating fully with these investigations. The Company also has had discussions with the DOL regarding compliance with ERISA, relating to the Company interactions with insurance brokers and to regulations concerning insurance information provided by the Company to plan administrators of ERISA plans, including specifically the reporting of fees and commissions paid to agents, brokers, and others in accordance with the requirements of Schedule A of Form 5500. The DOL is pursuing an investigation of the Company concerning these issues, both generally and specifically in connection with certain brokers, including Universal Life Resources. The Company is cooperating with the DOL investigation. The Company has been reviewing its compensation policies and procedures for compliance with applicable legal requirements. In accordance with its announced support for disclosure of compensation paid to producers, including both brokers and agents, the Company has implemented policies to facilitate customers obtaining information regarding producer compensation from the producers. Additionally, the Company provides appropriate notices to customers stating its policy surrounding disclosure and provides information on its website about its producer compensation programs. Under these policies, any customer who wants specific producer compensation related information can obtain this information by contacting the Company Producer Compensation Services toll-free number. Other changes include requiring customer approval of compensation paid by the Company to the producer when the customer is also paying a fee to the producer and strengthening certain policies and procedures associated with new business and quoting activities. The Company is still monitoring developments relating to contingent commissions and will consider alternative arrangements when there is more clarity on the issue as a component of producer compensation. In addition to various regulatory agencies investigating issues relating to broker compensation and quoting practices, the Company has been named as a defendant, along with other insurers, in litigation brought by regulatory agencies or private parties in putative class actions making allegations arising out of broker compensation arrangements or quoting practices. For further information on the various lawsuits, see Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8. Beginning in March 2005, several of the Company insurance subsidiaries received requests from various regulatory agencies seeking information relating to finite reinsurance and whether there are any ancillary or verbal side agreements that affect the potential loss under the terms of the reinsurance agreement. Additionally, the requests seek information on such matters as the Company use of finite reinsurance, controls relating to proper accounting treatment, and maintenance of underwriting files on the reinsurance agreements. The Company has responded to the earlier requests and is in the process of responding to the more recent requests. In February 2006, the Company received from the Financial Services Authority (FSA) in the U.K. the results of the FSA recent risk assessment review of Unum Limited. In the normal course of regulatory review, the FSA focuses on the identification and assessment of risks within U.K. regulated businesses. The Company is in the process of responding to the report. Acquisitions and Dispositions During 2005, the Company wholly-owned subsidiary GENEX acquired Independent Review Services, Inc., a provider of medical diagnostic networks and independent medical examinations, at a price of $3.5 million. This acquisition will broaden GENEX product offerings through the addition of medical diagnostic services. In 2005, Unum Limited completed the sale of its Netherlands branch. The gain on the sale was approximately $4.0 million after tax. In 2005, the Company disposed of its remaining 40 percent ownership position in its Argentinean operation and recognized an after tax gain of approximately $0.4 million. 32 Table of Contents Income Tax Under the Life Insurance Company Tax Act of 1959, U.S. stock life insurance companies were required to maintain a policyholders surplus account containing the accumulated portion of income which had not been subjected to income tax in the year earned. The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 required that no future amounts be added after 1983 to the policyholders surplus account and that any future distributions to shareholders from the account would become subject to federal income tax at the general corporate federal income tax rate then in effect. During 2004, the Homeland Investment Act of 2004 was enacted. The Homeland Investment Act of 2004 provides, in part, that distributions from policyholders surplus accounts during 2005 and 2006 will not be taxed. The amount of the policyholders surplus accounts of the Company U.S. insurance subsidiaries at December 31, 2004, was approximately $228.8 million. Distributions made during 2005 by these life insurance subsidiaries, including dividend distributions, were deemed to occur first from the policyholders surplus accounts. As a result, the Company U.S. life insurance subsidiaries distributed as dividends the remaining balance of their policyholders surplus accounts to the holding company during 2005. This resulted in the elimination of a future potential tax of approximately $80.1 million which had not previously been provided for in current or deferred taxes because management considered the conditions under which such a tax would be paid to be remote. This will also allow the Company to engage in transactions in the future without concern for triggering a tax liability related to distributions from the policyholders surplus accounts. In April 2005, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) completed its examination of tax years 1999 through 2001 and issued its revenue agent report (RAR). Income tax liabilities of approximately $32.0 million that related primarily to interest on the timing of expense deductions were released in the first quarter of 2005, all of which was reflected as a reduction to income tax expense. In the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company paid the IRS proposed adjustments for its 1999 through 2001 tax years and will file claims for refund on disputed issues. In the third quarter of 2005, the Company recognized an income tax benefit of approximately $10.8 million related to the finalization of income tax reviews of the Company U.K. subsidiaries. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company repatriated $454.8 million in unremitted foreign earnings from its U.K. subsidiaries under the Homeland Investment Act of 2004. In connection with the repatriation, the Company recorded current taxes payable on such previously unremitted foreign earnings of approximately $15.3 million and recorded a tax benefit of approximately $18.6 million as a result of the reversal of the deferred tax liability related to unremitted earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, both of which are included in the results reported for 2005. Financing During 2005, the Company repaid $227.0 million of maturing debt. In conjunction with the repatriation, in November 2005, the Company completed a long-term debt offering, issuing $400.0 million of 6.85% senior notes due November 15, 2015. Closed Block Reinsurance Recapture from Centre Life Reinsurance Ltd. During 2005, the Company recaptured its closed block individual income protection business originally ceded to Centre Life Reinsurance Ltd. in 1996. The recaptured business includes approximately $1.6 billion in invested assets and $185.0 million of annual premium. The effective date of the recapture was August 8, 2005. Prior to recapture, the reinsurance contract had an embedded derivative that required the bifurcation of the derivative from the basic reinsurance contract. The fair value attributed to the embedded derivative was reported in fixed maturity securities, and the change in the fair value of this embedded derivative was reported as a realized investment gain or loss during the period of change. At the date of recapture, the embedded derivative was terminated, and the time value component of this derivative was recognized as a realized investment loss of $9.4 million before tax. 33 Table of Contents The underlying operating results of the reinsurance contract, prior to recapture, were reflected in other income. The recapture therefore did not have a material impact on operating income for the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment. On a statutory basis of reporting, the recapture increased statutory surplus $57.5 million in Unum America. The recapture does not have a material impact on the Company targeted risk-based capital objectives for its U.S. insurance subsidiaries. Impact of Hurricanes During 2005, several hurricanes struck the United States gulf coast region in close proximity and timing. The Company has client companies and sales offices that were impacted by the storms. Some individual policyholders who resided in the area have moved, taken other jobs, or lost their jobs as a result of the storms. In addition, some of the Company group policyholders may be unable to continue business as a result of the storms. The Company has extended its grace period for premium payments due from its policyholders in counties and parishes proclaimed disaster areas by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) due to these hurricanes. The Company is unable to estimate a range of reasonably possible losses on policies that may ultimately lapse, but the Company will likely experience some persistency and premium collection reductions during 2006 as a result of the storms. It is also expected that sales in the affected region will be lower for some period of time until recovery is achieved. The impact on the Company financial position and results of operations as a result of these storms is expected to be immaterial. 2004 Significant Transactions and Events Settlement of Multistate Market Conduct Examination During 2004, certain of the Company insurance subsidiaries entered into settlement agreements with state insurance regulators upon conclusion of a multistate market conduct examination led by Maine, Massachusetts, and Tennessee relating to disability claims handling practices. A total of 48 states and the District of Columbia are parties to the settlement agreements. In addition, the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL), which had been conducting an inquiry relating to certain ERISA plans, is a party to the settlement agreements, and the Office of the NYAG, which had engaged in its own investigation of the Company claims handling practices, notified the Company that it was in support of the settlement and was, therefore, closing its investigation on this issue. The examination report did not make any findings of violations of law or market conduct regulations. However, the examination report did identify areas of concern. These became the focus of specific changes and enhancements to the Company disability claims handling operations which are designed to assure each claim decision is made in a consistently high quality manner. The primary components of the settlement agreements include: enhancements to the Company claims handling procedures; a reassessment process for claimants of certain previously denied or closed claims who elect to participate; additional corporate and board governance to support the oversight of the reassessment process and general claims handling practices; and payment of a fine in the amount of $15.0 million that was allocated among the states and jurisdictions that joined the agreements and a potential fine of $145.0 million in the future if certain standards are not met in examinations at the end of approximately two years. In the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company recorded a charge of $127.0 million before tax, or $87.8 million after tax, comprised of four elements: $27.5 million of incremental direct operating expenses to conduct the two-year reassessment process; $44.0 million for benefit costs and reserves from claims reopened from the reassessment; $40.5 million for additional benefit costs and reserves for claims already incurred and currently in inventory that are 34 Table of Contents anticipated as a result of the claim process changes being implemented; and the $15.0 million fine. The charge decreased before-tax operating results for the U.S. Brokerage segment group income protection and individual income protection recently issued lines of business $116.7 million and $1.7 million, respectively, and the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment $8.6 million. The ongoing costs of changes in the claims handling process and governance improvements will be included in the Company operating expenses as incurred going forward. These ongoing costs are not anticipated to materially affect the Company results of operations. The insurance commissioners of Maine, Massachusetts, and Tennessee, the states in which the Company three principal insurance subsidiaries are domiciled, began the multistate targeted market conduct examination in September 2003 and, as the lead state regulators, directed the course of the exam. The Company also has an insurance subsidiary domiciled in New York, but New York had been proceeding separately with its market conduct examination prior to commencement of the multistate examination. It became a participating state and also entered into a substantially identical settlement agreement covering the subsidiary domiciled in New York. The purpose of the examination was to determine whether the long-term disability claims handling practices of the Company insurance subsidiaries reflected unfair claim settlement practices. Examiners working under the direction of the three lead state regulators reviewed policy forms, manuals, and administration and organization charts, but primarily focused on reviewing individual or group long-term claim files closed, appealed, or open during two time periods from 2002 to early 2004. The claim file review led to discussions with the Company that resulted in the settlement agreements. A principal feature of the settlement agreements is a reassessment process. Under the agreements, the Company is offering to reassess any individual or group long-term disability claim that was denied or closed since January 1, 2000, except for specific categories of closures such as settlement, death, or payment of maximum benefits. The potential pool of claims decided over the nearly five year period that are eligible for reassessment if the claimant elects to participate is approximately 215,000 claims. However, almost half of these claims are subject to a preliminary determination as to whether the claimant seeking reassessment returned to work under the policy, in which case the claim is not eligible for further reassessment. The Company will also accept requests for reassessment from other individuals whose claims were closed after January 1, 1997, and through December 31, 1999, subject to the same closure exceptions as the group receiving notice, and from claimants who dispute the category for closure if it affects their eligibility for reassessment. There will be ongoing oversight by the Company and lead state regulators of the reassessment process. The DOL may also participate in this monitoring of the reassessment process. See previous discussion under California Settlement Agreement and Amendment of the Multistate Market Conduct Examination Settlement Agreements contained herein pertaining to subsequent amendments to the multistate settlement agreements reassessment process. The Company also agreed to enhance certain aspects of its claim operations, including making changes to its organization and procedures to improve the consistency of and the support for each claim decision and create an easier process for claimants. First, the Company increased the number of experienced claims professionals involved in making claim decisions, as well as more heavily involved higher levels of management in signing off on adverse claim decisions. Doing so not only put more experienced people into closer contact with claim decisions, but it should also improve turnaround times and clarify accountability for claims decisions. Second, to improve the support for the initial claim decisions, the Company modified its policies regarding medical information, including guidelines for the use of independent medical evaluations and the process for handling claimants with multiple medical conditions. Third, to make it easier for a claimant to understand and proceed through the claim process, the Company added a number of service components, including referring certain claims to field personnel who will meet with the claimant in an effort to make the process less burdensome. Also, there is an additional telephone hotline available to claimants who seek additional assistance. Finally, to further assure consistency in the initial claim decision, the Company added a position of quality compliance consultant to assess the totality of the claim decision and to focus on issues of compliance and documentation. The final principal part of the settlement agreements addressed aspects of corporate governance which are intended to reflect today greater emphasis in this area and to help establish best practices for the industry. A regulatory compliance unit, reporting directly to a newly formed regulatory compliance committee of the board of directors, was created to monitor the reassessment process, compliance with market conduct regulations and ERISA 35 Table of Contents requirements, as well as general claims handling compliance. The committee is composed of five independent directors, including two directors with significant insurance industry or insurance regulatory experience. The agreements will remain in place until the later of January 1, 2007, or the completion of an examination of claims handling practices and an examination of the reassessment process, both of which will be conducted by the lead state regulators. In addition to the fine of $15.0 million, the insurance subsidiaries that are parties to the settlement agreements are subject as a group to potential fines for non-compliance with the settlement agreements, including contingent fines of $100,000 per day if certain implementation deadlines are not met and a contingent fine of $145.0 million for failure to satisfactorily meet the performance standards in the settlement agreements relating to the examinations referred to above, which will be conducted in approximately two years. This latter contingent fine relating to examination of the claims handling practices or the reassessment process is limited to a maximum of $145.0 million for both examinations should the performance standards not be met. The performance standard is based on compliance with a maximum tolerance standard for claims procedures based on review of a statistically credible random sample of individual or group claims. The Company believes that the changes it has made to its claims operations and to enhance its oversight functions will substantially reduce the likelihood that the Company would fail to meet the performance standards in the agreements when these examinations are concluded. Restructuring of Individual Income Protection Closed Block Business In the first quarter of 2004, the Company restructured its individual income protection closed block business wherein three of its insurance subsidiaries entered into reinsurance agreements to reinsure approximately 66.7 percent of potential future losses that occur above a specified retention limit. The individual income protection closed block reserves in these three subsidiaries comprise approximately 90 percent of the Company overall retained risk in the closed block of individual income protection. The reinsurance agreements effectively provide approximately 60 percent reinsurance coverage for the Company overall consolidated risk above the retention limit, which equaled approximately $8.0 billion in existing statutory reserves at the date of the transaction. The maximum risk limit for the reinsurer was approximately $783.0 million initially and grows to approximately $2.6 billion over time, after which any further losses will revert to the Company. These reinsurance transactions were effective as of April 1, 2004. The Company transferred cash equal to $521.6 million of reserves ceded in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment plus an additional $185.8 million in cash for a before-tax prepaid cost of insurance which was deferred and is being amortized into earnings over the expected claim payment period covered under the Company retention limit. The Company retained the higher yielding investments historically associated with these reserves and redeployed these investments to other lines of business. In conjunction with the restructuring of the individual income protection closed block business, effective January 1, 2004, the Company modified its reporting segments to include a separate segment for this business. The reporting, monitoring, and management of the closed block of individual income protection business as a discrete segment is consistent with the Company financial restructuring and separation of this business from the lines of business which actively market new products. In the past, this business had been reported in combination with the individual income protection recently issued line of business. Prior to 2004, detailed separate financial metrics and models were unavailable to appropriately manage this block of business separately from the recently issued individual income protection block of business. The separation of the closed block business into a separate reporting segment required the Company to perform, separately for the individual income protection closed block business and individual income protection recently issued business, impairment testing for goodwill and loss recognition testing for the recoverability of deferred policy acquisition costs and value of business acquired. As required under GAAP, prior to the change in reporting segments, these tests were performed for the individual income protection line of business on a combined basis. The testing indicated impairment of the individual income protection closed block deferred policy acquisition costs, value of business acquired, and goodwill balances of $282.2 million, $367.1 million, and $207.1 million, respectively. These impairment charges, $856.4 million before tax and $629.1 million after tax, were recorded in the first quarter of 2004. 36 Table of Contents Also as part of the restructuring, the Company analyzed the reserve assumptions related to its individual income protection closed block reserves as a stand-alone segment. Previously these reserves were analyzed for the individual income protection line of business on a combined basis. Included in the analysis was a review of morbidity assumptions, primarily claim resolution rates, and claim reserve discount rate assumptions. Based upon this analysis, the Company lowered the claim reserve discount rate to reflect the segmentation of assets between the individual income protection recently issued business and the individual income protection closed block business, the change in the Company investment portfolio yield rates during the first quarter of 2004, the Company expectation of future investment portfolio yield rates, and the Company desire to maintain the relationship between the claim reserve discount rate and the investment portfolio yield rate for the individual income protection closed block at the Company long-term objective. The segmentation of the investment portfolio was necessary to ensure appropriate matching of the duration of the assets and the related policy liabilities. Based on this analysis, in the first quarter of 2004 the Company increased its individual income protection closed block claim reserves by $110.6 million before tax, or $71.9 million after tax, to reflect its current estimate of future benefit obligations. The first quarter 2004 change represented a 1.2 percent increase in total net Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment reserves as of March 31, 2004, which equaled $9.530 billion prior to this increase. Financing As part of the restructuring, in May 2004, the Company issued 12.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a private offering for $300.0 million. The Company subsequently registered the privately placed securities for resale by the private investors. Proceeds from the offering were used to restore the Company insurance subsidiaries risk-based capital to the approximate overall level that existed prior to the individual income protection closed block reinsurance transaction and to provide additional liquidity at the holding company level. Acquisitions and Dispositions In the first quarter of 2004, Unum Limited became responsible for the ongoing administration and management of the United Kingdom portion of the group income protection claims portfolio of Swiss Life (UK) plc (Swiss Life), and Swiss Life reinsured this portfolio to Unum Limited. Unum Limited also became a multi-national pooling partner for Swiss Life Insurance & Pension Company with respect to business written in the United Kingdom. With the goal of focusing on its core operations, in 2004 the Company sold its Japanese operation, Unum Japan Accident Insurance Co., Ltd. The Company also entered into an agreement with the buyer to reinsure certain existing income protection business and intends to have a continuing presence in these operations for at least one year. The Company wrote down the book value of the Japan operations to the estimated fair value less cost to sell during 2003 and at that time recognized an impairment loss of $1.2 million before tax and $0.8 million after tax. The Company also recognized a tax benefit of $6.8 million, for a net after-tax gain of $6.0 million in 2003. During the second quarter of 2004, the Company completed the sale of its Canadian branch and reported a loss of $70.9 million after tax on the sale. On a statutory basis of reporting, the Company U.S. insurance subsidiaries reported a 2004 gain of $250.6 million after tax on the sale of the branch. Additionally, the transaction resulted in an approximate 29 point improvement in the Company RBC ratio for its U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis. Assets transferred to the buyer included available-for-sale fixed maturity securities with a fair value of $1,099.4 million (book value of $957.7 million) and cash of $31.7 million. Liabilities transferred included reserves of $1,254.8 million. The Company retained a portion of the Canadian branch fixed maturity bond portfolio according to the terms of the transaction. At the close of the transaction, the bonds retained had a fair value of $732.9 million and a yield of 7.14 percent, which added approximately four basis points to the investment portfolio yield rate in the Company continuing operations. These investments were subsequently redeployed to the Company other lines of business. Financial results for the Canadian branch are reported as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements. Accordingly, the discussion of results by segment as follows does not include amounts related to those operations. See Discontinued Operations contained herein in Item 7 and Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of the Company discontinued operations. 37 Table of Contents In 2004, GENEX acquired Integrated Benefits Management, a provider of case management services, to further broaden GENEX relationship and distribution partnerships. The purchase price was $0.7 million. In conjunction with the restructuring of its Argentinean operation, the Company reduced its ownership position in this operation to 40 percent during 2004 and reported a before-tax loss of $4.7 million. The Company also recognized from this transaction a tax benefit of $7.4 million, for a net after-tax gain of $2.7 million on the 2004 transaction. The Company wrote down the book value of the Argentinean operation to the estimated fair value less cost to sell during 2003 and at that time recognized an impairment loss of $13.5 million before tax and $11.3 million after tax. Income Tax During 2004, the Company recognized tax benefits as a result of settlements with the IRS of certain tax issues (primarily related to insurance tax reserves and investment losses) affecting the Company federal income tax liability related to its 1996 through 1998 tax years. During the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company obtained a judgment in refund litigation for federal income tax paid for tax year 1984, plus interest, and as a result will be entitled to a refund of tax plus interest for all tax years subsequent to tax year 1984 in which the IRS took inconsistent positions on the deductibility of insurance tax reserves that were the subject of the litigation and for which the Company paid tax based on the IRS inconsistent positions. Included in 2004 operating results is income of $14.0 million before tax and approximately $59.3 million after tax attributable to these prior year tax items. 2003 Significant Transactions and Events Reserve Strengthening In April 2003, the Company completed an analysis of its assumptions related to its U.S. Brokerage group long-term income protection claim reserves. Included in the analysis was a review of active claim reserves, incurred but not reported (IBNR) reserves, and claim reopen reserves. An active claim reserve is established for future benefit payments when a claim is incurred and reported to the Company. IBNR reserves are established on claims which are estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to the Company. Claim reopen reserves are established for those claimants who have previously recovered but who are anticipated to return to disabled status under the same disability and within a specified period of time, as contractually allowed by the disability policy. The analysis was initiated based on lower claim resolution rates observed during the first quarter of 2003. The claim resolution rate is the rate of probability that a disability claimant will recover, die, or reach maximum benefit limits and no longer receive benefit payments from the Company. Generally, claim resolution rates vary by the age of the claimant at the time of disability, duration or length of time since the disability initially occurred, and claim diagnosis. The claim resolution rates for group long-term income protection during the first quarter of 2003 were below levels anticipated for reserves and were lower than those experienced in the full years 2002, 2001, and 2000. The analysis indicated not only a decrease in overall claim resolution rates, but also a change in claim resolution rates by claim duration. The analysis of emerging claim resolution rates and the reasons driving the changes resulted in a reduction in the Company long-term expectations with respect to claim resolution rates. The Company long-term expectations applied to all claims incurred regardless of the date of incurral. In addition, the Company reviewed the reserve discount rate, which is the interest rate at which future cash flows for benefits and expenses to be paid are discounted to determine the current value of those cash flows. The Company concluded at that time that a change in its discount rate assumptions was not warranted. Based on the April 2003 analysis, in the first quarter of 2003 the Company increased its U.S. Brokerage group long-term income protection claim reserves by $454.0 million before tax, or $295.1 million after tax, to reflect its current estimate of future benefit obligations. The active claim reserve for claims already reported to the Company and still in open claim status was increased by $516.0 million, the IBNR reserve was decreased by $23.0 million, and the reopen reserve was decreased by $39.0 million before tax. The first quarter 2003 change represented a 7.8 percent increase in total net U.S. Brokerage group income protection reserves as of March 31, 2003, which equaled $5.828 billion prior to this increase. In January 2004, the Company completed its annual review of claim reserves to ensure that its claim reserves make adequate and reasonable provision for future benefits and expenses. Based upon this review, as of December 31, 2003, the Company increased its U.S. Brokerage group long-term income protection claim reserves by $421.0 million and its U.S. Brokerage group short-term income protection claim reserves by $19.0 million, for a total 38 Table of Contents increase of $440.0 million before tax and $286.0 million after tax. Approximately $300.0 million of the reserve strengthening reflected implementation of a lower discount rate for the Company group income protection claim reserves. The discount rate was lowered to reflect the Company actual change in investment portfolio yield rates during 2003, the expectation of future investment portfolio yield rates, and the Company new discount rate management approach of maintaining a wider spread between its group income protection portfolio investment yield rate and its average discount rate. The Company new discount rate management approach is intended to better reflect the current investment environment and position the Company to be more responsive with discount rates on new incurred claims as changes to the investment environment emerge. Approximately $140.0 million of the reserve increase related to a strengthening of the morbidity assumptions to reflect the impact of the Company view of a continuing jobless economic recovery on claim incidence and severity. Of this amount, approximately $64.0 million was established to reflect higher claim incidence expectations. Claim incidence in the second half of 2003 was 8.4 percent higher than the first half of the year and 5.8 percent above the second half of 2002. The Company January 2004 review indicated that claim incidence is expected to continue at an elevated level for several quarters as the Company believes that early indications of a recovering economy are not yet reflected in improved consumer confidence or job creation. Also included in the $140.0 million strengthening was approximately $76.0 million to reflect higher severity expectations driven primarily by a lengthening of claim duration expectations in those claims that have been open 36 months or longer. The $440.0 million reserve increase represented a 6.6 percent increase in total net U.S. Brokerage group income protection reserves as of December 31, 2003, which totaled $6.674 billion prior to this increase. Acquisitions and Dispositions During the first quarter of 2003, Unum Limited acquired the United Kingdom group income protection business of Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada (UK) Ltd (Sun Life) together with the renewal rights to Sun Life group life business, at a price of approximately $37.2 million. Furthering its goal of divesting its non-core operations, during 2003, the Company reinsured on a 100 percent indemnity coinsurance basis for non-New York policies and a 90 percent indemnity coinsurance basis for New York policies certain of its insurance policies sold through trade associations and ceded approximately $121.0 million of reserves to the reinsurer. The annual premium on the block reinsured was approximately $40.0 million and related primarily to individual income protection closed block policies. The transaction had an effective date of April 1, 2003. Financing In order to strengthen its capital position, during 2003, the Company issued 52.9 million shares of common stock, par value $0.10 per share, in a public offering and received approximately $547.7 million in proceeds from the sale of the shares after deducting underwriting discounts. Also in 2003, the Company issued 23.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a $575.0 million public offering. Proceeds from the offerings were used primarily to increase the capitalization of the Company insurance subsidiaries and to repay amounts loaned to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries. Accounting Pronouncements Derivatives Implementation Group Issue B36 Effective October 1, 2003, the Company adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133 Implementation Issue B36 (DIG Issue B36), Embedded Derivatives: Modified Coinsurance Arrangements and Debt Instruments That Incorporate Credit Risk Exposure That Are Unrelated or Only Partially Related to the Creditworthiness of the Obligor Under Those Instruments. DIG Issue B36 addresses financial accounting and reporting for embedded derivatives in modified coinsurance contracts that incorporate credit risk exposure unrelated to the credit risk of the counterparty to the reinsurance contract and requires the bifurcation of any such derivative from the host reinsurance contract. The change in the fair value of the derivative is reported as a realized investment gain or loss during the period of change. 39 Table of Contents The Company had two reinsurance contracts for which DIG Issue B36 was applicable. Transition to the provisions of DIG Issue B36 required the Company to value the credit risk provisions in these contracts as derivatives and report them in the consolidated statements of financial condition at their current fair values, with the change in fair value since inception of the reinsurance contracts up to the date of adoption reported as a 2003 cumulative effect of accounting principle change. The Company included in miscellaneous assets a deposit asset for one of the applicable reinsurance contracts. The deposit asset previously included unrealized gains or losses on the marketable securities held in the trust. Under the provisions of DIG Issue B36, any net unrealized gain was attributed to the value of the embedded derivative and was reported as such in fixed maturity securities. Any net unrealized loss was attributed to the marketable securities held in the trust and reported as an adjustment to the deposit asset, with the related effects on claim reserves reflected in the reinsurance receivable for claim reserves. The adoption of DIG Issue B36 resulted in an increase in fixed maturity securities of $61.3 million to record the fair value of the embedded derivatives, a decrease of $116.1 million in miscellaneous assets, $18.4 million in reinsurance receivable, and $134.5 million in accumulated other comprehensive income (net unrealized gain on securities) to eliminate the previously reported adjustment to fair value of the marketable securities held in the trust and the related effects on claim reserves, and a $39.9 million cumulative effect of accounting principle change, net of $21.4 million in tax. See Item 8, Notes 1 and 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. Stock Compensation The Company has various stock-based employee compensation plans. Prior to 2003, the Company accounted for those plans under the recognition and measurement principles of Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees , and related Interpretations. Effective January 1, 2003, the Company adopted the fair value recognition provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation , and selected the prospective method of adoption allowed under the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 148, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation Transition and Disclosure . The adoption increased before tax operating expenses for 2003 approximately $0.9 million. See Item 8, Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements concerning the subsequent issuance of SFAS 123(R). Critical Accounting Policies Reserves for Policy and Contract Benefits The two primary categories of liabilities for policy and contract benefits are policy reserves for claims not yet incurred and claim reserves for claims that have been incurred and have future benefits to be paid. Policy reserves equal the present value of the difference between future policy benefits and future premiums, allowing a margin for expenses and profit. These reserves are applicable for the majority of the Company business, which is traditional non interest-sensitive in nature. The claim payments are estimated using assumptions established when the policy was issued. Throughout the life of the policy, the reserve is based on the original assumptions used for the policy issue year. Ordinarily, generally accepted accounting principles require that these assumptions not be subsequently modified unless the policy reserves are determined to be inadequate. A claim reserve is established when a claim is incurred or is estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to the Company. Policy reserves for a particular policy continue to be maintained after a claim reserve has been established for as long as the policy remains in force. Claim reserves generally equal the Company estimate, at the current reporting period, of the present value of the liability for future benefits and expenses to be paid on claims incurred as of that date. A claim reserve for a specific claim is based on assumptions derived from the Company actual historical experience as to claim duration as well as the specific characteristics of the claimant such as benefits available under the policy, the covered benefit period, and the age and occupation of the claimant. Consideration is given to current and historical trends in the Company experience and to expected deviations from historical experience that result from changes in benefits available, changes in the Company risk management policies and procedures, and other economic, environmental, or societal factors. Reserves for claims that are estimated to have already been incurred but that have not yet been reported to the Company are based on factors such as historical claim reporting patterns, the average cost of claims, and the expected volumes of incurred claims. 40 Table of Contents Claim reserves, unlike policy reserves, are subject to revision as current claim experience and projections of future factors affecting claim experience change. In a reporting period, actual experience may deviate from the long-term assumptions used to determine the claim reserves. The Company reviews annually, or more frequently as appropriate, emerging experience to ensure that its claim reserves make adequate and reasonable provision for future benefits and expenses. The Company reserves for group and individual income protection products include a provision for future payments, other than legal expenses, on all claim related lawsuits for which the cause of action has already occurred. This includes known lawsuits and those yet to be filed. The reserve amount is the Company estimate of the payments on all such lawsuits based on past payments and expected future payments. Claim reserves, in general, are an estimate of the current value of future, otherwise unfunded, benefit commitments or liabilities. The calculation of claim reserves involves numerous assumptions. In setting these assumptions, the Company depends upon industry information and experience, Company experience and analysis, and reasoned judgment. There can be no guarantee that these assumptions individually, or collectively, will be duplicated by actual experience over time. The primary assumptions related to claim reserves are the discount rate, the claim resolution rate, and the incidence rate for incurred but not reported (IBNR) claims. The discount rate is the interest rate at which future benefit cash flows are discounted to determine the present value of those cash flows. It is important since higher discount rates produce lower reserves. If the discount rate is higher than future investment returns, the Company assets will not earn sufficient investment income to support future liabilities. In this case, the reserves may eventually be insufficient. Alternatively, if a discount rate is chosen that is too low relative to future investment results, the reserve, and thus the claim cost in the current period, will be overstated and profits will be accumulated in the reserves rather than released through earnings. The Company sets its discount rate assumptions in conjunction with the current and expected future investment income rate of the assets supporting the reserves. If the investment yield at which new investments are purchased is below or above the investment yield of the existing investment portfolio, it is likely that the discount rate on new claims will be established below or above the discount rate on existing claims. It is the Company intent to use a discount rate that provides some margin for adverse movement in the investment portfolio yield rate. Since policies may receive claim payments for a number of years, it is unlikely that the chosen discount rate assumption will prove to be accurate for any one policy; rather, the discount rate is chosen to apply to many claims with various characteristics of length and severity. The Company uses its experience and analysis of its existing claims and investment performance to determine the appropriate discount rate assumption. Actual claim reserves incurred in the calendar quarter are sensitive to the choice of discount rate. For example, a 25 basis point increase or decrease in the U.S. Brokerage group long-term income protection claim discount rate for current year claims would change a quarter incurred claim cost in 2005 by approximately $4.0 million. The claim resolution rate is the rate of probability that a disability claim will close or change due to maximum benefits being paid under the policy, the recovery or death of the insured, or a change in status in any given period. It is important because it is used to estimate how long benefits will be paid for a claim. Estimated resolution rates that are set too high will result in reserves that are lower than they need to be to pay the claim benefits over time. A claim closes due to maximum benefits being paid if all of the contractual benefits under the policy have been paid. A claim also closes if the policyholder recovers from his or her disability and is no longer receiving disability benefit payments or if the policyholder dies in the period. A claim may change status during the period. For example, a policyholder receiving disability benefits may return to part time work, and the claim benefit may be reduced to reflect the change to partial disability. Establishing claim resolution assumptions is complex and involves many factors, including the cause of disability, the policyholder age, the type of contractual benefits provided, etc. Claim resolution assumptions also vary by duration of disability and time since initially becoming disabled. The Company uses its extensive claim experience and analysis to develop its claim resolution assumptions. Claim resolution experience is studied over a number of years with more weight placed on the more recent experience. Claim resolution assumptions are established to represent the Company future resolution rate expectations. Due to the individual nature of each claim, it is unlikely that the claim resolution rate will be accurate for any particular claim. The Company establishes its claim resolution assumptions to apply as an average to its large base of active claims. In this manner, the assumed rates are much more accurate over the broad base of claims. Actual claim reserves incurred in the calendar quarter are sensitive to the choice of resolution rate. For example, a 41 Table of Contents one percent increase or decrease in the U.S. Brokerage group long-term income protection claim resolution rate would change a quarter incurred claim cost in 2005 by approximately $3.0 million. The Company has liability for claims that have been incurred but not reported to the Company and must establish a liability for these claims equal to the present value of the expected benefit payments. In addition to the discount rate and claim resolution rate, the incidence rate is also a primary assumption in the IBNR reserve. The incidence rate is the rate at which new claims per thousand insured lives are submitted to the Company. The incidence rate is affected by many factors including the age of the insured, the insured occupation or industry, the benefit plan design, and certain external factors such as consumer confidence and levels of unemployment. The Company establishes the incidence assumption using a historical review of actual incidence results along with an outlook of future incidence expectations. As the actual claims are reported and claim reserves are established, the accuracy of the IBNR emerges. While the Company expects its IBNR reserve to be appropriate over the long term, it will not always equal, in a particular reporting period, the actual reserve established for a reported claim. For example, a 10 basis point deviation in the actual incidence rate from that assumed in the U.S. Brokerage IBNR reserve would result in an increase or decrease of approximately $10.0 million in claim reserves established during a quarter in 2005, relative to the IBNR reserve previously established to cover those claims. Presented as follows are reserves by each major line of business within each segment with discussion regarding material changes. (in millions of dollars) December 31, 2005 December 31, 2004 (3) IBNR (1) All Other Total (2) IBNR (1) All Other Total (2) Group Income Protection $ 698.6 $ 7,600.1 $ 8,298.7 $ 781.9 $ 7,261.3 $ 8,043.2 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 237.6 1,386.7 1,624.3 261.8 1,452.2 1,714.0 Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued 77.8 1,064.8 1,142.6 72.0 927.7 999.7 Long-term Care 32.1 1,959.0 1,991.1 28.4 1,589.6 1,618.0 Voluntary Workplace Benefits 32.3 764.5 796.8 31.4 692.3 723.7 U.S. Brokerage Segment 1,078.4 12,775.1 13,853.5 1,175.5 11,923.1 13,098.6 Unum Limited Segment 242.9 2,100.1 2,343.0 206.9 2,201.6 2,408.5 Colonial Segment 83.7 1,204.3 1,288.0 71.9 1,119.1 1,191.0 Individual Income Protection - Closed Block Segment 428.9 12,202.9 12,631.8 360.3 12,376.5 12,736.8 Other Segment 239.6 8,466.3 8,705.9 217.7 8,339.9 8,557.6 Consolidated $ 2,073.5 $ 36,748.7 $ 38,822.2 $ 2,032.3 $ 35,960.2 $ 37,992.5 (1) IBNR for income protection includes reopen reserves. These two categories of reserves are developed and maintained in aggregate based on historical monitoring that has only been on a combined basis. (2) Equals the sum of Policy and Contract Benefits, Reserves for Future Policy and Contract Benefits, Unearned Premiums, and Other Policyholder Funds as reported in the consolidated statements of financial condition. (3) Certain items for the Unum Limited segment have been reclassified between IBNR and All Other to conform to current reporting. 42 Table of Contents The increase in IBNR reserves from December 31, 2004 is due primarily to the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment, which includes a reclassification of reserves from All Other to IBNR reflecting additional IBNR reserves associated with the recapture of the reinsurance treaty in 2005, and the Unum Limited segment, which is due to growth in insured lives and the average premium size per policy. Partially offsetting these increases is a decrease in the IBNR reserves for the U.S. Brokerage segment due primarily to decreases in insured lives in the group income protection and group life and accidental death and dismemberment lines of business. The increase in All Other reserves from December 31, 2004 is driven by growth in the active life reserves for the U. S. Brokerage long-term care and individual income protection recently issued lines of business and growth in the disabled life reserves in the U.S. Brokerage group income protection line of business. Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs The Company defers certain costs incurred in acquiring new business and amortizes (expenses) these costs over the life of the related policies. Deferred costs include certain commissions, other agency compensation, selection and policy issue expenses, and field expenses. Acquisition costs that do not vary with the production of new business, such as commissions on group products which are generally level throughout the life of the policy, are excluded from deferral. The Company uses its own historical experience and expectation of the future performance of its business in determining the expected life of the policies. Over 90 percent of the Company deferred policy acquisition costs relate to traditional non interest-sensitive products, for which the costs are amortized in proportion to the estimated premium income to be received over the life of the policies in accordance with the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 60, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises . The estimated premium income in the early years of the amortization period is higher than in the later years due to higher anticipated policy persistency in the early years, which results in a greater proportion of the costs being amortized in the early years of the life of the policy. Amortization of deferred costs on traditional products is adjusted to reflect the actual policy persistency as compared to the anticipated experience. The Company will experience accelerated amortization if policies terminate earlier than projected. Deferred costs related to U.S. Brokerage group and individual income protection products are generally amortized over a twenty-year period, with approximately 75 percent and 90 percent of the original deferred costs related to group income protection products expected to be amortized by years ten and fifteen, respectively. For individual income protection policies, approximately 35 percent and 65 percent of the original deferred costs are expected to be amortized by years ten and fifteen, respectively. Deferred costs for U.S. Brokerage group and individual long-term care products are amortized over a twenty-year period, with approximately 45 percent and 70 percent of the original deferred costs expected to be amortized by years ten and fifteen, respectively. Deferred costs for U.S. Brokerage group life and accidental death and dismemberment products are amortized over a fifteen-year period, with approximately 85 percent of the cost expected to be amortized by year ten. Deferred costs for U.S. Brokerage voluntary products are amortized over a fifteen-year period, with approximately 90 percent of the cost expected to be amortized by year ten. Deferred costs for Unum Limited group and individual income protection and group life products are generally amortized over a fifteen-year period, with approximately 80 percent of the original deferred costs expected to be amortized by year ten. Deferred costs for products issued by the Colonial segment are generally amortized over a seventeen-year period, on average, with approximately 80 percent and 90 percent of the original deferred costs expected to be amortized by years ten and fifteen, respectively. Valuation of Fixed Maturity Securities In determining when a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, the Company evaluates the following factors: The probability of recovering principal and interest. The Company ability and intent to retain the security for a sufficient period of time for it to recover. Whether the security is current as to principal and interest payments. The significance of the decline in value. The time period during which there has been a significant decline in value. Current and future business prospects and trends of earnings. 43 Table of Contents The valuation of the security underlying collateral. Relevant industry conditions and trends relative to their historical cycles. Market conditions. Rating agency actions. Bid and offering prices and the level of trading activity. Adverse changes in estimated cash flows for securitized investments. Any other key measures for the related security. The Company review procedures include, but are not limited to, monthly meetings of certain members of the Company senior management personnel to review reports on the entire portfolio, identifying investments with changes in market value of five percent or more, investments with changes in rating either by external rating agencies or internal analysts, investments segmented by issuer, industry, and foreign exposure levels, and any other relevant investment information to help identify the Company exposure to possible credit losses. Based on this review of the entire investment portfolio, individual investments may be added to or removed from the Company watch list , which is a list of securities subject to enhanced monitoring and a more intensive review. The Company also determines if its investment portfolio is overexposed to an issuer that is showing warning signs of deterioration and, if so, the Company makes no further purchases of that issuer securities and may seek opportunities to sell securities it holds from that issuer to reduce the Company exposure. The Company monitors below-investment-grade securities as to individual exposures and in comparison to the entire portfolio as an additional credit risk management strategy, looking specifically at the Company exposure to individual securities currently classified as below-investment-grade. In determining current and future business prospects and cash availability, the Company considers the parental support of an issuer in its analysis but does not rely heavily on this support. If the Company determines that the decline in value of an investment is other than temporary, the investment is written down to fair value, and an impairment loss is recognized in the current period to the extent of the decline in value. If the decline is considered temporary, the security continues to be carefully monitored. These controls have been established to identify the Company exposure to possible credit losses and are intended to give the Company the ability to respond rapidly. The Company has no held-to-maturity fixed maturity securities. All fixed maturity securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value. Fair values are based on quoted market prices, where available. Private placement fixed maturity securities had a fair value of approximately $3.9 billion, or 11.1 percent of total fixed maturity securities, at December 31, 2005. Private placement fixed maturity securities do not have readily determinable market prices. For these securities, the Company uses internally prepared valuations combining matrix pricing with vendor purchased software programs, including valuations based on estimates of future profitability, to estimate the fair value. Additionally, the Company obtains prices from independent third-party brokers to establish valuations for certain of these securities. The Company ability to liquidate its positions in some of these securities could be impacted to a significant degree by the lack of an actively traded market, and the Company may not be able to dispose of these investments in a timely manner. Although the Company believes its estimates reasonably reflect the fair value of those securities, the key assumptions about the risk-free interest rates, risk premiums, performance of underlying collateral (if any), and other factors involve significant assumptions and may not reflect those of an active market. The Company believes that generally these private placement securities carry a credit quality comparable to companies rated Baa or BBB by major credit rating organizations. 44 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2005, the key assumptions used to estimate the fair value of private placement fixed maturity securities included the following: Risk free interest rates of 4.35 percent for five-year maturities to 4.54 percent for 30-year maturities were derived from the current yield curve for U.S. Treasury Bonds with similar maturities. Current Baa corporate bond spreads ranging from 0.78 percent to 1.75 percent plus an additional 30 basis points were added to the risk free rate to reflect the lack of liquidity. An additional five basis points were added to the risk free rates for foreign investments. Additional basis points were added as deemed appropriate for certain industries and for individual securities in certain industries that are considered to be of greater risk. Increasing the 30 basis points added to the risk free rate for lack of liquidity by 1.5 basis points, increasing the five basis points added to the risk free rates for foreign investments by one basis point, and increasing the additional basis points added to each industry considered to be of greater risk by one basis point would have decreased the December 31, 2005 net unrealized gain in the fixed maturity securities portfolio by approximately $1.7 million. Historically, the Company realized gains or losses on dispositions of its private placement fixed maturity securities have not varied significantly from amounts estimated under the valuation methodology described above. Changes in the fair value of fixed maturity securities, other than declines that are determined to be other than temporary, are reported as a component of other comprehensive income in stockholders equity. If it is subsequently determined that any of these securities are other than temporarily impaired, the impairment loss is reported as a realized investment loss in the consolidated statements of operations. The recognition of the impairment loss does not affect total stockholders equity to the extent that the decline in value had been previously reflected in other comprehensive income. There are a number of significant risks inherent in the process of monitoring the Company fixed maturity securities for impairments and determining when and if an impairment is other than temporary. These risks and uncertainties include the following possibilities: The assessment of a borrower ability to meet its contractual obligations will change. The economic outlook, either domestic or foreign, may be less favorable or may have a more significant impact on the borrower than anticipated, and as such, the security may not recover in value. New information may become available concerning the security, such as disclosure of accounting irregularities, fraud, or corporate governance issues. Significant changes in credit spreads may occur in the related industry. Adverse rating agency actions may occur. Reinsurance Receivable Reinsurance is a contractual agreement whereby the Company reinsurance partners assume a defined portion of the risk for future benefits payable under reinsurance contracts. The reinsurance receivable reported as an asset in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition includes amounts due from the Company reinsurers on current claims and estimates of amounts that will be due on future claims. Policy reserves and claim reserves reported in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition are not reduced for reinsurance. The reinsurance receivable is generally equal to the policy reserves and claim reserves related to the risk being reinsured. The Company reduces the reinsurance receivable if recovery is not likely due to the financial position of the reinsurer or if there is disagreement between the Company and the reinsurer regarding the liability of the reinsurer. Goodwill Goodwill is the excess of the cost of an acquired entity over the net of the amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but the Company reviews on an annual basis the carrying amount of goodwill for indications of impairment, with consideration given to financial performance and other relevant factors. In accordance with accounting guidance, the Company tests for impairment at either the operating segment level or one level below. In addition, certain events including, but not limited to, a significant adverse change in legal 45 Table of Contents factors or the business environment, an adverse action by a regulator or rating agency, or unanticipated competition would cause the Company to review goodwill for impairment more frequently than annually. The goodwill reported as an asset in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition at December 31, 2005 is attributable primarily to the acquisition of The Paul Revere Life Insurance Company (individual income protection recently issued business) and GENEX Services, Inc. (disability management services business). The impairment testing for goodwill involves estimating the fair value of the individual income protection block of recently issued business and the fair value of the disability management services business based upon the present value of future cash flows using assumptions such as future sales, morbidity experience, portfolio yield rate, and the rate of return at which the Company believes the market would price the businesses for purchase. Adverse changes in any of these factors could result in an impairment of goodwill for either or both of the blocks of business. Income Taxes The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The Company valuation allowance relates primarily to assets for foreign net operating loss carryforwards and assets for the Company basis in certain of its foreign subsidiaries that are not likely to be realized in the future based on management expectations using currently available evidence. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, the Company has considered all available positive and negative evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event the Company determines that it most likely would not be able to realize all or part of its deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. The calculation of the Company tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws in a multitude of jurisdictions, both domestic and foreign. The amount of income taxes paid by the Company is subject to ongoing audits in various jurisdictions, and a material assessment by a governing tax authority could affect profitability. The Company records tax liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues in the U.S. and other tax jurisdictions based on management estimate of whether, and to the extent which, additional taxes will probably be due. However, due to the complexity of the tax laws and uncertainties in their interpretation, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from the current estimate of the probable tax liabilities. If the estimate of the tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, an additional charge to expense would result. If payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be less than the recorded amounts, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when the Company determines the liabilities are no longer probable. Management believes that adequate accruals have been provided for all years presented. 46 Table of Contents Consolidated Operating Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Revenue Premium Income $ 7,815.6 (0.3 )% $ 7,839.6 2.9 % $ 7,615.7 Net Investment Income 2,188.3 1.4 2,158.7 2,158.4 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) (6.7 ) (122.9 ) 29.2 116.8 (173.8 ) Other Income 440.0 0.6 437.4 11.8 391.3 Total 10,437.2 (0.3 ) 10,464.9 4.7 9,991.6 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 7,083.2 (2.3 ) 7,248.4 (7.9 ) 7,868.1 Commissions 804.7 (4.5 ) 842.3 (0.2 ) 844.1 Interest and Debt Expense 208.0 0.4 207.1 10.6 187.2 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (519.4 ) (6.8 ) (557.3 ) (16.3 ) (665.9 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 463.7 6.2 436.7 (4.8 ) 458.6 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 15.1 (4.4 ) 15.8 (57.9 ) 37.5 Impairment of Intangible Assets N.M. 856.4 N.M. Compensation Expense 753.9 1.9 739.6 (5.2 ) 779.8 Other Operating Expenses 918.4 (1.8 ) 935.4 2.0 917.4 Total 9,727.6 (9.3 ) 10,724.4 2.9 10,426.8 Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations Before Income Tax and Cumulative Effect of Accounting Principle Change 709.6 N.M. (259.5 ) 40.4 (435.2 ) Income Tax (Benefit) 196.0 N.M. (67.3 ) (60.6 ) (170.6 ) Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations Before Cumulative Effect of Accounting Principle Change 513.6 N.M. (192.2 ) 27.4 (264.6 ) Loss from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax N.M. (60.8 ) 62.4 (161.7 ) Cumulative Effect of Accounting Principle Change, Net of Tax N.M. 39.9 Net Income (Loss) $ 513.6 N.M. $ (253.0 ) 34.5 $ (386.4 ) N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Included in the results for 2005 is an after tax charge of $51.6 million related to the Company settlement of a market conduct examination with the California DOI and related matters. Included in the results for 2004 are after tax charges of $701.0 million related to the restructuring of the individual income protection closed block business and $87.8 million related to the Company settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Included in the results for 2003 is an after tax charge of $581.1 million related to U.S. Brokerage group income protection reserve strengthening. The losses from discontinued operations are related to the sale of the Company Canadian branch, which closed effective April 30, 2004. See preceding discussions concerning significant transactions and events and Discontinued Operations contained herein in Item 7 and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further details. 47 Table of Contents The decline in premium income in 2005 relative to the prior year is generally in line with the Company expectations as premium income has declined in the Company U.S. Brokerage group income protection and group life and accidental death and dismemberment lines of business due to the Company pricing strategy for its group business. The Unum Limited segment, Colonial segment, and remaining U.S. Brokerage segment lines of business reported growth in premium income. In addition, premium income in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment increased in 2005 due to the recapture of a ceded block of business effective August 8, 2005. Premium income increased in 2004 relative to 2003 due to increases in the U.S. Brokerage supplemental and voluntary lines and the Unum Limited and Colonial segments. This growth was partially offset by a decline in premium income in the U.S. Brokerage group income protection and group life and accidental death and dismemberment lines of business. See the operating results by segment contained herein for further discussions of premium income variances between years. Net investment income increased slightly in 2005 relative to the prior year. Included in net investment income for 2005 is approximately $35.0 million related to the $1.6 billion of bonds transferred to the Company in conjunction with the 2005 recapture of a ceded closed block of individual income protection business. Excluding that, net investment income was consistent year over year, with the increase from the growth in invested assets and higher bond call premiums offset by the investment of new cash at lower rates and a decline in the level of prepayments on mortgage-backed securities relative to the prior year. Net investment income in 2004 was level with 2003, with the growth in invested assets offset by lower income on new cash invested in the lower interest rate environment and by a decline in the level of prepayments on mortgage-backed securities. See Investments contained herein in Item 7 for further discussion. The Company volatility in net realized investment gains and losses is due in part to changes in the fair value of the embedded derivatives in certain reinsurance contracts. These fair value changes resulted in a net realized loss of $7.9 million in 2005 compared to net realized gains of $88.6 million for 2004 and $0.8 million for 2003. The Company also experienced improvements in net realized investment gains and losses from sales and write-downs, with a net realized gain of $1.2 million in 2005 compared to net realized losses of $59.4 million and $174.6 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Company believes that its active management of credit risk has resulted in this improving trend and expects the level of realized investment gains or losses during 2006 from sales and write-downs to be relatively consistent with the level of 2005. See Investments contained herein in Item 7 for further discussion. The reported ratio of benefits and change in reserves for future benefits to premium income was 90.6 percent for 2005 compared to 92.5 percent for 2004 and 103.3 percent for 2003. As previously noted, benefits and change in reserves for future benefits for 2005 include charges of $52.7 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and for 2004 include charges of $84.5 million related to the multistate market conduct examination settlement agreements and $110.6 million related to the restructuring of the individual income protection closed block business. In 2003, benefits and change in reserves for future benefits include charges of $894.0 million related to the U.S. Brokerage group income protection reserve strengthening. Excluding these items, the ratio of benefits and change in reserves for future benefits to premium income was 90.0 percent for 2005 compared to 90.0 percent for 2004 and 91.6 percent for 2003. See operating results by segment contained herein for discussions of line of business risk results. Commissions decreased in 2005 relative to 2004 and 2003 due primarily to the decline in sales and also to the restructuring of the Colonial agency field sales force. The Company is aggressively managing its operating expenses, particularly in those lines of business with declining revenue. The Company reported a consolidated operating expense ratio in 2005 consistent with the level of 2004 and lower than 2003. Excluding the 2005 charges of $22.3 million resulting from the California DOI settlement agreement and related matters and the 2004 charges of $42.5 million resulting from the multistate market conduct examination settlement agreements, as discussed herein, the operating expense ratios were 21.1 percent in 2005 compared to 20.8 percent and 22.3 percent for 2004 and 2003, respectively. 48 Table of Contents As previously discussed, the Company income tax for 2005 includes tax benefits of $42.8 million related to the reduction of income tax liabilities in the first and third quarters of 2005 and a net tax benefit of $3.3 million recorded in connection with the repatriation of unremitted foreign earnings from its U.K. subsidiaries under the Homeland Investment Act of 2004. 49 Table of Contents Consolidated Sales Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 U.S. Brokerage Segment Fully Insured Products Group Long-term Income Protection $ 180.4 % $ 180.4 (39.7 )% $ 299.1 Group Short-term Income Protection 74.8 (5.9 ) 79.5 (37.5 ) 127.2 Group Life 157.8 (5.2 ) 166.5 (31.1 ) 241.6 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 14.7 14.8 12.8 (51.9 ) 26.6 Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued 53.8 (12.7 ) 61.6 (15.5 ) 72.9 Group Long-term Care 21.1 12.8 18.7 (30.7 ) 27.0 Individual Long-term Care 13.0 (33.3 ) 19.5 (55.6 ) 43.9 Voluntary Workplace Benefits 130.2 14.1 114.1 7.8 105.8 Total Fully Insured Products 645.8 (1.1 ) 653.1 (30.8 ) 944.1 Administrative Services Only (ASO) Products Group Long-term Income Protection 1.8 63.6 1.1 (83.1 ) 6.5 Group Short-term Income Protection 5.8 (20.5 ) 7.3 (49.3 ) 14.4 Total ASO Products 7.6 (9.5 ) 8.4 (59.8 ) 20.9 U.S. Brokerage Segment 653.4 (1.2 ) 661.5 (31.5 ) 965.0 Unum Limited Segment Group Long-term Income Protection 91.2 (11.7 ) 103.3 26.7 81.5 Group Life 33.0 (51.5 ) 68.1 145.8 27.7 Individual Income Protection 8.1 (27.0 ) 11.1 (42.8 ) 19.4 Unum Limited Segment 132.3 (27.5 ) 182.5 41.9 128.6 Colonial Segment Income Protection 176.8 2.5 172.5 (5.6 ) 182.7 Life 60.6 3.4 58.6 2.4 57.2 Cancer and Critical Illness 49.0 3.4 47.4 4.6 45.3 Colonial Segment 286.4 2.8 278.5 (2.3 ) 285.2 Individual Income Protection - Closed Block Segment 6.5 (16.7 ) 7.8 (35.5 ) 12.1 Total Sales from Continuing Operations 1,078.6 (4.6 ) 1,130.3 (18.7 ) 1,390.9 Discontinued Operations N.M. 10.1 (72.4 ) 36.6 Total $ 1,078.6 (5.4 ) $ 1,140.4 (20.1 ) $ 1,427.5 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Sales results shown in the preceding chart generally represent the annualized premium or annualized fee income on new sales expected to be received and reported as premium income or fee income during the next twelve months following or commencing in the initial quarter in which the sale is reported, depending on the effective date of the new sale. Sales do not correspond to premium income or fee income reported as revenue under GAAP because new 50 Table of Contents annualized premiums measure current sales performance, while premium income and fee income are recognized when earned and reflect renewals and persistency of in force policies written in prior years as well as current new sales. Prior year sales results by segment have been reclassified to conform to the current reporting segments, the change of which is discussed herein. Premiums for fully insured products are reported as premium income while the fees for administrative services only (ASO) products, wherein the risk and responsibility for funding claim payments remains with the customer, are included in other income. Sales, together with persistency of the existing block of business and the Company renewal program, are an indicator of growth in the Company premium and fee income. Trends in new sales, as well as existing market share, are also indicators of the Company potential for growth in its respective markets and the level of market acceptance of price changes and new product offerings. Sales may fluctuate significantly due to case size and timing of sales submissions. Negative media attention or downgrades in the financial strength ratings of the Company insurance subsidiaries may adversely affect the Company ability to grow sales and renew its existing business. The Company intends to continue with its disciplined approach to pricing and also with the strategy of developing a more balanced business mix of large, small, and mid-employer markets. The Company has field sales personnel who specialize in (1) employer-provided plans for employees and (2) supplemental benefit plans that include multi-life income protection and long-term care product offerings and products sold to groups of employees through payroll deduction at the workplace. These field sales personnel partner with Company representatives from claims, customer service, and underwriting who work in conjunction with independent brokers and consultants to present coverage solutions to potential customers and to manage existing customer accounts. The Company utilizes a distribution model for the sale of individual income protection and individual long-term care insurance products whereby independent brokers and consultants are provided direct access to a sales support center centrally located in the Company corporate offices. The Company intends to maintain its focus on workplace customers and increased integration between supplemental benefit plans and group offerings by continuing to provide highly focused field support. The Company also utilizes an agency field sales force to market the products offered by its Colonial segment. Segment Operating Results Effective July 1, 2005, the Company modified its reporting segments to separate its United States business from that of its United Kingdom subsidiary, Unum Limited, due to the continued growth in that subsidiary and to recent organizational changes within the Company which established a separate management team to focus solely on the U.S. Brokerage lines of business. The Company new reporting segments are comprised of the following: U.S. Brokerage, Unum Limited (U.K. business), Colonial, Individual Income Protection Closed Block, Other, and Corporate. The U.S. Brokerage segment includes the results of the Company U.S. group income protection insurance, group life and accidental death and dismemberment products, and supplemental and voluntary lines of business, including individual income protection recently issued, group and individual long-term care, and brokerage voluntary workplace benefits products. The Unum Limited segment includes group long-term income protection, group life, and individual income protection products. The products now reported in the U.S. Brokerage segment and the Unum Limited segment were previously combined and reported in the Income Protection and Life and Accident segments. The modification of the Company reporting segments had no impact on the level at which the Company performs impairment testing for goodwill or loss recognition testing for the recoverability of deferred policy acquisition costs and value of business acquired. The results of the disability management services business are now reported in the Other segment, which has been redefined to include the disability management services business as well as results from U.S. Brokerage insured products not actively marketed (with the exception of the individual income protection products in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment). There were no changes to the Colonial, Individual Income Protection Closed Block, or Corporate segments. Segment information for prior periods has been reclassified to conform to the current reporting segments. 51 Table of Contents In the following segment financial data and discussions of segment operating results, operating revenue excludes net realized investment gains and losses. Operating income or operating loss excludes net realized investment gains and losses, income tax, and results of discontinued operations. These are considered non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). These non-GAAP financial measures of operating revenue and operating income or operating loss differ from revenue and income (loss) from continuing operations before income tax as presented in the Company consolidated operating results reported herein and in income statements prepared in accordance with GAAP due to the exclusion of before tax realized investment gains and losses. The Company measures segment performance for purposes of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information , excluding realized investment gains and losses because management believes that this performance measure is a better indicator of the ongoing businesses and the underlying trends in the businesses. The Company investment focus is on investment income to support its insurance liabilities as opposed to the generation of realized investment gains and losses, and a long-term focus is necessary to maintain profitability over the life of the business. Realized investment gains and losses are dependent on market conditions and not necessarily related to decisions regarding the underlying business of the Company segments. However, income or loss excluding realized investment gains and losses does not replace net income or net loss as a measure of the Company overall profitability. The Company may experience realized investment losses, which will affect future earnings levels as the underlying business is long-term in nature and requires that the Company be able to earn the assumed interest rates in its liabilities. A reconciliation of total operating revenue by segment to total consolidated revenue and total operating income (loss) by segment to consolidated net income (loss) is as follows. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2005 2004 2003 Operating Revenue by Segment $ 10,443.9 $ 10,435.7 $ 10,165.4 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) (6.7 ) 29.2 (173.8 ) Revenue $ 10,437.2 $ 10,464.9 $ 9,991.6 Operating Income (Loss) by Segment $ 716.3 $ (288.7 ) $ (261.4 ) Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) (6.7 ) 29.2 (173.8 ) Income Tax (Benefit) 196.0 (67.3 ) (170.6 ) Loss from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax (60.8 ) (161.7 ) Cumulative Effect of Accounting Principle Change, Net of Tax 39.9 Net Income (Loss) $ 513.6 $ (253.0 ) $ (386.4 ) Included in the 2005 before-tax operating income by segment of $716.3 million is a before-tax charge of $75.0 million related to the settlement of the market conduct examination with the California DOI and related matters. Included in the 2004 before-tax operating loss by segment of $288.7 million is a before-tax charge of $127.0 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination and a before-tax charge of $967.0 million related to the first quarter of 2004 restructuring of the individual income protection closed block of business. Included in the 2003 before-tax operating loss by segment of $261.4 million is a before-tax charge of $894.0 million related to U.S. Brokerage group income protection reserve strengthening. 52 Table of Contents U.S. Brokerage Segment Operating Results The U.S. Brokerage segment includes group long-term and short-term income protection insurance, group life and accidental death and dismemberment products, and supplemental and voluntary lines of business. The supplemental and voluntary lines of business are comprised of recently issued individual income protection insurance, group and individual long-term care insurance, and voluntary workplace benefits products. Shown below are financial results for the U.S. Brokerage segment. In the sections following, financial results and key ratios are also presented for the major lines of business within the segment. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 5,229.0 (3.6 )% $ 5,421.6 0.7 % $ 5,382.4 Net Investment Income 998.2 3.4 965.8 (0.8 ) 974.0 Other Income 108.6 20.9 89.8 27.2 70.6 Total 6,335.8 (2.2 ) 6,477.2 0.8 6,427.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 4,419.3 (4.2 ) 4,614.4 (15.1 ) 5,437.5 Commissions 501.6 (6.8 ) 538.3 (1.9 ) 548.8 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (311.9 ) (9.9 ) (346.0 ) (24.6 ) (458.8 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 306.9 7.2 286.3 1.5 282.0 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 0.3 50.0 0.2 (33.3 ) 0.3 Operating Expenses 1,031.9 (1.6 ) 1,048.5 1,048.4 Total 5,948.1 (3.2 ) 6,141.7 (10.4 ) 6,858.2 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 387.7 15.6 $ 335.5 177.8 $ (431.2 ) Segment Sales Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Sales for the U.S. Brokerage segment during 2005 were generally consistent with Company expectations. The Company anticipated relatively weaker sales for the first half of 2005 relative to the comparable period of 2004 for both group and individual income protection products primarily as a result of the competitive pricing environment. The Company began to restore sales momentum during the latter half of the year, particularly in the small and mid-employer core markets, while maintaining its commitment to a disciplined pricing approach for new business. The Company intends to continue to emphasize profitable premium growth through a balance of new sales, renewal programs, and persistency of existing profitable blocks of business. 53 Table of Contents Sales highlights for 2005 showing progress in achievement of the strategy of disciplined pricing and a balanced business mix through diversification include: Sales in 2005 for fully insured group long-term and short-term income protection and group life in the small and mid-employer core markets increased approximately 11.6 percent in these three product lines, offset by a decline in sales in the more competitive large case market. Individual income protection recently issued sales attributable to multi-life business were approximately 85 percent of this product line new sales in 2005 compared to 81 percent in 2004. Voluntary workplace benefits sales increased in comparison to the prior year due to both growth in existing products along with the introduction of new products. Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Group long-term and short-term income protection sales, on a fully insured basis, decreased during 2004 compared to 2003 due to a decline in sales as a result of the Company aforementioned approach to pricing and continued shift to focus on the small and mid-employer core markets. Sales for group life decreased in 2004 relative to 2003 due to a more competitive market, which resulted in sales declines in all market sizes, and also due to a decrease in large-employer market sales. The Company anticipated weaker sales for 2004 as compared to 2003 for its group products due primarily to its balanced business mix strategy and the competitive pricing environment. The portion of the individual income protection sales attributable to multi-life business was approximately 81 percent for 2004 sales and 77 percent for 2003 sales, although both multi-life and non multi-life sales declined in 2004 relative to the prior year. Voluntary workplace benefits sales increased in 2004 relative to 2003 and were generally in line with the Company expectations. Segment Persistency and Renewal of Existing Business Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 The Company monitors persistency of its existing business and reflects adverse changes in persistency in the current period amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. One way in which the Company monitors persistency is at the overall block of business level (i.e., group long-term income protection, group short-term income protection, and group life). Persistency, at the overall block of business level, is the year-to-date rate at which existing business for all issue years in the block of business at the beginning of the period remains inforce at the end of the period. In determining whether additional amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs is required due to adverse persistency, the Company measures persistency by issue year (i.e., the rate at which existing business for that specific issue year at the beginning of the period remains inforce at the end of the period). The rate of persistency for an overall block of business may improve while individual issue years within the overall block of business may deteriorate and require additional amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. Persistency during 2005 for the overall block of fully-insured group long-term income protection, on average, was level with 2004, but was higher than expected. Persistency for fully insured group short-term income protection, on average, declined marginally during 2005 compared to the prior year and was slightly less than expected. Included in the 2005 policy terminations was a group policyholder who did not terminate the relationship with the Company, but transferred from fully insured short-term income protection to ASO. Adjusting persistency for this policyholder transfer, persistency for fully insured group short-term income protection was slightly higher than expected for 2005. It was anticipated that persistency in the group income protection business would decline in 2005 due to the Company more disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection. Since the group life and accidental death and dismemberment products are primarily sold in conjunction with group income protection, the more focused renewal effort in group income protection has reduced persistency in these lines, though the reduction in persistency is less than anticipated. The persistency for the supplemental and voluntary product lines generally continues to be within expected levels. 54 Table of Contents For the years 2002 and subsequent, the Company lowered its premium persistency assumptions for group income protection, group life, and group accidental death and dismemberment policy acquisition costs deferred in those years to reflect its current estimate of persistency. This accelerated the amortization of acquisition costs deferred in those years into the early life of the policy by using lower premium persistency assumptions to determine the scheduled or expected amortization. Although persistency in the future may be lower than historical levels, particularly in certain issue years due to the Company increased emphasis on retaining profitable business, the acceleration of scheduled amortization may eliminate the need for additional amortization related to the decline in actual persistency relative to scheduled or expected persistency. The Company does not anticipate that the persistency levels for 2006 will result in increased amortization. During 2005, the Company completed its annual comprehensive scenario testing with respect to the amortization and recoverability of its group income protection and group life deferred policy acquisition costs. The deferred policy acquisition costs were fully recoverable. The assessment is performed primarily to test both recoverability and the limits of recoverability. Sustained adverse persistency at the levels tested would result in lower emerging future profits due to lower overall premium levels and additional acceleration, on a prospective basis, of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs relative to the scheduled or expected amortization, but the Company does not anticipate prolonged persistency rates at the stress levels tested. A continuing part of the Company strategy for U.S. Brokerage group business involves executing its renewal programs and managing persistency in its existing blocks of business. Persistency for the primary lines of business within the U.S. Brokerage segment is expected to remain stable or slightly improve during 2006, which reflects the need for less aggressive renewal actions needed on the in-force business and a smaller 2006 renewal program than those of 2004 and 2005. Included in the Company 2006 renewal program is a focus on group income protection products sold in the State of California. As a result of the Company settlement agreement with the California DOI and the resulting revisions in group income protection product requirements for policies issued in California, the Company 2006 renewal program includes a focus on new sales and renewal of existing business in the California market. The Company previous renewal programs have generally been successful in retaining business that is relatively more profitable than business that terminated. While it is expected that the additional premium and related profits associated with renewal activity will continue to emerge, the Company intends to balance the renewal program with the need to maximize persistency and retain producer relationships. In January of 2006, the Company began a process of filing a request with various state insurance departments for rate adjustments on one older series of individual long-term care policies. The rate adjustment will bring the rates for this policy series closer to today market, better reflecting current interest rates, higher expected future claims, persistency, experience, and other factors related to pricing individual long-term care coverage. Overall, the average increase will be in the 30 percent range and will affect approximately 130,000 policyholders, less than 16 percent of the Company total long-term care block of business. Increases are subject to state review and approval and will be effective on the policy anniversary following the state approval and only after the proper state-specific notification requirements have been satisfied. In states for which a rate increase is submitted and approved, customers will also be given options for coverage changes or other approaches that might fit their current financial and insurance needs. Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Persistency during 2004 for group long-term income protection, on average, declined from that experienced in 2003. Terminations were more heavily concentrated in the large-employer market, while persistency in the small and mid-employer markets improved slightly in 2004 compared to 2003. Persistency for fully insured short-term income protection also declined during 2004, on average, over the prior year. These declines in persistency were expected due to the Company disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection. Persistency in 2004 in group life and the supplemental and voluntary lines of business within this segment was consistent with the levels of 2003. 55 Table of Contents U.S. Brokerage Group Income Protection Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for U.S. Brokerage group income protection. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Income Protection $ 1,961.6 (3.3 )% $ 2,028.6 (0.2 )% $ 2,031.7 Group Short-term Income Protection 566.3 (8.1 ) 616.1 (2.3 ) 630.9 Total Premium Income 2,527.9 (4.4 ) 2,644.7 (0.7 ) 2,662.6 Net Investment Income 605.7 1.7 595.8 (2.3 ) 609.7 Other Income 80.3 15.4 69.6 23.4 56.4 Total 3,213.9 (2.9 ) 3,310.1 (0.6 ) 3,328.7 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 2,397.7 (5.3 ) 2,533.1 (25.8 ) 3,412.1 Commissions 175.1 (12.0 ) 199.0 (0.5 ) 200.1 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (64.6 ) (16.2 ) (77.1 ) (38.4 ) (125.1 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 92.2 (1.4 ) 93.5 (2.7 ) 96.1 Operating Expenses 582.5 (6.0 ) 619.6 0.7 615.5 Total 3,182.9 (5.5 ) 3,368.1 (19.8 ) 4,198.7 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 31.0 153.4 $ (58.0 ) 93.3 $ (870.0 ) Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) (1) 94.8 % 95.8 % 128.1 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) (2) 23.0 % 23.4 % 23.1 % Before-tax Operating Income (Loss) Ratio (% of Premium Income) (3) 1.2 % (2.2 )% (32.7 )% Persistency - Group Long-term Income Protection 84.8 % 84.8 % 87.2 % Persistency - Group Short-term Income Protection 79.6 % 80.6 % 84.5 % 56 Table of Contents (1) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax reserve charge of $27.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters; the 2004 before-tax reserve charge of $80.2 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination; and the 2003 before-tax reserve strengthening of $894.0 million. Excluding these charges, the benefit ratios for 2005, 2004, and 2003 would have been 93.8%, 92.7%, and 94.6%, respectively. (2) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $10.1 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $36.5 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the operating expense ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 22.6% and 22.0%, respectively. (3) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $37.4 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters; the 2004 before-tax charge of $116.7 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination; and the 2003 before-tax reserve strengthening of $894.0 million. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income ratios for 2005, 2004, and 2003 would have been 2.7%, 2.2%, and 0.9%, respectively. Excluding the charges noted in (3) above and discussed more fully in the preceding significant transactions and events discussions for each applicable year, group income protection would have reported operating income of $68.4 million in 2005, $58.7 million in 2004, and $24.0 million in 2003. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Operating revenue for group income protection decreased in 2005 relative to the prior year due to the expected decline in premium income. Net investment income increased due to the growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business, offsetting the impact of the declining yield which results from investing new cash in the lower interest rate environment. Other income, which increased in 2005 relative to the prior year, includes ASO fees of $59.0 million and $56.1 million for 2005 and 2004, respectively. The benefit ratio for group long-term income protection increased in 2005 relative to the prior year, excluding the charges taken in 2005 and 2004 related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and the settlement agreements related to the multistate market conduct examination, due primarily to claims management performance, particularly reduced operational effectiveness in the timing of claim decisions and claim recoveries. For group short-term income protection, the 2005 benefit ratio was lower than 2004 due primarily to increased premiums per insured life and a decrease in the paid claim incidence rate. Commissions and the deferral of policy acquisition costs were below the prior year due primarily to lower sales. Operating expenses for 2005 include charges of $10.1 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and for 2004 includes charges of $36.5 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding those charges, expenses are lower than the prior year, and while the adjusted operating expense ratio has increased slightly relative to the prior year, the Company is aggressively managing its expenses against the expected decline in premium income. As discussed under Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements, and in Risk Factors contained herein in Item 1A, certain risks and uncertainties are inherent in the Company group income protection business. Components of claims experience, including, but not limited to, incidence and recovery rates, may be worse than expected. Both economic and societal factors can affect claim incidence. Adjustments to reserve amounts may be required in the event of changes from assumptions regarding the incidence of claims or the rate of recovery, as well as persistency, mortality, and interest rates used in calculating the reserve amounts. 57 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Premium income for group income protection decreased slightly in 2004 relative to 2003, primarily due to the expected decrease in persistency for group short-term income protection. Net investment income decreased in 2004 compared with 2003 due primarily to lower investment portfolio yields resulting from the decline in market interest rates and from less prepayment income on fixed maturity securities, offset somewhat by a year over year increase in the retrospective adjustment of the amortization of the purchase discount on mortgage-backed securities. Included in other income are ASO fees of $56.1 million for 2004 and $46.5 million for 2003. The settlement of the multistate market conduct examination resulted in a 2004 charge of $80.2 million for benefit costs and reserves. Excluding this reserve charge as well as the 2003 reserve strengthening previously discussed, the benefit ratio for 2004 declined compared to 2003. Contributing to the decline in the 2004 benefit ratio relative to 2003 was a decrease in the submitted claim incidence rate for group long-term income protection and an increase in premium per insured life, primarily due to rate increases placed on poorer performing business through the 2004 renewal program. Partially offsetting the factors contributing to the decline in the benefit ratio was a lower claim discount rate used for new claims occurring in 2004 relative to the rate used in 2003. For group short-term income protection, the benefit ratio was lower primarily due to a decline in paid claim incidence in 2004 compared to 2003. Costs capitalized during 2004 for group income protection were lower than in the prior year due to an updated analysis of costs associated with the acquisition of new business and due to the decrease in sales. Operating expenses for 2004 include a charge of $36.5 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. 58 Table of Contents U.S. Brokerage Group Life and Accidental Death and Dismemberment Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for U.S. Brokerage group life and accidental death and dismemberment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Life $ 1,306.8 (9.3 )% $ 1,441.0 (1.6 )% $ 1,463.8 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 156.4 (14.3 ) 182.4 (8.2 ) 198.6 Total Premium Income 1,463.2 (9.9 ) 1,623.4 (2.3 ) 1,662.4 Net Investment Income 151.9 2.7 147.9 2.0 145.0 Other Income (Loss) 2.0 N.M. (0.6 ) (220.0 ) 0.5 Total 1,617.1 (8.7 ) 1,770.7 (2.1 ) 1,807.9 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,111.9 (10.6 ) 1,244.3 (2.8 ) 1,280.0 Commissions 97.8 (7.9 ) 106.2 (6.2 ) 113.2 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (42.7 ) (9.1 ) (47.0 ) (41.3 ) (80.0 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 73.0 9.0 67.0 (6.8 ) 71.9 Operating Expenses 188.3 0.8 186.8 (6.6 ) 200.1 Total 1,428.3 (8.3 ) 1,557.3 (1.8 ) 1,585.2 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 188.8 (11.5 ) $ 213.4 (4.2 ) $ 222.7 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 76.0 % 76.6 % 77.0 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 12.9 % 11.5 % 12.0 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 12.9 % 13.1 % 13.4 % Persistency - Group Life 78.3 % 84.0 % 83.2 % Persistency - Accidental Death & Dismemberment 76.9 % 80.3 % 84.2 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Premium income decreased in 2005 relative to the prior year due to decreased sales growth and lower persistency levels. The increase in net investment income relative to the prior year is due to an increase in the yield on floating rate investments that support certain products within the group life line of business offset somewhat by a decline in the level of assets supporting this business. 59 Table of Contents The group life line of business reported a decrease in the benefit ratio for 2005 relative to the prior year. Submitted claim incidence was slightly lower in 2005 relative to the prior year, but the average paid claim size and submitted waiver incidence increased relative to the prior year. The accidental death and dismemberment line of business reported a slightly increased benefit ratio for 2005 compared to the prior year due to slightly higher levels of paid claim incidence offset partially by a decreased average paid claim size. Commissions and the deferral of policy acquisition costs decreased in 2005 compared to the prior year due primarily to the decrease in sales in comparison to the prior year, partially offset by a 2005 buy-out of a block of business from a commissioned sales agency. Operating expenses have remained relatively stable in 2005 relative to the prior year, but the operating expense ratio increased due to the decline in premium income. Although aggressively managing expenses, the Company anticipates continuing pressure on its operating expense ratios for group life and accidental death and dismemberment. Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Premium income decreased in 2004 relative to 2003 due primarily to lower sales. The group life line of business benefit ratio decreased slightly in 2004 relative to 2003 due to an increase in premiums per life partially offset by higher submitted and paid claim incidence rates in 2004 relative to 2003 as well as an increase in the average paid claim size. Acquisition costs capitalized during 2004 were lower than in 2003 due primarily to an updated analysis of costs associated with the acquisition of new business and due to the decrease in sales. 60 Table of Contents U.S. Brokerage Supplemental and Voluntary Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for U.S. Brokerage supplemental and voluntary product lines. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Operating Revenue Premium Income Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued $ 425.1 2.3 % $ 415.6 5.8 % $ 392.8 Long-term Care 473.2 6.5 444.5 9.9 404.6 Voluntary Workplace Benefits 339.6 15.7 293.4 12.8 260.0 Total Premium Income 1,237.9 7.3 1,153.5 9.1 1,057.4 Net Investment Income 240.6 8.3 222.1 1.3 219.3 Other Income 26.3 26.4 20.8 51.8 13.7 Total 1,504.8 7.8 1,396.4 8.2 1,290.4 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 909.7 8.7 837.0 12.3 745.4 Commissions 228.7 (1.9 ) 233.1 (1.0 ) 235.5 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (204.6 ) (7.8 ) (221.9 ) (12.5 ) (253.7 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 141.7 12.6 125.8 10.4 114.0 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 0.3 50.0 0.2 (33.3 ) 0.3 Operating Expenses 261.1 7.8 242.1 4.0 232.8 Total 1,336.9 9.9 1,216.3 13.2 1,074.3 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 167.9 (6.8 ) $ 180.1 (16.7 ) $ 216.1 Benefit Ratios (% of Premium Income) Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued (1) 57.5 % 57.7 % 54.6 % Long-term Care 93.0 % 88.8 % 84.7 % Voluntary Workplace Benefits 66.3 % 69.0 % 72.5 % Interest Adjusted Loss Ratio Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued 43.8 % 46.0 % 41.5 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) (2) 21.1 % 21.0 % 22.0 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) (3) 13.6 % 15.6 % 20.4 % Persistency - Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued 89.6 % 90.7 % 89.6 % Persistency - Long-term Care 95.8 % 95.5 % 95.0 % Persistency - Voluntary Workplace Benefits 81.1 % 81.0 % 82.1 % 61 Table of Contents (1) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax reserve charge of $2.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters and the 2004 before-tax reserve charge of $0.6 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the benefit ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 57.0% and 57.6%, respectively. (2) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $1.0 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $1.1 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the operating expense ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 21.0% and 20.9%, respectively. (3) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $3.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $1.7 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 13.8% and 15.8%, respectively. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 The increase in premium income for 2005 relative to the prior year for the individual income protection recently issued business and individual long-term care is due to sales growth in prior periods and stable persistency. The increase in premium income in the group long-term care and voluntary workplace benefits lines of business is attributable to current year sales growth as well as sales growth in previous periods and stable persistency. Net investment income increased relative to the prior year due primarily to growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business, partially offset by the inclusion in 2004 of a portion of the investment income attributable to the bonds retained from the sale of the Canadian branch that were subsequently redeployed to other lines of business and also due to a decline in the yield on the portfolio from investing new cash in the lower interest rate environment. The benefit ratio for the individual income protection recently issued business decreased slightly in 2005 relative to the prior year, excluding the 2005 reserve charge related to the California DOI settlement agreement and related matters and the 2004 reserve charge related to the multistate market conduct examination as discussed above, driven primarily by lower incidence and a release of active life reserves on two large multi-life cases which terminated during 2005. Multi-life business, which constitutes approximately 60 percent of the individual income protection recently issued block of business, has consistently had lower claim incidence rates than the non multi-life business. The benefit ratio for long-term care was higher in 2005 than in the prior year due primarily to the aging of the block of business and a lower net claim resolution rate. The benefit ratio for the voluntary workplace benefits products was lower in comparison to the prior year due primarily to a lower rate of insureds in claim payout status in the voluntary income protection line of business and improved mortality experience in the voluntary life line of business. The deferral of policy acquisition costs decreased during 2005 relative to the prior year due primarily to the lower level of sales in the individual income protection recently issued and long-term care lines of business, offset somewhat by higher levels of deferral for the voluntary workplace benefits product lines due to increased sales. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was higher for 2005 due to the termination during 2005 of two large multi-life cases which resulted in the write-off of associated unamortized acquisition costs. This increased amortization was offset by the release of active life reserves, as previously mentioned. Operating expenses increased in comparison to the prior year due to growth in these lines of business; however, the operating expense ratio remained consistent with that of the prior year. Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 The growth in premium income for individual income protection recently issued resulted from prior year sales growth and stable persistency of the existing block of business. Premium income for long-term care increased during 2004 compared to 2003 primarily due to new sales growth in previous periods. Changes in the product offering during 2003 decreased the 2004 growth in individual long-term care sales relative to historical trends. Persistency in the long-term care line of business remained high and stable. The growth in premium income for voluntary workplace benefits was due primarily to sales growth. 62 Table of Contents Net investment income for 2004 increased slightly from 2003 due to the continued growth in invested assets supporting these lines of business offset by a decline in the yield on the portfolio as well as internal redistributions of invested assets in conjunction with the Company management of asset and liability cash flows. The increase in the benefit ratio for individual income protection recently issued for 2004 relative to 2003 was primarily due to a decline in the net claim resolution rate, partially offset by a decrease in submitted claim incidence due to the growth in the multi-life portion of this line of business, which has consistently had lower claim incidence rates than the non multi-life business. The increase in the benefit ratio for the long-term care lines of business is due to higher submitted claim incidence in 2004 in comparison to 2003 and a higher net claim resolution rate. Acquisition costs capitalized during 2004 were lower than in 2003 due primarily to the reduction in sales of individual income protection recently issued and long-term care business. Segment Outlook The Company primary focus during 2006 will be continued improvement of its claims management results and profitability enhancement in its group income protection line of business, along with an emphasis on continued growth in the small and mid-employer core markets and the supplemental and voluntary product lines. The Company intends to continue its disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection, with a more conscious effort to balance growth and profitability. Although this strategy may cause a somewhat lower persistency or market share, historically the profitability of business that terminates has generally been less than the profitability of retained business. Because of anticipated long-term improvements in the claim management results for the group long-term income protection business, the Company expects its overall benefit ratio for group income protection to gradually improve relative to 2005 while the benefit ratios in the other lines of business are expected to remain relatively stable year over year. The Company believes that its U.S. Brokerage results will benefit if there is an improvement in overall economic conditions and a higher interest rate environment, although the improvement in results may lag behind the improvements in the economy and interest rate environment. 63 Table of Contents Unum Limited Segment Operating Results The Unum Limited segment includes insurance for group long-term income protection, group life, and individual income protection products sold primarily in the United Kingdom through field sales personnel and independent brokers and consultants. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Unum Limited segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Income Protection $ 582.9 16.2 % $ 501.8 35.2 % $ 371.2 Group Life 164.1 39.2 117.9 93.9 60.8 Individual Income Protection 38.3 (2.8 ) 39.4 (12.4 ) 45.0 Total Premium Income 785.3 19.1 659.1 38.2 477.0 Net Investment Income 154.2 10.5 139.6 31.1 106.5 Other Income 6.1 96.8 3.1 (68.7 ) 9.9 Total 945.6 17.9 801.8 35.1 593.4 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 545.8 17.5 464.5 34.8 344.5 Commissions 56.4 15.3 48.9 43.4 34.1 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (34.1 ) (9.5 ) (37.7 ) 12.2 (33.6 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 21.6 12.5 19.2 12.9 17.0 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 14.2 (1.4 ) 14.4 166.7 5.4 Operating Expenses 154.0 9.1 141.2 23.9 114.0 Total 757.9 16.5 650.5 35.1 481.4 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 187.7 24.1 $ 151.3 35.1 $ 112.0 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 69.5 % 70.5 % 72.2 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 19.6 % 21.4 % 23.9 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 23.9 % 23.0 % 23.5 % Persistency - Group Long-term Income Protection 94.2 % 92.1 % 92.9 % Persistency - Group Life 86.3 % 83.0 % 87.7 % Persistency - Individual Income Protection 88.4 % 86.7 % 87.2 % 64 Table of Contents Segment Sales Sales decreased in 2005 relative to the prior year due in part to higher sales in 2004 related to the exit of a major insurer from the U.K. market during 2004. Sales for group life products were also unfavorably impacted in 2005 relative to the prior year due to the competitive environment in the U.K. for group life products and the Company maintaining pricing discipline. Group long-term income protection sales increased in 2004 compared to 2003 due to the exit of a major insurer in the group long-term income protection market and the favorable movement in the foreign currency exchange rate in 2004 relative to 2003. When measured in its local currency, the sales growth rate in the group long-term income protection line was approximately 13.2 percent year over year. Group life sales increased in 2004 compared to 2003 due to the acquisition of the Sun Life block of business in 2003 as well as the favorable foreign exchange rate in 2004 compared to 2003. Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Premium income increased in comparison to the prior year due primarily to growth in the group long-term income protection line of business resulting from block acquisitions, the related growth in prior year sales, and favorable persistency. The premium income increase in the group life line of business was due to prior period sales growth and favorable persistency. Net investment income increased in 2005 relative to 2004 due to continued growth in the business and the assets supporting it, offset partially by a slight decrease in portfolio yields relative to the prior year. Other income for 2005 includes $5.7 million related to the disposal of Unum Limited Netherlands branch during 2005, as previously discussed. While underlying claims experience was favorable, the benefit ratio for the group long-term income protection line of business increased in comparison to 2004 due to the inclusion in the prior year of extremely favorable claim resolution experience on an acquired block of group long-term income protection business. The benefit ratio for the group life line of business decreased in comparison to 2004 due to favorable claim experience in 2005 and recent renewal activity which resulted in terminations during 2005 of less profitable business. Operating expenses have increased in 2005 compared to 2004 due to growth of the lines of business, but the operating expense ratios decreased due to an increase in premium income, economies of scale, and the Company focus on expense management. Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 The growth in the group long-term income protection premium income was primarily attributable to continued strong sales growth and the favorable foreign currency exchange rate in 2004 relative to 2003. When measured in its local currency, the growth rate in premium income in the group long-term income protection line was approximately 20.8 percent year over year. The growth in group life premium income for 2004 relative to 2003 was attributable primarily to the acquisition of Sun Life, as previously discussed, and the favorable exchange rate. The increase in net investment income was due primarily to the growth in assets supporting the lines of business and the favorable movement in the exchange rate. The benefit ratio for the Unum Limited lines of business decreased in 2004 relative to 2003 due primarily to the extremely favorable claim resolution experience on an acquired block of group long-term income protection business. The amortization of value of business acquired increased during 2004 due to the previously discussed transaction with Swiss Life. 65 Table of Contents Segment Outlook During 2006, the Company intends to focus on maintaining its strong leadership position in the U.K and to continue to identify new sources of business to drive future growth in both the group and individual markets. Total sales for 2006 are expected to be level with that of 2005, with increases in individual income protection sales offsetting declines in the sale of group income protection products. Sales growth is expected to gain momentum throughout the year, with quarter over prior year comparable quarter increases in the latter half of the year. It is expected that persistency will remain at its current levels, although pricing competition may negatively impact sales and/or persistency. Although claims experience is favorable for the group long-term income protection line of business, it is expected that the benefit ratio may increase during 2006, relative to the current level, as positive claim resolution trends on recent block acquisitions become less pronounced. The Company believes that this segment will continue to produce growth in operating income, although the rate of growth will decline as the acquisition-related growth of the last several years subsides. 66 Table of Contents Colonial Segment Operating Results The Colonial segment includes insurance for income protection products, life products, and cancer and critical illness products issued by the Company subsidiary Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company and marketed to employees at the workplace through an agency sales force and brokers. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Colonial segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Operating Revenue Premium Income Income Protection $ 508.9 4.7 $ 486.2 4.6 % $ 464.9 Life 114.0 6.6 106.9 10.5 96.7 Cancer and Critical Illness 164.1 11.0 147.9 12.1 131.9 Total Premium Income 787.0 6.2 741.0 6.8 693.5 Net Investment Income 96.0 1.6 94.5 5.0 90.0 Other Income 4.4 91.3 2.3 (8.0 ) 2.5 Total 887.4 5.9 837.8 6.6 786.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 433.2 6.1 408.3 3.3 395.4 Commissions 170.7 (1.8 ) 173.9 5.5 164.9 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (173.4 ) (0.2 ) (173.7 ) 4.6 (166.1 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 134.7 2.7 131.2 10.9 118.3 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 0.6 (50.0 ) 1.2 (233.3 ) (0.9 ) Operating Expenses 153.5 8.6 141.3 10.6 127.7 Total 719.3 5.4 682.2 6.7 639.3 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 168.1 8.0 $ 155.6 6.1 $ 146.7 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 55.0 % 55.1 % 57.0 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 19.5 % 19.1 % 18.4 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 21.4 % 21.0 % 21.2 % Persistency - Income Protection 75.3 % 75.6 % 72.0 % Persistency - Life 84.1 % 84.1 % 87.2 % Persistency - Cancer and Critical Illness 83.2 % 82.6 % 82.0 % Segment Sales Sales in 2005 increased for all lines of business as compared to 2004 driven primarily by growth in the core markets, which are comprised of employee groups with less than 2,000 lives, partially offset by a decline in sales in the large case market. Sales were also unfavorably impacted by the hurricanes in the Gulf Coast and Florida. 67 Table of Contents The sales decrease in 2004 relative to 2003 was attributable to a decline in sales of income protection products, partially offset by an increase in sales for the cancer and life products. The decline in sales for income protection results from the discontinuance by the Company of new sales of group long-term income protection as well as from lower sales of individual short-term income protection to employee groups of 2,000 or more lives. Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Growth in premium income during 2005 was attributable to sales growth and stable persistency. The benefit ratio for 2005 was consistent with the prior year, with decreases in the income protection and life lines of business offset by an increase in the cancer and critical illness line of business. Individual short-term income protection claim incidence decreased in 2005 compared to 2004, while the average claim duration for closed claims as well as the average indemnity was higher in 2005 relative to 2004. For accident and sickness products, which are included in the income protection line of business, the claim incidence rate decreased in 2005 relative to the prior year, but the average claim payment increased over that reported for 2004. The life line of business reported an increase in the number of paid claims in 2005 relative to 2004 and a decrease in the average claim payment. The cancer and critical illness line of business was unfavorably impacted by $3.5 million in benefit charges related to litigation. Commissions in 2005 declined relative to the prior year, and operating expenses increased. These changes were due primarily to the restructuring of the agency field sales force wherein the Company is moving certain functions from a commissioned sales agency status to salaried employees of the Company. Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Premium income growth in 2004 relative to the prior year was attributable primarily to favorable persistency. The 2004 benefit ratio for this segment was lower than in 2003 due primarily to a lower benefit ratio for the income protection line of business. Individual short-term income protection claim incidence decreased for 2004 compared with the prior year while the average claim duration for closed claims was higher in 2004 relative to 2003. The average indemnity for individual short-term income protection was higher in 2004 relative to 2003. For accident and sickness products, the claim incidence rate decreased in 2004 relative to the prior year, but the average claim payment increased over that reported in 2003. The life line of business reported an increase in the number of paid claims relative to 2003 and an increase in the average claim payment. Segment Outlook Sales results in recent years have not grown at the rate the Company believes it can competitively and profitably achieve. In 2006, the Company will continue to emphasize consistent, profitable sales growth by focusing on the recruitment and productivity of agents, improved business tools, and enhanced marketing research and development. The Company expects growth in revenue and profitability to be driven by increasing premium income through sales growth and stable persistency while maintaining a focus on high-quality business and the management of expenses. High quality service is viewed as a differentiator for the Colonial segment in the marketplace. The two key drivers for quality service delivery are trained service professionals and effective use of technology. These key drivers will be emphasized by seeking to increase innovation, productivity, and performance through leadership development and technological advances. 68 Table of Contents Individual Income Protection - Closed Block Segment Operating Results The Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment generally consists of those individual income protection policies in force prior to the Company substantial changes in product offerings, pricing, distribution, and underwriting. These changes generally occurred during the period 1994 through 1998. A minimal amount of new business continued to be sold subsequent to these changes, but the Company ceased selling new policies in this segment at the beginning of 2004 other than update features contractually allowable on existing policies. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 1,011.7 2.5 % $ 986.6 (4.1 )% $ 1,028.5 Net Investment Income 770.0 (3.6 ) 799.1 (3.0 ) 824.2 Other Income 95.2 (5.1 ) 100.3 4.6 95.9 Total 1,876.9 (0.5 ) 1,886.0 (3.2 ) 1,948.6 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,562.7 (3.5 ) 1,618.9 5.6 1,533.6 Commissions 74.9 (1.8 ) 76.3 (10.8 ) 85.5 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs N.M. (7.5 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs N.M. 41.3 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired N.M. 32.7 Impairment of Intangible Assets 856.4 N.M. Operating Expenses 159.4 1.4 157.2 (21.6 ) 200.5 Total 1,797.0 (33.7 ) 2,708.8 43.6 1,886.1 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 79.9 109.7 $ (822.8 ) N.M. $ 62.5 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) (1) 154.5 % 164.1 % 149.1 % Interest Adjusted Loss Ratio 87.3 % 87.5 % 82.7 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) (2) 15.8 % 15.9 % 19.5 % Before-tax Operating Income (Loss) Ratio (% of Premium Income) (3) 7.9 % (83.4 )% 6.1 % Persistency 94.5 % 94.5 % 94.2 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 69 Table of Contents (1) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax reserve charge of $2.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters and the 2004 before-tax reserve charge of $0.6 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the benefit ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 57.0% and 57.6%, respectively. (2) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $1.0 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $1.1 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the operating expense ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 21.0% and 20.9%, respectively. (3) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $3.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $1.7 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 13.8% and 15.8%, respectively. Excluding the charges noted in (3) above and discussed more fully in the preceding significant transactions and events discussions for each applicable year, the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment would have reported operating income of $114.2 million in 2005 and $152.8 million in 2004. As previously discussed, effective August 8, 2005, the Company recaptured the closed block individual income protection business originally ceded to Centre Life Reinsurance Ltd. in 1996. The underlying operating results of the reinsurance contract, prior to recapture, were reflected in other income. The recapture did not have a material impact on operating income for the segment. Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Premium income increased in 2005 compared to the prior year due to the recapture of the previously discussed block of business, which added approximately $70.0 million of premium income to this segment and on an annual basis, is expected to add approximately $185.0 million of premium income. Other than premiums on the recaptured block of business, premium income declined in 2005 relative to the prior year, as expected in this closed block of business. Net investment income decreased in 2005 relative to the prior year due to a decline in the portfolio yield rate and a decrease in income from prepayments on mortgage-backed securities. These declines were offset somewhat by approximately $35.0 million of investment income related to the $1.6 billion of bonds transferred to the Company in conjunction with the reinsurance recapture. Other income includes the underlying results of certain blocks of reinsured business, including the results of the aforementioned block of business prior to the recapture date. The benefit ratio for 2005 was stable in comparison to the prior year, excluding the reserve charge in 2005 related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and the reserve charges in 2004 related to the restructuring of this block and the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination, as noted in the preceding financial metrics. Claim recovery rates were lower in 2005 relative to 2004, while claim incidence rates improved. Excluding the charges noted in (2) above, operating expenses were lower than the prior year due primarily to the Company overall expense management initiatives. 70 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Premium income decreased relative to the prior year due to the expected decline in this closed block of business. Net investment income declined in 2004 relative to the prior year due to a decline in the portfolio yield rate and due to lower prepayments on mortgage-backed securities, offset somewhat by a retrospective adjustment of the amortization of the purchase discount on mortgage-backed securities. Net investment income was also negatively impacted due to the lower yield on cash equivalent investments held during the first half of 2004 in conjunction with the pending transfer of cash for the reinsurance agreements entered into as part of the restructuring of this block. Other income includes the underlying results of certain blocks of reinsured business. The increase in the benefit ratio for 2004 relative to 2003, excluding the reserve charges in 2004 related to the restructuring of this block and the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination, was due to a decrease in the claim recovery rate relative to the level of 2003, offset somewhat by a decrease in claim incidence rates in 2004 relative to 2003 levels. The operating expense ratio decreased relative to 2003 due primarily to a reduction in selling and underwriting expenses. A minimal amount of new business was still being sold during 2003, primarily related to update features on existing policies. Due to the impairment of intangible assets as of January 1, 2004, no scheduled amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs or value of business acquired was included in operating results for this segment during 2004, compared to $74.0 million in 2003. Segment Outlook The Company believes that the 2004 restructuring of this closed block of business has strengthened the balance sheet for this segment and minimized the Company exposure to potential future adverse morbidity. As part of the 2004 restructuring, the Company entered into reinsurance agreements which effectively provide approximately 60 percent reinsurance coverage for the Company overall consolidated risk above a specified retention limit, which at December 31, 2005, equaled approximately $8.0 billion. The maximum risk limit for the reinsurer grows to approximately $2.6 billion over time, after which any further losses will revert to the Company. The Company has not yet reached the retention limit and does not currently anticipate that once reached, the Company experience would be such that its losses would exceed the maximum risk limit for the reinsurer and therefore revert back to the Company. The reinsurance receivable for this contract, as reported in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition, was approximately $570.0 million at December 31, 2005. Total revenue, subsequent to a full year inclusion of premium and net investment income related to the recaptured block of business, is expected to decline very slowly over time as the Company believes that persistency will remain in the mid-90 percent range. The Company believes that the interest adjusted loss ratio will be relatively flat over the long-term, but the segment may experience quarterly volatility. The expense ratio throughout 2006 is expected to be consistent with or lower than that reported for 2005. 71 Table of Contents Other Segment Operating Results The Other operating segment includes results from disability management services and U.S. Brokerage insured products not actively marketed (with the exception of certain individual income protection products in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment), including individual life and corporate-owned life insurance, reinsurance pools and management operations, group pension, health insurance, and individual annuities. It is expected that operating revenue and income in this segment resulting from the products that are not actively marketed will decline over time as these business lines wind down, and management expects to reinvest the capital supporting these lines of business in the future growth of the U.S. Brokerage, Unum Limited, and Colonial segments. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2005 % Change 2004 % Change 2003 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 2.6 (91.7 )% $ 31.3 (8.7 )% $ 34.3 Net Investment Income 120.5 (5.3 ) 127.3 (9.1 ) 140.1 Other Income 213.9 2.7 208.3 1.9 204.4 Total 337.0 (8.1 ) 366.9 (3.1 ) 378.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 122.2 (14.1 ) 142.3 (9.4 ) 157.1 Commissions 1.1 (77.6 ) 4.9 (54.6 ) 10.8 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs N.M. 0.1 0.1 Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 0.5 N.M. N.M. Operating Expenses 167.5 (3.8 ) 174.2 3.3 168.7 Total 291.3 (9.4 ) 321.5 (4.5 ) 336.7 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 45.7 0.7 $ 45.4 7.8 $ 42.1 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Disability Management Services Operating revenue from disability management services, which includes the Company wholly-owned subsidiaries GENEX and Options and Choices, Inc., totaled $177.9 million in 2005, compared to $177.1 million in 2004 and $173.0 million in 2003. Operating income totaled $15.7 million in 2005, compared to $16.2 million in 2004 and $17.2 million in 2003. Reinsurance Pools and Management The Company reinsurance operations include the reinsurance management operations of Duncanson & Holt, Inc. (D&H) and the risk assumption, which includes reinsurance pool participation; direct reinsurance which includes accident and health (A&H), long-term care (LTC), and long-term disability coverages; and Lloyd of London (Lloyd s) syndicate participations. During the years 1999 through 2001, the Company exited its reinsurance pools and management operations through a combination of a sale, reinsurance, and/or placement of certain components in run-off. Total operating revenue for the reinsurance pools and management operations was $7.7 million, $5.2 million, and $15.5 million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. During 2005, this line of business reported an 72 Table of Contents operating loss of $11.0 million, compared to operating losses of $7.5 million and $7.1 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. Individual Life and Corporate-Owned Life During 2000, the Company reinsured substantially all of the individual life and corporate-owned life insurance blocks of business. The Company ceded approximately $3.3 billion of reserves to the reinsurer. The $388.2 million before-tax gain on these transactions was deferred and is being amortized into income based upon expected future premium income on the traditional insurance policies ceded and estimated future gross profits on the interest-sensitive insurance policies ceded. Total operating revenue for individual life and corporate-owned life insurance was $41.0 million, $40.0 million, and $39.9 million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. Operating income for the same periods was $38.8 million, $38.2 million, and $33.5 million. Other Group pension, health insurance, individual annuities, and other closed lines of business had operating revenue of $110.4 million, $144.6 million, and $150.4 million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively, and operating income (losses) of $2.2 million, $(1.5) million, and $(1.5) million. Decreases in operating revenue and income are expected to continue as these lines of business wind down. Included in these amounts were the Company operating results for its previously owned operation in Argentina, which produced operating revenue of $27.7 million and $18.1 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively, and operating losses of $6.2 million and $13.4 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. As previously disclosed, in the fourth quarter of 2005 the Company disposed of its remaining 40 percent ownership position in its Argentinean operation. The Argentinean operation had been restructured during 2004 wherein at that time the Company reduced its ownership position to 40 percent and reported a before-tax loss of $4.7 million. During 2003, the Company recognized an impairment loss of $13.5 million related to this operation. Corporate Segment Operating Results The Corporate segment includes investment income on corporate assets not specifically allocated to a line of business, corporate interest expense, and certain other corporate income and expense not allocated to a line of business. Operating revenue in the Corporate segment was $61.2 million in 2005, compared to $66.0 million in 2004 and $31.6 million in 2003. As previously discussed, during the fourth quarter of 2004 the Company obtained a judgment in refund litigation for federal income tax paid for tax year 1984, plus interest, and as such, recognized $14.0 million of operating revenue in the Corporate segment related to the interest portion of the anticipated refund. Also contributing to the decline in revenue during 2005 relative to 2004 was a $9.4 million curtailment gain recognized in 2004 related to changes in the Company retiree medical plan. See Note 7 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of the curtailment gain. The Corporate segment reported operating losses of $152.8 million, $153.7 million, and $193.5 million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. Interest and debt expense increased from $187.2 million in 2003 and $207.1 million in 2004 to $208.0 million in 2005 due to the impact of the debt offerings, as discussed under Liquidity and Capital Resources included herein. Included in operating expenses for 2003 is approximately $15.0 million in severance and pension benefit payouts related to the change of the Company president and chief executive officer. 73 Table of Contents Discontinued Operations During 2003, the Company entered into an agreement to sell its Canadian branch. The transaction closed April 30, 2004, and the Company reported a second quarter of 2004 loss of $113.0 million before tax and $70.9 million after tax on the sale of the branch. The Company also recognized a first quarter of 2004 loss of $0.6 million before tax and $0.4 million after tax to write down the value of bonds in the Canadian branch investment portfolio to market value. Losses from discontinued operations were $60.8 million and $161.7 million, net of tax, in 2004 and 2003, respectively. Excluding the 2004 and 2003 losses on the sale and the write-downs, income from discontinued operations was $10.5 million and $35.2 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of the Company discontinued operations. Investments Overview Investment activities are an integral part of the Company business, and profitability is significantly affected by investment results. Invested assets are segmented into portfolios that support the various product lines. Generally, the investment strategy for the portfolios is to match the effective asset cash flows and durations with related expected liability cash flows and durations to consistently meet the liability funding requirements of the Company business. The Company seeks to maximize investment income and total return and to assume credit risk in a prudent and selective manner, subject to constraints of quality, liquidity, diversification, and regulatory considerations. The Company overall investment philosophy is to invest in a portfolio of high quality assets that provide investment returns consistent with that assumed in the pricing of its insurance products. Assets are invested predominately in fixed maturity securities, and the portfolio is matched with liabilities so as to eliminate as much as possible the Company exposure to changes in the overall level of interest rates. Changes in interest rates affect the amount and timing of cash flows. The Company actively manages its asset and liability cash flow match as well as its asset and liability duration match in order to minimize interest rate risk. The Company may redistribute its investments within its different lines of business, when necessary, to adjust the cash flow and/or duration of the asset portfolios to better match the cash flow and duration of the liability portfolios. Asset and liability portfolio modeling is updated on a quarterly basis and is used as part of the overall interest rate risk management strategy. Cash flows from the inforce asset and liability portfolios are projected at current interest rate levels and also at levels reflecting an increase and a decrease in interest rates to obtain a range of projected cash flows under the different interest rate scenarios. These results enable the Company to assess the impact of projected changes in cash flows and duration resulting from potential changes in interest rates. Testing the asset and liability portfolios under various interest rate scenarios enables the Company to choose the most appropriate investment strategy as well as to minimize the risk of disadvantageous outcomes. This analysis is a precursor to the Company activities in derivative financial instruments, which are used to hedge interest rate risk and to manage duration match. At December 31, 2005, the weighted average duration of the Company policyholder liability portfolio was approximately 8.09 years, and the weighted average duration of the Company investment portfolio supporting those policyholder liabilities was approximately 7.71 years. 74 Table of Contents Below is a summary of the Company formal investment policy, including the overall quality and diversification objectives. The majority of investments are in high quality publicly traded securities to ensure the desired liquidity and preserve the capital value of the Company portfolios. The long-term nature of the Company insurance liabilities also allows it to invest in less liquid investments to obtain superior returns. A maximum of 10 percent of the total investment portfolio may be invested in below-investment-grade securities, 2 percent in equity type instruments, up to 35 percent in private placements, and 5 percent in commercial mortgage loans. The remaining assets can be held in publicly traded investment-grade corporate securities, mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities, and U.S. government agencies and municipal securities. The Company intends to manage the risk of losses due to changes in interest rates by matching asset duration with liabilities to within a range of +/- three years. The weighted average credit quality rating of the portfolio should be BBB or higher. The maximum investment per issuer group is limited based on internal limits established by the Company board of directors and is more restrictive than the 5 percent limit generally allowed by the state insurance departments which regulate the type of investments the Company insurance subsidiaries are allowed to own. These internal limits are as follows: Rating Internal Limit ($ in millions) AAA/A $ 150 BBB 100 BBB- 75 BB/BBB- 60 BB 50 B/BB 40 B 20 The portfolio is to be diversified across industry classification and geographic lines. Derivative instruments may be used to hedge interest rate risk and foreign currency risk and match liability duration and cash flows consistent with the plan approved by the board of directors. Asset mix guidelines and limits are established by the Company and approved by the board of directors. The allocation of assets and the selection and timing of the acquisition and disposition of investments are subject to ratification by the investment subcommittee of the board of directors on a weekly basis. These actions are also reviewed and approved by the board of directors on a quarterly basis. These investment policies and guidelines are reviewed and appropriately adjusted by the board of directors annually, or more frequently if deemed necessary. Investment Results Net investment income was $2,188.3 million in 2005, up 1.4 percent relative to the prior year. Included in net investment income for 2005 is approximately $35.0 million related to the $1.6 billion of bonds transferred to the Company in conjunction with the 2005 recapture of a ceded closed block of individual income protection business. Excluding that, net investment income was fairly consistent with the prior year, with the increase from the growth in invested assets and higher bond call premiums offset by a lower portfolio yield due to the low interest rate environment and the investment of new cash at lower rates as well as a decline in the level of prepayments on mortgage-backed securities. The overall yield in the portfolio was 6.85 percent as of December 31, 2005, and the weighted average credit rating was A2. This compares to an overall yield in the portfolio of 6.93 percent as of December 31, 2004 and a weighted average credit rating of A3. In the current low interest rate market, the Company expects that the portfolio yield will continue to gradually decline until the market rates on new purchases increase above the level of the overall yield. The Company reported before-tax realized investment gains and losses during the last three years as shown in the following chart. Impairment losses were recognized as a result of management determination, based on the factors discussed herein in Critical Accounting Policies, that the value of certain fixed maturity and equity securities had 75 Table of Contents other than temporarily declined during the applicable reporting period, as well as the result of further declines in the values of fixed maturity and equity securities that had initially been written down in a prior period. The Company also reports changes in the fair values of certain embedded derivatives as realized investment gains and losses, as required under the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133 Implementation Issue B36 (DIG Issue B36), Embedded Derivatives: Modified Coinsurance Arrangements and Debt Instruments That Incorporate Credit Risk Exposure That Are Unrelated or Only Partially Related to the Creditworthiness of the Obligor Under Those Instruments . During 2005, the change in fair values of the embedded derivatives was minimal, reflecting interest rate levels on mid-term and longer-term maturities that were, on average, fairly consistent at the end of 2005 with the level of rates existing at the end of 2004. The realized loss on these embedded derivatives for 2005 also includes recognition of a $9.4 million before tax loss related to the time value component of the embedded derivative in the reinsurance contract that was recaptured in the third quarter of 2005. Interest rates generally decreased during 2004, resulting in an increase in the fair value of these embedded derivatives during that time period. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2005 2004 2003 Gross Realized Investment Gain from Sales $ 110.8 $ 93.4 $ 166.9 Gross Realized Investment Loss Write-downs 19.4 88.0 187.3 Sales 90.2 64.8 154.2 Total 109.6 152.8 341.5 Change in Fair Value of DIG Issue B36 Derivatives (7.9 ) 88.6 0.8 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) $ (6.7 ) $ 29.2 $ (173.8 ) Realized Investment Losses during 2005 from Other than Temporary Impairments Approximately 81 percent of the 2005 other than temporary impairment losses occurred in the transportation and financial institutions industries. Circumstances surrounding larger other than temporary impairment losses are as follows: $10.3 million loss on certificates issued by a trust backed by leases to a U.S. based airline. Although the airline had filed for bankruptcy in the third quarter of 2004, the bonds are secured by aircraft owned by the trust and have remained current on all interest payments to date. However, due to the lack of clarity regarding the value of aircraft collateralizing these securities and the length of time these securities have been in an unrealized loss position, the Company determined that an other than temporary impairment had occurred. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2000. At the time of the impairment, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. 76 Table of Contents Realized Investment Losses during 2004 from Other than Temporary Impairments Approximately 58 percent of the 2004 other than temporary impairment losses in continuing operations occurred in the financial institutions and transportation industries. Circumstances surrounding larger other than temporary impairment losses are as follows: $20.5 million loss on securities issued by a large domestic based airline. The company continues to be plagued by a high cost structure and faces liquidity problems if costs are not substantially reduced in the short-term. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment grade in the third quarter of 2001. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $12.0 million loss on senior notes issued by a United Kingdom based engineering and manufacturing company engaged in the bus and automotive industry. The company experienced a rapid deterioration in business prospects at its main operating unit in late 2003 and early 2004, followed by the discovery of bookkeeping fraud at one of its business units. Both of these issues were discovered and disclosed to the company banks and note holders by outside financial consultants during the first quarter of 2004. The company filed for U.K. administration on March 31, 2004. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2003. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 180 days but less than 270 days. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $9.0 million loss on structured securities issued by a trust and collateralized by a pool of high yield bonds. The Company performs a periodic review of the estimated cash flows associated with all of its securitized high yield securities. During each of the 2004 quarterly reviews, it was determined that an adverse change in estimated cash flows had occurred for these securities. The investment was originally purchased as part of the Company below-investment-grade strategy. At the time of the initial impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $8.9 million loss on private equity securities issued by a U.S. based insurance services company. The Company initially recognized an impairment loss on these securities in the first quarter of 2002 due to the negative revenue impact resulting from the company loss of a single large client. The Company closely monitored the financial performance of the company during 2002 and 2003. In the first quarter of 2004, following a review of the company capital condition, its revenue and earnings performance, and discussions with company management, it was determined that the investment was further impaired. In the third quarter of 2004, the company was recapitalized at a market price that indicated an additional impairment loss had occurred. The investment was originally purchased as part of the Company private equity investment program. There had been no unrealized gain or loss subsequent to the initial impairment loss in 2002. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $5.2 million loss on securities issued by a U.S. based heavy construction company. The company has been struggling with a number of problem projects and is below plan in attaining new business. This continued financial stress culminated in the company failure to make its monthly interest payment for June 2004. These bonds are secured by a number of real estate properties. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2002. At the time of the write-down, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. 77 Table of Contents Realized Investment Losses during 2003 from Other than Temporary Impairments Approximately 46 percent of the 2003 impairments in continuing operations occurred in the energy and utilities industries. Circumstances surrounding larger other than temporary impairment losses are as follows: $26.4 million loss on securities issued by a related entity of a U.S. based energy company. The securities were issued by a utility company that services an industrial site in England and whose 98 percent parent filed for insolvency in December 2001. This issuer was excluded from the parent insolvency filing due to the financial separation from the parent and was operating as a going concern during 2002. Despite the financial separation, the issuer securities were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the fourth quarter of 2001. The Company initially recognized an impairment loss on these securities at the time of the parent insolvency filing in 2001. These bonds were secured by a second lien on the real estate holdings of the company. The Company closely monitored this security and the value of the collateral during 2002. Following extensive negotiations during 2002 and the first quarter of 2003 with the company two other lenders, financial advisors, and counsel, it was determined that the investment was further impaired. Prior to its impairment loss in 2003, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 270 days but less than one year. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $18.1 million loss on securities issued by a Norwegian based energy services company engaged in offshore seismic surveying and floating production. The impairment loss was taken after further analysis of available information indicated the company lack of near term liquidity and that overall industry conditions in the energy sector had negatively affected the operations more than previous analysis had indicated. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2002. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $14.4 million loss on securities issued by a United Kingdom electrical generation subsidiary of a U.S. based company. Although this industry operating environment in the U.K. weakened over the past few years due to competitive pricing pressures, the company had benefited from a favorable, long-term power sales agreement with a large, investment-grade U.K. power customer. Depressed electricity prices in the merchant power market and operating problems at the company, as well as financial difficulties experienced by the company U.K. power customer, contributed to a weakened financial profile. In October 2002, the financial problems associated with the major U.K. customer resulted in the termination of the favorable power contract. The company made its December 2002 interest payments as scheduled. However, due to discussions that were initiated between the issuer and senior lenders in the first quarter of 2003 and the continued weakness in the U.K. power market, it was determined that this investment was other than temporarily impaired. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the fourth quarter of 2001. Prior to its impairment loss, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The Company also owns securities in the previously mentioned U.K. power customer of this issuer and previously recorded an impairment loss on those securities in the fourth quarter of 2002. $11.3 million loss on securities issued by a regulated natural gas pipeline company located in Argentina. The impairment loss was taken following continued delays by the Argentine government in implementing tariff reform and the company default on its interest payment due during the second quarter. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the second quarter of 2001. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. 78 Table of Contents $11.1 million loss on securities issued by a leading producer of performance products for the automotive industry and nylon fibers for the carpet industry. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2002. The issuer was current on its interest payments as of September 30, 2003, but filed for bankruptcy in December 2003, despite having implemented several successful measures which improved liquidity and reduced potential legal liabilities. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 1 year but less than two years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $11.0 million loss on securities issued by a travel services company located in the United Kingdom. The impairment loss was taken following discussions between the issuer and its creditors regarding difficulties in the issuer businesses due to geopolitical unrest and persistent weakness in demand for leisure travel and requests for certain waivers and consents of debt covenants. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2003. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 270 days but less than one year. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. Realized Investment Losses during 2005 from Sale of Fixed Maturity Securities For the year ended December 31, 2005, the Company realized a loss of $76.6 million on the sale of fixed maturity securities. The securities sold during the year had a book value of $919.4 million and a fair value of $842.8 million at the time of sale and represented 85 different issuers. Circumstances surrounding larger realized investment losses from sale of securities are as follows: $14.6 million loss on securities issued by a major U.S. based automotive parts supplier. The company has experienced declining sales and production levels, along with higher steel prices and growing employee health care and retirement costs. The company filed for bankruptcy in the third quarter of 2005. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2005. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 90 days but less than 180 days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $12.6 million loss on securities issued by a major U.S. based automotive manufacturer. The company has experienced declining sales due to competition and the increase in gasoline prices, along with higher raw materials costs and growing employee health care and retirement costs. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2005. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of less than 90 days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $9.8 million loss on securities linked to the credit of two major U.S. based airlines. These securities were trust certificates secured by leases on aircraft that were subleased to the two airlines, one of which is currently in bankruptcy. The risk of a potential restructuring of the securities had increased following the continued delay in the bankrupt airline plans to emerge from bankruptcy. These securities had an investment-grade rating until downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2003. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 2 years but less than 3 years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. 79 Table of Contents Realized Investment Losses during 2004 from Sale of Fixed Maturity Securities For the year ended December 31, 2004, the Company realized a loss of $53.0 million on the sale of fixed maturity securities in its continuing operations. The securities sold during the year had a book value of $604.6 million and a fair value of $551.6 million at the time of sale and represented 67 different issuers. Circumstances surrounding larger realized investment losses from sale of securities are as follows: $5.8 million loss on securities issued by a leading builder of power plants and a provider of electricity generation in the U.S., Canada, and the United Kingdom. The company had suffered from an over supply of power generation in most of the markets in which it operates. In addition, the company had experienced weak cash flow and high debt ratios as a result of weak industry and economic fundamentals. These securities were originally purchased as part of the Company below-investment-grade strategy. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $5.3 million loss on securities issued by an international reinsurance provider. The company was negatively impacted after it was determined it had failed to adequately reserve for projected claims. The company financial strength ratings were subsequently downgraded by Standard & Poor Corporation and A.M. Best Company. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2004. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of less than ninety days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. Realized Investment Losses during 2003 from Sale of Fixed Maturity Securities For the year ended December 31, 2003, the Company realized a loss of $143.6 million on the sale of fixed maturity securities in its continuing operations. The securities sold during the year had a book value of $821.0 million and a fair value of $677.4 million at the time of sale and represented 94 different issuers, of which approximately 59 percent were a part of the Company 2003 program to reduce its below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities holdings to comply with its investment policy regarding diversification and to better position the investment portfolio in the then current environment and reduce exposure to potential credit-related losses. Circumstances surrounding larger realized investment losses from sale of securities are as follows: $28.1 million loss on securities issued by a leading producer of performance products for the automotive industry and nylon fibers for the carpet industry. The company operations had been severely impacted by the increased price of raw materials and energy as well as a weakening demand for its products. In addition, the company was involved in an environmental pollution lawsuit with a potentially large negative impact. These securities had an investment-grade rating until downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2002. At the time of sale, the investment had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $25.2 million loss on securities guaranteed by an Italian dairy company. The loss was incurred after it was revealed that the guarantor had engaged in massive fraud, ultimately leading to the company bankruptcy. The guarantor had been rated investment-grade until December 2003. At the time of sale, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of less than 90 days. The Company also owns $22.5 million of fixed maturity securities of a wholly-owned Canadian subsidiary of the parent company. Although the financial and operating profiles of the subsidiary are separate from the parent and no other than temporary impairment was deemed to exist, in conjunction with the classification of the Canadian branch as an asset held for sale, the Company recognized a loss of $4.0 million to write down the value of these securities, which were held in the Canadian branch investment portfolio, to market value. This loss is included in the loss from discontinued operations. 80 Table of Contents $15.2 million loss on securities issued by a major domestic airline. The Company has systematically sold the securities during the first nine months of 2003 to substantially reduce its exposure to the airline. These securities had an investment-grade rating until the various issues were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002. At the time of sale, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The Company also took an other than temporary impairment charge of $0.3 million on the value of certain private, secured debt obligations of this issuer as part of a consensual restructuring proposal. $11.1 million loss on unsecured debt and private, secured debt obligations issued by a major domestic airline. The Company sold the securities to reduce its exposure to the airline. These securities had an investment-grade rating until downgraded in the third quarter of 2001. At the time of sale, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $9.2 million loss on securities issued by a provider of phone, cable, and internet services. This company operations were severely impacted by the decline in the telecommunications market and thus, the decision was made to reduce the exposure to this company. These securities were originally purchased as part of the Company below-investment-grade strategy. At the time of sale, this security had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. Asset Distribution The following table provides the distribution of invested assets for the periods indicated. Ceded policy loans of $3.0 billion as of December 31, 2005 and $2.9 billion as of December 31, 2004, which are reported on a gross basis in the consolidated statements of financial condition contained herein in Item 8, are excluded from the table below. The investment income on these ceded policy loans is not included in income. Distribution of Invested Assets December 31 2005 2004 Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities 89.9 % 90.0 % Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities 6.0 6.4 Mortgage Loans 2.0 1.5 Real Estate 0.1 0.1 Short-Term Investments 1.2 1.2 Other Invested Assets 0.8 0.8 Total 100.0 % 100.0 % 81 Table of Contents Fixed Maturity Securities Fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2005, included $34.7 billion, or 99.6 percent, of bonds and derivative instruments and $155.4 million, or 0.4 percent, of redeemable preferred stocks. The following table shows the fair value composition by internal industry classification of the fixed maturity bond portfolio and the associated unrealized gains and losses. Fixed Maturity Bonds By Industry Classification As of December 31, 2005 (in millions of dollars) Classification Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Gain Gross Unrealized Gain Basic Industry $ 2,275.1 $ 121.6 $ 608.7 $ 37.4 $ 1,666.4 $ 159.0 Canadian 406.9 95.3 406.9 95.3 Capital Goods 2,520.1 230.6 439.2 15.6 2,080.9 246.2 Communications 2,929.2 216.1 623.6 40.8 2,305.6 256.9 Consumer Cyclical 1,155.6 26.3 355.2 44.4 800.4 70.7 Consumer Non-Cyclical 3,919.8 245.1 1,075.9 30.8 2,843.9 275.9 Derivative Instruments 263.6 247.7 (129.1 ) 129.5 392.7 377.2 Energy (Oil & Gas) 2,475.8 360.8 132.6 4.5 2,343.2 365.3 Financial Institutions 3,453.2 118.8 1,072.2 53.8 2,381.0 172.6 Mortgage/Asset-Backed 4,431.3 254.0 1,012.2 20.3 3,419.1 274.3 Sovereigns 633.1 33.4 57.4 0.4 575.7 33.8 Technology 379.9 27.4 124.7 6.6 255.2 34.0 Transportation 1,062.0 135.7 71.6 3.5 990.4 139.2 U.S. Government Agencies and Municipalities 2,651.6 180.9 326.6 9.6 2,325.0 190.5 Utilities 6,144.2 493.6 1,368.1 34.1 4,776.1 527.7 Total $ 34,701.4 $ 2,787.3 $ 7,138.9 $ 431.3 $ 27,562.5 $ 3,218.6 82 Table of Contents The following table is a distribution of the maturity dates for fixed maturity bonds in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2005. Fixed Maturity Bonds By Maturity As of December 31, 2005 Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Due in 1 year or less $ 56.6 $ 0.1 Due after 1 year up to 5 years 418.3 7.5 Due after 5 years up to 10 years 1,872.0 208.6 Due after 10 years 3,779.8 194.8 Subtotal 6,126.7 411.0 Mortgage/Asset-Backed Securities 1,012.2 20.3 Total $ 7,138.9 $ 431.3 Of the $431.3 million in gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2005, $343.5 million, or 79.6 percent, are related to investment-grade fixed maturity bonds. The following table shows the length of time the Company investment-grade fixed maturity bonds had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2005. Unrealized Loss on Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Bonds Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position As of December 31, 2005 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss <= 90 days $ 1,906.9 $ 28.0 > 90 <= 180 days 2,517.3 70.4 > 180 <= 270 days 72.1 1.7 > 270 <= 1 year 187.5 4.5 > 1 year <= 2 years 8.8 121.7 > 2 years <= 3 years 1,450.9 83.5 > 3 years 96.8 33.7 Totals $ 6,240.3 $ 343.5 83 Table of Contents The following table shows the length of time the Company below-investment-grade fixed maturity bonds had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2005. The fair value and gross unrealized losses are categorized by the relationship of the current fair value to amortized cost for those securities on December 31, 2005. The fair value to amortized cost relationships are not necessarily indicative of the fair value to amortized cost relationships for the securities throughout the entire time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position nor are they necessarily indicative of the relationships subsequent to December 31, 2005. Unrealized Loss on Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Bonds Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position As of December 31, 2005 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss <= 90 days fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost $ 131.5 $ 3.2 > 90 <= 180 days fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 114.1 5.2 > 180 <= 270 days fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 61.1 3.7 > 270 <=1 year fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 256.4 28.3 fair value < 70% >= 40% of amortized cost 24.2 15.2 Subtotal 280.6 43.5 > 1 year <= 2 years fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 95.7 7.9 > 2 years <= 3 years fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 9.6 0.4 > 3 years fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 200.3 19.1 fair value < 70% >= 40% of amortized cost 5.7 4.8 Subtotal 206.0 23.9 Totals $ 898.6 $ 87.8 84 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2005, the Company held two securities with a gross unrealized loss of $10.0 million or greater, as shown in the chart below. Gross Unrealized Losses on Fixed Maturity Bonds $10.0 Million or Greater As of December 31, 2005 (in millions of dollars) Fixed Maturity Bonds Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss Length of Time in a Loss Position Investment-Grade Principal Protected Equity Linked Note $ 43.9 $ 26.4 > 3 years Below-Investment-Grade U.S. Based Automobile Manufacturer $ 33.2 $ 13.1 > 270 days <= 1 year Unrealized losses on investment-grade fixed maturity securities principally relate to changes in interest rates or changes in market or sector credit spreads which occurred subsequent to the acquisition of the securities. These changes are generally temporary and are not recognized as realized investment losses unless the securities are sold, it becomes unlikely that the Company will hold the securities until recovery based on relevant facts and circumstances, or the securities become other than temporarily impaired. Generally, below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities are more likely to develop credit concerns. As previously discussed under Critical Accounting Policies contained herein, in determining whether a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, the Company utilizes a formal, well-defined, and disciplined process to monitor and evaluate its fixed income investment portfolio. The process results in a thorough evaluation of problem investments and the recording of realized losses on a timely basis for investments determined to have an other than temporary impairment. For those fixed maturity securities with an unrealized loss and on which the Company has not recorded an impairment loss, the Company believes that the decline in fair value below amortized cost is temporary. The Company has the ability to hold its securities to the earlier of recovery or maturity and intends to hold all of its fixed maturity investments until maturity to meet its liability obligations. If information becomes available that changes the Company assessment as to whether the Company will receive contractual payments related to a fixed maturity security and the security is also not projected to recover in value, the related security is generally sold. The Company may also in certain circumstances sell a security in an unrealized loss position because of changes in tax laws, when a merger or the disposition of a segment or product line results in position levels outside of the Company investment guidelines, due to changes in regulatory or capital requirements, due to unexpected changes in liquidity needs, to better match portfolio cash flows, or to take advantage of tender offers that recover up to or beyond the cost of the investment. For those securities with a gross unrealized loss of $10.0 million or greater, further discussed as follows are (a) the factors which the Company believes resulted in the impairment and (b) the information the Company considered, both positive and negative, in reaching the conclusion that the impairments were not other than temporary. 85 Table of Contents The principal protected equity linked note is a zero coupon bond, issued by a large, well capitalized Fortune 500 financial services company, the return of which is linked to a Vanguard S&P 500 index mutual fund. This bond matures on August 24, 2020 and carried the AA rating of the issuer, as determined by S&P as of December 31, 2005. This note has an embedded derivative contract and substitutes highly rated bonds in place of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund to provide principal protection in the event of a significant decline in the equities market. The note derives its value from the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund. The reduction in the market value of this note was the result of the decline in the S&P 500 index subsequent to the purchase date of the note. Based on historical long-term returns of the S&P 500 index, the Company believes that the value of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund will equate to or exceed the par value of the security at maturity. The Company therefore believes that the decline in fair value of the note is temporary. The Company has the ability to hold this security to the earlier of recovery or maturity. The fixed maturity bonds of the U.S. based automobile manufacturer are securities issued by the manufacturer and its captive finance subsidiary. The reduction in market value of these securities was primarily due to a decline in profitability and cash flow due to the competitive environment, loss of market share, high cost of raw materials, and rising employee healthcare and pension costs. The company recently announced several expense management initiatives that include plant closings, staffing reductions, and restructuring of employee healthcare and retiree benefits. The automotive company and the finance subsidiary both have substantial liquidity. The automotive company has approximately $25 billion in cash and equivalents compared to $18 billion of debt with an average maturity of 25 years. The finance subsidiary has approximately $18 billion in cash and equivalents. These securities have been in an unrealized loss position for greater than 270 days but less than one year, and the Company believes that the decline in fair value of these securities is temporary. The Company has the ability to hold these securities to the earlier of recovery or maturity. The Company investment in mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities was approximately $4.2 billion and $3.8 billion on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2005 and, 2004, respectively. At December 31, 2005, the mortgage-backed securities had an average life of 7.9 years and effective duration of 4.5 years. The mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities are valued on a monthly basis using valuations supplied by the brokerage firms that are dealers in these securities. The primary risk involved in investing in mortgage-backed securities is the uncertainty of the timing of cash flows from the underlying loans due to prepayment of principal with the possibility of reinvesting the funds in a lower interest rate environment. The Company uses models which incorporate economic variables and possible future interest rate scenarios to predict future prepayment rates. The Company has not invested in mortgage-backed derivatives, such as interest-only, principal-only or residuals, where market values can be highly volatile relative to changes in interest rates. As of December 31, 2005, the Company exposure to below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities was $2,180.7 million, approximately 6.0 percent of the fair value of invested assets excluding ceded policy loans, compared to 6.4 percent at the end of 2004. Below-investment-grade bonds are inherently more risky than investment-grade bonds since the risk of default by the issuer, by definition and as exhibited by bond rating, is higher. Also, the secondary market for certain below-investment-grade issues can be highly illiquid. Additional downgrades may occur during 2006, but the Company does not anticipate any liquidity problem caused by its investments in below-investment-grade securities, nor does it expect these investments to adversely affect its ability to hold its other investments to maturity. The Company has a significant interest in, but is not the primary beneficiary of, a special purpose entity which is a collateralized bond obligation asset trust in which the Company holds interests in several of the tranches and for which the Company acts as investment manager of the underlying securities. The Company investment in this entity is reported at fair value with fixed maturity securities in the consolidated statements of financial condition. The fair value of this investment was derived from the fair value of the underlying assets. The fair value and amortized cost of this investment were $21.5 million and $21.0 million, respectively, at December 31, 2005, and $25.6 million and $24.8 million, respectively, at December 31, 2004. 86 Table of Contents Mortgage Loans and Real Estate The Company mortgage loan portfolio was $739.4 million and $498.2 million on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The Company believes its mortgage loan portfolio is well diversified geographically and among property types. The incidence of problem mortgage loans and foreclosure activity remains low, and management expects the level of delinquencies and problem loans to remain low in the future. The Company had no restructured or delinquent mortgage loans at December 31, 2005 or 2004. The Company invested in commercial mortgage loans during 2005 and expects that during 2006 it will continue to add investments in this category either through the secondary market or through loan originations. Real estate was $18.2 million and $27.4 million at December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Investment real estate is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation. Real estate acquired through foreclosure is valued at fair value at the date of foreclosure and may be classified as investment real estate if it meets the Company investment criteria. If investment real estate is determined to be permanently impaired, the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to fair value. Occasionally, investment real estate is reclassified to real estate held for sale when it no longer meets the Company investment criteria. Real estate held for sale, which is valued net of a valuation allowance that reduces the carrying value to the lower of cost or fair value less estimated cost to sell, was $6.7 million at December 31, 2005 and $6.2 million at December 31, 2004. The Company uses a comprehensive rating system to evaluate the investment and credit risk of each mortgage loan and to identify specific properties for inspection and reevaluation. The Company establishes an investment valuation allowance for mortgage loans based on a review of individual loans and the overall loan portfolio, considering the value of the underlying collateral. Investment valuation allowances for real estate held for sale are established based on a review of specific assets. If a decline in value of a mortgage loan or real estate investment is considered to be other than temporary or if the asset is deemed permanently impaired, the investment is reduced to estimated net realizable value, and the reduction is recognized as a realized investment loss. Management monitors the risk associated with these invested asset portfolios and regularly reviews and adjusts the investment valuation allowance. At December 31, 2005, the balance in the valuation allowances for real estate was $7.6 million. No valuation allowance was held for mortgage loans at December 31, 2005. Derivatives The Company uses derivative financial instruments to manage reinvestment risk, duration, and currency risk. Historically, the Company has utilized interest rate futures contracts, current and forward interest rate swaps and options on forward interest rate swaps, current and forward currency swaps, interest rate forward contracts, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, and forward contracts on specific fixed income securities. All of these freestanding derivative transactions are hedging in nature and not speculative. Positions under the Company hedging programs for derivative activity that were open during 2005 involved current and forward interest rate swaps, current and forward currency swaps, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, and options on forward interest rate swaps. Almost all hedging transactions involving product portfolios are associated with the individual and group long-term care and the individual and group income protection products. All other product portfolios are periodically reviewed to determine if hedging strategies would be appropriate for risk management purposes. During the years ended December 31, 2005, 2004, and 2003, the Company recognized net gains of $120.7 million, $29.1 million, and $79.6 million, respectively, on the termination of cash flow hedges and reported $121.0 million, $29.2 million and $79.1 million, respectively, in other comprehensive income and $(0.3) million, $(0.1) million, and $0.5 million as a component of realized investment gains and losses. The Company amortized $21.8 million, $20.7 million, and $17.3 million of net deferred gains into net investment income in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. The Company current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position, was $63.4 million at December 31, 2005. Additions and terminations, in notional amounts, to the Company hedging programs during 2005 were $1,269.4 million and $1,458.8 million, respectively. Additions and terminations in 2004 were $1,706.6 million and $911.9 million, respectively. Additions and terminations include roll activity, which is the closing out of an old contract and initiation of a new one when a contract is about to 87 Table of Contents mature but the need for it still exists. The notional amount of derivatives outstanding under the hedge programs was $4,606.5 million at December 31, 2005 and $4,795.9 million at December 31, 2004. During 2005, the Company initiated a derivatives strategy to hedge the foreign currency risk associated with the U.S. dollar denominated debt issued by one of its U.K. subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2005, the Company had $400.0 million notional amount of currency swaps and $216.3 million notional amount of forward currency contracts outstanding under this program. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the Company had $684.5 million and $707.3 million, respectively, notional amount of open current and forward foreign currency swaps to hedge fixed income Canadian dollar denominated securities the Company retained after the sale of the Canadian branch. As of December 31, 2005 and 2004, the Company had $348.0 million and $785.0 million, respectively, notional amount of open options on forward interest rate swaps under the hedging program used to lock in a reinvestment rate floor for the reinvestment of cash flows from renewals on policies with a one to two year minimum premium rate guarantee. The Company also has embedded derivatives in modified coinsurance contracts recognized under DIG Issue B36. The derivatives recognized under DIG Issue B36 are not designated as hedging instruments, and the change in fair value is reported as a realized investment gain or loss during the period of change. Due to the change in fair value of these embedded derivatives, the Company recognized $7.9 million of net realized investment losses during 2005 and $88.6 million, and $0.8 million of net realized investment gains during 2004 and 2003, respectively. Non-current Investments The Company exposure to non-current investments totaled $29.5 million at December 31, 2005, or 0.1 percent of invested assets excluding ceded policy loans, compared to $91.5 million at December 31, 2004. Non-current investments are those investments for which principal and/or interest payments are more than thirty days past due. At December 31, 2005 these investments, which are subject to the same review and monitoring procedures in place for other investments in determining when a decline in fair value is other than temporary, consisted of fixed maturity securities for which before-tax impairment losses of approximately $107.6 million had been recorded life-to-date. The amortized cost of these investments was $5.7 million. Approximately $28.8 million of the fixed maturity securities, on a fair value basis, had principal and/or interest payments past due for a period greater than one year. Other The Company has an investment program wherein it simultaneously enters into repurchase agreement transactions and reverse repurchase agreement transactions with the same party. The Company nets the related receivables and payables in the consolidated statements of financial condition as these transactions meet the requirements for the right of offset. As of December 31, 2005, the Company had $729.7 million face value of these agreements in an open position that were offset. The Company also uses the repurchase agreement market as a source of short-term financing. The Company had no contracts for this purpose outstanding at December 31, 2005. Liquidity and Capital Resources The Company liquidity requirements are met primarily by cash flows provided from operations, principally in its insurance subsidiaries. Premium and investment income, as well as maturities and sales of invested assets, provide the primary sources of cash. Debt and/or securities offerings provide an additional source of liquidity. Cash is applied to the payment of policy benefits, costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions), operating expenses, and taxes, as well as purchases of new investments. The Company has established an investment strategy that management believes will provide for adequate cash flows from operations. The Company policy benefits are primarily in the form of claim payments, and the Company therefore has minimal exposure to the policy withdrawal risk associated with deposit products such as individual life policies or annuities. The Company cash flows from operations could be negatively impacted by a decrease in demand for the Company insurance products or an increase in the incidence of new claims or the duration of existing claims. 88 Table of Contents Cash flow could also be negatively impacted by a deterioration in the credit market whereby the Company ability to liquidate its positions in certain of its fixed maturity securities would be impacted such that the Company might not be able to dispose of these investments in a timely manner. The Company believes its cash resources are sufficient to meet its liquidity requirements for the next twelve months. The Company cash flows from discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003 are combined with cash flows from continuing operations within each cash flow statement category in the consolidated statements of cash flows. The absence of cash flows from discontinued operations in 2005 did not materially affect liquidity and capital resources nor is it expected to do so in the future. Consolidated Cash Flows Operating Cash Flows Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,503.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2005, compared to $747.0 million and $1,345.2 million for the comparable periods of 2004 and 2003. Included in the operating cash flows for 2004 is a cash disbursement of $707.4 million made in conjunction with the reinsurance of the Company individual income protection closed block of business. During 2003, by mutual consent the Company amended existing reinsurance contracts with one of its reinsurers to transform the contracts from coinsurance to modified coinsurance arrangements. Under the terms of those amendments, the Company, as the assuming reinsurer, transferred to the ceding reinsurer cash equal to the statutory disabled life reserves of approximately $286.2 million and established a corresponding receivable. The ceding reinsurer will retain the assets backing the statutory disabled life reserves and will credit interest at a 7.00 percent effective annual rate to the Company. This 2003 cash disbursement is included in cash flows from operations. Operating cash flows are primarily attributable to the receipt of premium and investment income, offset by payments of claims, commissions, expenses, and income taxes. Premium income growth is dependent not only on new sales, but on renewals of existing business, renewal price increases, and stable persistency. Investment income growth is dependent on the growth in the underlying assets supporting the Company insurance reserves and on the level of portfolio yield rates. Increases in commissions and operating expenses are attributable primarily to new sales growth and the first year acquisition expenses associated with new business. The level of paid claims is due partially to the growth and aging of the block of business and also to the general economy, as previously discussed in the operating results by segment. The income tax adjustment to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating activities increased $231.3 million in 2005 compared to 2004 primarily as a result of the utilization of net operating loss carryforwards during 2005 compared to an income tax benefit in 2004 related to the previously mentioned first quarter of 2004 restructuring charges associated with the individual income protection closed block segment. Investing Cash Flows Investing cash inflows consist primarily of the proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments. Investing cash outflows consist primarily of payments for purchases of investments. Net cash used in investing activities was $1,633.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2005 compared to $919.7 million and $2,107.9 million for the comparable periods of 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Company generated $575.1 million less in proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale securities in 2005 than in 2004, primarily due to a decrease in principal prepayments on mortgage-backed securities and bond calls. The Company utilized short-term investments during 2004 in anticipation of the cash to be transferred in conjunction with the reinsurance transaction related to the individual income protection closed block restructuring. The Company generated less in proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale securities in 2004 than in 2003, primarily due to a decrease in principal prepayments on mortgage-backed securities and bond calls during 2004. The Company received less in proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities during 2004 compared to 2003 due to the Company sales and subsequent purchases during 2003 related to the reduction and restructuring of its below-investment-grade portfolio. During 2005, the Company had cash inflows of $8.8 million related to the sale of Unum Limited Netherlands branch and cash outflows of $3.5 million related to the GENEX acquisition of Independent Review Services, Inc. 89 Table of Contents During 2004, the Company had cash inflows of $18.8 million in conjunction with the sale of its Japanese operations. In conjunction with the 2004 disposition of the Canadian branch, the Company transferred fixed maturity securities with a fair value and book value of approximately $1,099.4 million and $957.7 million, respectively, and cash of $31.7 million. While no cash was exchanged in the previously discussed 2004 Swiss Life transaction, the Company assumed reserves of approximately $279.6 million and received fixed maturity securities of approximately $259.0 million and other miscellaneous assets of approximately $5.2 million, for a net purchase price of $15.4 million. In 2004, the Company had cash outflows of $0.7 million to acquire Integrated Benefits Management. During 2003, the Company had cash inflows of $110.0 million related to the acquisition of Sun Life. The Company also received fixed maturity securities of approximately $118.4 million and other miscellaneous assets and liabilities of approximately $20.3 million and assumed reserves of approximately $285.9 million relative to the Sun Life acquisition, for a net purchase price of $37.2 million. During 2003, the Company had $152.5 million of cash outflows related to the disposition, through reinsurance ceded, of a block of policies previously sold through trade associations. Financing Cash Flows Financing cash flows consist primarily of borrowings and repayments of debt, issuance or repurchase of common stock, and dividends paid to stockholders. Net cash provided by financing activities was $71.0 million for 2005 compared to $181.9 million and $734.8 million provided in 2004 and 2003, respectively. During 2005, the Company repaid $227.0 million of maturing debt. Also in 2005, the Company received proceeds of $399.6 million from issuance of 6.85% senior debentures less underwriting discounts of $4.0 million. During 2004, the Company received proceeds of $300.0 million from the issuance of adjustable conversion-rate equity security units. The Company combined offering in May 2003 provided $575.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt, less underwriting discounts of $17.2 million, and $547.7 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock. These proceeds were used primarily to increase the capitalization of the Company insurance subsidiaries and to repay amounts loaned to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries. During 2003, the Company reduced short-term debt $235.0 million by repayment of reverse repurchase agreements and $20.0 million by repayment of the current portion of the medium-term notes. See Debt as follows for further information on the Company debt offerings. Cash Available from Subsidiaries The Company is dependent upon payments from its subsidiaries to pay dividends to its stockholders, to pay its debt obligations, and to pay its expenses. These payments by the Company insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries may take the form of interest payments on amounts loaned to such subsidiaries by the Company, operating and investment management fees, and/or dividends. At December 31, 2005, the Company had outstanding from its insurance subsidiaries a $150.0 million surplus debenture due in 2006 with a weighted average interest rate during 2005 of 8.56 percent and a $100.0 million surplus debenture due in 2027 with a weighted average interest rate during 2005 of 8.25 percent. Semi-annual interest payments are conditional upon the approval by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Restrictions under applicable state insurance laws limit the amount of ordinary dividends that can be paid to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries in any 12-month period without prior approval by regulatory authorities. For life insurance companies domiciled in the United States, that limitation equals, depending on the state of domicile, either ten percent of an insurer statutory surplus with respect to policyholders as of the preceding year end or the statutory net gain from operations, excluding realized investment gains and losses, of the preceding year. The payment of ordinary dividends to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries is further limited to the amount of statutory surplus as it relates to policyholders. Based on the restrictions under current law, during 2006, $621.4 million is available for the payment of ordinary dividends to the Company from its U.S. insurance subsidiaries. 90 Table of Contents The Company also has the ability to draw a dividend from its U.K. insurance subsidiary, Unum Limited. Such dividends are limited in amount, based on insurance company law in the U.K., which requires a minimum solvency margin. Approximately $240.3 million is available for the payment of dividends from Unum Limited during 2006. The amount available during 2005 for the payment of ordinary dividends from the Company U.S. insurance subsidiaries was $663.3 million, of which $280.0 million was utilized. The amount available during 2005 from Unum Limited was $152.5 million, of which $69.6 million was utilized and repatriated under the Homeland Investment Act of 2004. The remaining dividend of $385.2 million of unremitted foreign earnings repatriated in 2005 under the Homeland Investment Act of 2004 was from the Company non-insurance U.K. subsidiaries. The ability of the Company to continue to receive dividends from its insurance subsidiaries without regulatory approval will be dependent upon the level of earnings of its insurance subsidiaries as calculated under law. In addition to regulatory restrictions, the amount of dividends that will be paid by insurance subsidiaries will depend on additional factors, such as risk-based capital ratios, funding growth objectives at an affiliate level, and maintaining appropriate capital adequacy ratios to support the ratings desired by the Company. Insurance regulatory restrictions do not limit the amount of dividends available for distribution to the Company from its non-insurance subsidiaries except where the non-insurance subsidiaries are held directly or indirectly by an insurance subsidiary and only indirectly by the Company. The Company risk-based capital (RBC) ratio for its U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was 308 percent and 298 percent at the end of 2005 and 2004, respectively. The individual RBC ratios for the Company principal operating subsidiaries ranged from 234 percent to 447 percent at December 31, 2005. The individual RBC ratio for each insurance subsidiary is above the range that would require state regulatory action. Debt At December 31, 2005, the Company had long-term debt, including the adjustable conversion-rate equity security units and the junior subordinated debt securities, totaling $3,261.6 million. At December 31, 2005, the debt to total capital ratio was 35.0 percent compared to 35.2 percent at December 31, 2004. The debt to total capital ratio, when calculated allowing no equity credit for the Company junior subordinated debt securities and 50 percent equity credit for the Company adjustable conversion-rate equity security units, was 30.3 percent at December 31, 2005, compared to 30.2 percent at December 31, 2004. During the fourth quarter of 2005, the Company repatriated $454.8 million in unremitted foreign earnings from its U.K. subsidiaries, and as part of its repatriation plan, issued $400.0 million of 6.85% senior debentures due November 15, 2015 in a private offering. In May 2004, the Company issued 12.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a private offering for $300.0 million. The Company subsequently registered the privately placed securities for resale by the private investors. Each unit has a stated amount of $25 and will initially consist of (a) a contract pursuant to which the holder agrees to purchase, for $25, shares of the Company common stock on May 15, 2007 and which entitles the holder to contract adjustment payments at the annual rate of 3.165 percent, payable quarterly, and (b) a 1/40 or 2.5 percent ownership interest in a senior note issued by the Company due May 15, 2009 with a principal amount of $1,000, on which the Company will pay interest at the initial annual rate of 5.085 percent, payable quarterly. Upon settlement of the common stock purchase contract and successful remarketing of the senior note element of the units, the Company will receive proceeds of approximately $300.0 million and will issue between 17.7 million and 20.4 million shares of common stock. In May 2003, the Company issued 23.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a public offering for $575.0 million. Each unit has a stated amount of $25 and will initially consist of (a) a contract pursuant to which the holder agrees to purchase, for $25, shares of the Company common stock on May 15, 2006 and which entitles the holder to contract adjustment payments at the annual rate of 2.25 percent, payable quarterly, and (b) a 1/40, or 2.5 percent, ownership interest in a senior note issued by the Company due May 15, 2008 with a principal amount of $1,000, on which the Company will pay interest at the initial annual rate of 6.00 percent, payable quarterly. Upon settlement of the common stock purchase contract and successful remarketing of the senior note element of the units, the Company will receive proceeds of approximately $575.0 million and will issue between 43.3 million and 52.9 million shares of common stock. The scheduled remarketing of the senior note element of these units occurred in February 2006, as stipulated by the terms of the original offering, and the 91 Table of Contents Company issued $575.0 million of 5.997% senior notes due May 15, 2008. The Company participated in the remarketing of the units and purchased $400.0 million of the senior notes which were subsequently retired. In 2001, the Company issued $575.0 million of 7.625% senior notes due March 1, 2011. In 2002, the Company completed two long-term offerings, issuing $250.0 million of 7.375% senior debentures due June 15, 2032 and $150.0 million of 7.250% public income notes due June 15, 2032. The public income notes are redeemable at the Company option, in whole or in part, on or after June 25, 2007. In 1998, the Company completed public offerings of $200.0 million of 7.25% senior notes due March 15, 2028, $200.0 million of 7.0% senior notes due July 15, 2018, and $250.0 million of 6.75% senior notes due December 15, 2028. In 1998, Provident Financing Trust I issued $300.0 million of 7.405% capital securities in a public offering. These capital securities, which mature on March 15, 2038, are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Company, have a liquidation value of $1,000 per capital security, and have a mandatory redemption feature under certain circumstances. The Company issued $300.0 million of 7.405% junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, which mature on March 15, 2038, to Provident Financing Trust I in connection with the capital securities offering. The sole assets of Provident Financing Trust I are the junior subordinated debt securities. The Company has a shelf registration, which became effective in 2005, with the Securities and Exchange Commission to issue various types of securities, including common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depository shares, stock purchase contracts, units and warrants, or preferred securities of wholly-owned finance trusts up to an aggregate of $1.0 billion. If utilized, the shelf registration will enable the Company to raise funds from the offering of any individual security covered by the shelf registration as well as any combination thereof, subject to market conditions and the Company capital needs. Commitments Contractual debt, junior subordinated debt securities, adjustable conversion-rate equity security units, estimated policyholder liability maturities, and estimated lease commitments are as follows (in millions of dollars): Payments Due Total In 1 Year or Less After 1 Year up to 3 Years After 3 Years up to 5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt $ 2,087.0 $ $ $ $ 2,087.0 Adjustable Conversion-rate Equity Security Units 875.0 575.0 300.0 Junior Subordinated Debt Securities 300.0 300.0 Policyholder Liabilities 29,088.0 3,492.5 5,535.3 4,223.0 15,837.2 Operating Leases 144.7 34.3 57.6 26.7 26.1 Total $ 32,494.7 $ 3,526.8 $ 6,167.9 $ 4,549.7 $ 18,250.3 The Company policyholder liability maturities, which are presented net of reinsurance ceded, represent the projected payout of the current inforce policyholder liabilities and therefore incorporate uncertainties as to the timing and amount of claim payments. The Company utilizes extensive liability modeling to project future cash flows from the inforce business. The primary assumptions used to project future cash flows are claim incidence rates for mortality and morbidity, claim resolution rates, persistency rates, and interest rates. These cash flows are discounted to determine the current value of the projected claim payments. The timing and amount of payments on policyholder liabilities may vary significantly from the projections above. See previous discussion of asset/liability management under Investments - Overview contained here. 92 Table of Contents During 2005, the Company recorded an expense of $9.1 million to recognize a termination fee, payable in the first quarter of 2006, to exit an existing contract with an information technology provider. The Company has entered into an agreement with a new provider which is expected to result in a significantly less costly infrastructure. At December 31, 2005 the Company had capital commitments of approximately $71.1 million to fund certain of its private placement fixed maturity securities and for commercial mortgage loan originations. The funds will be due upon satisfaction of contractual notice from the trustee or issuer of the private placement securities or at closing of the mortgage loans. The amounts may or may not be funded. Ratings A.M. Best Company (AM Best), Fitch Ratings (Fitch), Moody Investors Service (Moody s), and Standard & Poor Corporation (S&P) are among the third parties that rate the Company senior debt and the financial strength of the Company principal U.S. insurance subsidiaries. Financial strength ratings are based primarily on U.S. statutory financial information for the individual U.S. domiciled insurance companies and reflect the rating agency view of the overall financial strength (capital levels, earnings, growth, investments, business mix, operating performance, and market position) of that insuring entity and its ability to meet its obligations to policyholders. Debt ratings represent the opinions of the rating agencies regarding an issuer ability to repay its debt and are based primarily on consolidated financial information prepared using generally accepted accounting principles. Both financial strength ratings and debt ratings incorporate qualitative analyses by rating agencies on an ongoing basis. The Company competes based in part on the financial strength ratings provided by rating agencies. A downgrade of the Company financial strength ratings can be expected to adversely affect the Company. A downgrade of the financial strength ratings could, among other things, adversely affect the Company relationships with distributors of its products and services and retention of its sales force, negatively impact persistency and new sales, particularly large case group sales and individual sales, and generally adversely affect the Company ability to compete. Downgrades in the Company debt ratings can be expected to adversely affect the Company ability to raise capital or its cost of capital. In November 2004, AM Best reaffirmed the Company ratings and commented that it would be closely monitoring the Company operations as to the impact of the multistate market conduct regulatory settlement. In this regard it noted that California conducted a separate examination and that there could be fines or remediation costs in addition to the charge announced by the Company in connection with the multistate settlement. AM Best stated that the maintenance of the Company current ratings reflected the agency expectation that several key financial and operational measures would be maintained. These measures are as follows: The maintenance of a Best Capital Adequacy Ratio (BCAR) of at least 150 percent on a consolidated basis, as well as for the primary operating companies. The maintenance of an NAIC risk-based capital ratio of at least 250 percent. No common stock repurchases through year end 2006. After-tax operating earnings in 2005 (excluding special charges) of $500 million on a GAAP basis and at least $375 million on a statutory basis. The debt-to-capital ratio cannot exceed its present level, and this ratio should trend downward with future equity growth through retained earnings and the 2005 debt pay-down. Cash at the holding company will be maintained to cover approximately six months of after-tax debt interest service and stockholder dividends. While the agency stated that a portion of the current cash position is intended for the pay-down of debt in 2005, it expects that the Company will build to a six-month cash position over a reasonable period of time. Persistency of the Company core group long-term income protection business will not drop below 80 percent. AM Best will also be taking into consideration the quality of business lapsing and the resulting impact on the Company loss ratios. The Company should not have any additional significant charges. Settlement expectations shall not exceed 120 percent of expected response rates, amount of claims reopened, size of claims payments and expenses associated with the payout. 93 Table of Contents The Company believes that its results for the year ended December 31, 2005 are in compliance with each of these measures, as follows: The BCAR is maintained by AM Best and has not yet been provided to the Company; however, the Company believes that its BCAR will be at least 150 percent for the year ended 2005. The Company RBC for its U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis, was 308 percent at the end of 2005. The Company did not repurchase any of its common stock during 2005. The Company surpassed both of these measures. The Company repaid $227.0 million of maturing debt in 2005 but, as part of its repatriation plan, issued $400.0 million of ten-year senior notes. In order to maintain its current debt leverage ratio, the Company reduced its outstanding debt $400.0 million during the first quarter of 2006 by participating in the remarketing of the senior note element of the Company adjustable conversion-rate equity security units in February 2006. At December 31, 2005, cash at the holding company was approximately $610.0 million, of which $402.7 million was used to participate in the remarketing of the units. The remainder is adequate to cover the required interest and dividend obligations. For 2005, persistency in group long-term income protection was 84.8 percent, consistent with the prior year. The profitability of the business terminated was generally lower than the profitability of the retained business. It is expected that the additional premium and related profits associated with renewal activity will continue to emerge. AM Best reaffirmed the Company ratings subsequent to the Company 2005 settlement agreement with the California DOI. While the reassessment is still in the early stages, the Company believes that total reserves for the reassessment process are adequate based on the results to date; however, actual results of the reassessment process may differ from the Company initial expectations. In June 2005 and again in October 2005, AM Best reaffirmed the existing financial strength rating of the Company and maintained a negative outlook. AM Best anticipates that the negative outlook will remain in effect until there is more clarity with regards to the ultimate cost of the multistate market conduct regulatory settlement agreements and the California settlement agreement and further improvement is exhibited in the financial flexibility of the parent company. In November 2005, AM Best assigned a bbb- rating to the $400.0 million 6.85% senior debentures and reaffirmed all of the Company remaining debt and financial strength ratings. In the first quarter of 2004, the ratings from Fitch were placed under review for a possible downgrade due to concerns expressed about the Company fourth quarter of 2003 reserve strengthening for group income protection and the profitability for this line of business. In May 2004 and again in November 2004, Fitch reaffirmed all of the Company ratings but kept the ratings under review pending Fitch completion of an analysis of the Company reserves. In February 2005, Fitch completed its analysis, citing the material progress the Company has made in strengthening risk based capital levels, resolving the multi-state market conduct examination, and improving GAAP and statutory earnings. Fitch reaffirmed all of the Company ratings and revised the outlook to stable. In October 2005, Fitch again reaffirmed all of the ratings of the Company following the announcement of the settlement agreement with the California DOI. In November 2005, Fitch assigned a BBB- rating to the $400.0 million 6.85% senior debentures and reaffirmed its ratings on all outstanding debt of the Company. In May 2004, Moody downgraded the Company senior debt credit ratings to Ba1 from Baa3 and the financial strength ratings on the Company insurance company subsidiaries to Baa1 from A3. The ratings outlook is negative . This action concluded the ratings review Moody initiated in February 2004. Moody indicated that the primary driver in the rating action was concern about the execution risk associated with the Company strategic plans to restore profitability to its core U.S. group long-term income protection business. Moody also noted that the Company had made considerable progress in improving its capital position throughout 2003. The change in the senior debt rating to Ba1 represents a below-investment-grade rating. In November 2004, Moody placed the Company senior debt credit ratings and the financial strength ratings of the Company insurance company subsidiaries on review for possible downgrade due to the heightened event risk associated with the issues concerning broker compensation in the employee benefit market. In April 2005, Moody confirmed the Company senior debt credit ratings and the financial strength ratings of the Company insurance subsidiaries while maintaining a 94 Table of Contents negative outlook. This rating action concluded the review for possible downgrade that began in November 2004. In October 2005, Moody reaffirmed the ratings of the Company following the announcement of the settlement agreement with the California DOI. In November 2005, Moody assigned a Ba1 rating to the $400.0 million 6.85% senior debentures and reaffirmed the financial strength ratings of the Company insurance subsidiaries. In May 2004, S&P downgraded the Company counterparty credit rating and senior debt rating to BB+ from BBB- while at the same time lowering the counterparty credit and financial strength ratings on the Company insurance company subsidiaries to BBB+ from A-, all with a stable outlook, citing concerns about the consistency of risk controls and valuation practices, which S&P believes have led to reserve charges and asset impairments in the past several quarters and have also contributed to marginal operating performance in the Company U.S. group income protection business. The outlook reflects the effects of strengthened capital adequacy, improved investment risk, and corrective measures taken by the Company to limit the downside on the closed block of individual income protection business and to improve profitability on its U.S. group income protection insurance. The change in the senior debt rating to BB+ represents a below-investment-grade rating. In October 2005, S&P reaffirmed all of the ratings of the Company following the announcement of the settlement agreement with the California DOI. In November 2005, S&P assigned a BB+ rating to the $400.0 million 6.85% senior debentures. The Company maintains an ongoing dialogue with these rating agencies to inform them of progress it is making regarding its strategic objectives and financial plans, as well as other issues which could impact the Company. There can be no assurance that further downgrades by these or other ratings agencies will not occur. The table below reflects, as of the date of this filing, the senior debt ratings for the Company and the financial strength ratings for the U.S. domiciled insurance company subsidiaries. AM Best Fitch Moody S&P Senior Debt Ratings bbb- BBB- (Good) Ba1 (Speculative) BB+ Financial Strength Ratings Provident Life & Accident A- (Excellent) A-(Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Provident Life & Casualty A- (Excellent) Not Rated Not Rated Not Rated Unum Life of America A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) First Unum Life A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Colonial Life & Accident A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Paul Revere Life A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Paul Revere Variable A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) These ratings are not directed toward the holders of the Company securities and are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold such securities. Each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. See Ratings in Part 1, Item 1 and Risk Factors Debt and Financial Strength Ratings in Part 1, Item 1A, contained herein for further discussion. Other Information Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans The Company sponsors several defined benefit pension and postretirement plans for its employees, including non-qualified pension plans. The U.S. pension plans comprise the majority of the total benefit obligation and pension expense for the Company. The value of the benefit obligations is determined based on a set of economic and demographic assumptions that represent the Company best estimate of future expected experience. These assumptions are reviewed annually. Two of the economic assumptions, the discount rate and the long-term rate of return, are adjusted accordingly based on key external indices. The Company follows Statements of Financial Accounting Standards No. 87 (SFAS 87), Employers Accounting for Pensions , No. 106, Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions , and No. 132, Employers Disclosures about Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits in its financial reporting and accounting for its pension and post-retirement benefit plans. 95 Table of Contents U.S. Pension and Post Retirement Benefit Plans The assumptions chosen for U.S. pension plans and the U.S. postretirement plan use consistent methodology but reflect the differences in the plan obligations. The Company uses a December 31 measurement date for each plan. The discount rate is an interest assumption used to convert the benefit payment stream to a present value. The Company sets the discount rate assumption at the measurement date for each of its retirement related benefit plans to reflect the yield of a portfolio of high quality fixed income debt instruments matched against the timing and amounts of projected future benefits. The discount rate used for the net periodic benefit costs for the U.S. pension plans was 5.80 percent and 6.05 percent in 2006 and 2005, respectively. Using a similar methodology applied to the postretirement plan cash flows, the discount rate used in the net periodic benefit cost for 2006 and 2005 was 5.50 percent and 5.70 percent, respectively. Lowering the discount rate by 50 basis points would have increased the 2005 pension expense for the U.S. pension plans by $10.0 million and would be expected to result in a $10.7 million increase in the 2006 pension expense. The long-term rate of return assumption is the best estimate of the average annual assumed return that will be produced from the pension trust assets until current benefits are paid. The Company uses a compound interest method in computing the rate of return on pension plan assets. The long-term rate of return on assets used in the net periodic pension costs for the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2006 and 2005 was 8.00 percent and 8.50 percent, respectively. Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on the plan assets by 50 basis points would have increased the 2005 pension expense by approximately $2.4 million. For 2006, lowering the assumption by 50 basis points would be expected to increase pension expense by approximately $2.6 million. The market related value equals the fair value of assets, determined as of the measurement date. The assets are not smoothed for purposes of SFAS 87. The expected return on assets, therefore, fully recognizes all asset gains and losses through the measurement date. The Company holds an unrecognized net loss representing the cumulative liability and asset gains and losses that have not been recognized in pension expense. As of December 31, 2005, there was an estimated unrecognized loss of approximately $363.9 million in the U.S. pension plans, compared to $318.2 million at December 31, 2004. The unrecognized loss has increased due to the decline in the year end discount rate from 6.05 percent at 2004 to 5.80 percent at 2005 and because the rate of return on assets was 4.90 percent in 2005 compared to an assumed rate of return of 8.50 percent. The unrecognized net loss is amortized as a component of pension expense. Only amounts outside of a corridor (equal to 10 percent of the greater of the projected benefit obligation or market related value of assets) are amortized. The 2006 pension expense is expected to include a loss amortization of approximately $22.4 million. This loss amortization was $19.2 million, $16.0 million, and $18.0 million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. The Company reported U.S. pension expense of $54.8 million, $43.6 million, and $41.8 million in 2005, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The fair value of plan assets in the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan was $515.4 million at December 31, 2005, compared to $478.1 million at year end 2004. In recent years, the moderate increase in assets, coupled with the liability increase due to declining discount rates, has reduced the year end funding level in the plan such that it has a deficit of $246.1 million as of December 31, 2005, compared to $176.5 million as of December 31, 2004. The Company had no regulatory contribution requirements for 2005 and 2004; however, the Company elected to make voluntary contributions of $23.0 million and $20.0 million, respectively, to its U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan. The Company expects to make a voluntary contribution of approximately $42.0 million to its U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan in 2006, based on current tax law. Non-U.S. Pension Plans The Company U.K. operation maintains a separate defined benefit plan for its eligible employees. The U.K. defined benefit pension plan (Scheme) was closed to new entrants on December 31, 2002. 96 Table of Contents The long-term rate of return on asset assumption used in the net periodic pension costs for 2006 and 2005 was 6.70 percent and 7.10 percent, respectively. The Company elected to set the discount rate assumption at the measurement date for the Scheme to reflect the yield of a portfolio of high quality fixed income debt instruments matched against the timing and amounts of projected future benefits. The discount rate assumptions were 4.80 percent and 5.30 percent as of December 31, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Pension expense was $11.7 million, $11.6 million, and $8.8 million in 2005, 2004, and 2003, respectively. The fair value of plan assets in the Scheme was $92.1 million at December 31, 2005, compared to $80.5 million at year end 2004. The Scheme has a deficit of $45.2 million at December 31, 2005, compared to $50.2 million at December 31, 2004. The Company contributes to the Scheme in accordance with a schedule of contributions which requires the Company to contribute to the Scheme at the rate of at least 18.20 percent of eligible salaries, sufficient to meet the minimum funding requirement under U.K. legislation. The Company contribution rate of 20.25 percent of eligible salaries is currently being reviewed. The Company made a $44.2 million contribution into the Scheme in January 2006 to reduce the deficit. The Company anticipates it will make additional contributions during 2006 into the Scheme of approximately $9.1 million. The Company previously maintained separate defined benefit plans for the employees of its Canadian branch operation. As a result of the sale of the Canadian branch, the Company froze the Canadian defined benefit pension plans during 2004 and recorded a curtailment loss of $0.7 million. The Company is currently in the process of terminating the Canadian plans. 97 Table of Contents 
