CIK: 5513
Company Name: UNUM GROUP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2017-02-22


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The discussion and analysis presented in this section should be read in conjunction with the "Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" included below the Table of Contents, "Risk Factors" included in Item 1A, "Selected Financial Data" included in Item 6, and the Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Item 8. Executive Summary 2016 Operating Performance and Capital Management For 2016 , we reported net income of $ 931.4 million , or $3.95 per diluted common share, compared to net income of $ 867.1 million , or $ 3.50 per diluted common share, in 2015 . Net income includes net realized investment gains and losses and non-operating retirement-related gains or losses. Excluding these items, after-tax operating income for 2016 was $926.2 million , or $3.92 per diluted common share, compared to $901.0 million , or $3.64 per diluted common share, in 2015 . See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP and Other Financial Measures" contained herein in this Item 7 for further discussion and a reconciliation of these items. Our Unum US segment reported an increase in operating income of 7.6 percent in 2016 compared to 2015 , with growth in premium income and overall favorable benefits experience, partially offset by lower net investment income. The benefit ratio for our Unum US segment for 2016 was 69.2 percent, compared to 70.1 percent in 2015 . Unum US sales were generally consistent in 2016 compared to 2015 , aided by our acquisition in 2016 of a provider of dental and vision insurance in the U.S. workplace. Persistency continues to be strong and is consistent with our expectations. Our Unum UK segment reported an increase in operating income, as measured in Unum UK's local currency, of 3.0 percent in 2016 compared to 2015 , with an increase in premium income and net investment income, partially offset by less favorable benefits experience. Premium income in local currency increased 3.6 percent in 2016 relative to 2015 . The benefit ratio for Unum UK was 69.4 percent in 2016 compared to 68.5 percent in 2015 . Unum UK sales in local currency increased 13.8 percent in 2016 compared to 2015 . Persistency improved in 2016 relative to the prior year and is consistent with our expectations. Our Colonial Life segment reported an increase in operating income of 1.6 percent in 2016 compared to 2015 , with growth in premium income , partially offset by slightly less favorable benefits experience. The 2016 benefit ratio for Colonial Life was 51.3 percent compared to 51.0 percent in 2015 . Colonial Life sales increased 10.3 percent in 2016 compared to 2015 . Persistency was favorable in 2016 compared to 2015 and is consistent with our expectations. Our Closed Block segment reported an increase in operating income of 8.7 percent in 2016 compared to 2015 , with higher net investment income and a lower other expense ratio partially offset by a decline in premium income and less favorable benefits experience. Benefits experience for individual disability remains within our range of expectations. Long-term care experienced volatility during the second and third quarters of 2016, with a resulting interest adjusted loss ratio for full year 2016 that was slightly higher than our range of expectations. Although our profit margins continue to be pressured by the impact of the low interest rate environment on our net investment income yields, our invested asset quality remains strong. The net unrealized gain on our fixed maturity securities was $4.7 billion at December 31, 2016 , compared to $3.7 billion at December 31, 2015 , with the increase due to a decline in credit spreads partially offset by an increase in U.S. Treasury rates during 2016 . The earned book yield on our investment portfolio was 5.30 percent for 2016 compared to a yield of 5.40 percent for 2015 . We believe our capital and financial positions are strong. At December 31, 2016 , the RBC ratio for our traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was above 400 percent, in line with our expectations and generally consistent with the prior year end. During 2016 , we repurchased 11.9 million shares of Unum Group common stock under our share repurchase program, at a cost of approximately $403 million . Our weighted average common shares outstanding, assuming dilution, equaled 236.0 million for 2016 compared to 247.9 million for 2015 , reflecting our capital management strategy of returning capital to shareholders through repurchases of our common stock. During 2016 we also increased our dividends to shareholders 8.1 percent on an annualized basis. As of December 31, 2016, Unum Group and our intermediate holding companies held fixed maturity securities, short-term investments, and cash of $594 million, excluding amounts committed for subsidiary contributions. 33 U.K. Referendum During 2016, the U.K. held a referendum and voted to leave the EU. The U.K. subsequently indicated that it will initiate the withdrawal process by the end of March 2017. Assuming the U.K. initiates the withdrawal process by giving notice that it is withdrawing from the EU, the U.K. and the EU will negotiate a withdrawal agreement during a maximum two-year period. We may see some dampening of growth in the U.K. due to the current disruption and uncertainty in the U.K. economy. We may experience volatility in the fair values of our investments in U.K. and EU-based issuers, but we do not expect a material increase in other-than-temporary impairments or defaults, nor do we believe this volatility will impact our ability to hold these investments. The magnitude and longevity of potential negative economic impacts on our growth will depend on the agreements reached by the U.K. and EU as a result of exit negotiations and the resulting response of the U.K. marketplace. There are currently no indications that capital requirements for our U.K. operations will change, but economic conditions may cause volatility in our solvency ratios. Our reported consolidated financial results may continue to be unfavorably impacted by the weakening of the British pound sterling. Further discussion is contained herein in this Item 7. 2016 and 2015 Acquisitions of Business In August 2016, we acquired 100 percent of the shares and voting interests in H&J Capital, L.L.C., parent of Starmount Life Insurance Company and AlwaysCare Benefits (which collectively we refer to as Starmount), for a total cash purchase price of $140.3 million plus contingent cash consideration of $10.0 million to be paid in two increments of $5.0 million each, at 18 and 24 months from the date of acquisition upon satisfaction of certain conditions. Starmount Life Insurance Company is an independent provider of dental and vision insurance in the U.S. workplace, and AlwaysCare Benefits is a nationally licensed, third-party administrator. The acquisition of Starmount will broaden our employee benefit offerings in the U.S. Starmount's dental and vision products and new dental and vision products to be marketed by Unum US are reported in our Unum US segment within our supplemental and voluntary product lines. Colonial Life dental and vision products are expected to be introduced in 2018 and will be reported in our Colonial Life segment. This acquisition, the results of which are included in our consolidated financial statements for the period subsequent to the date of acquisition, did not have a material impact on revenue, operating results, or sales for 2016. In September 2015, we acquired 100 percent of the common shares and voting interests in National Dental Plan Limited and associated companies (National Dental) for a total cash purchase price of 35.9 million or $54.3 million . National Dental, a leading provider of dental insurance in the U.K. workplace, is reported in our Unum UK segment as part of our supplemental product line. The acquisition of National Dental extends our market reach, broadening our employee benefit offerings in the U.K. This acquisition, the results of which are included in our financial results and sales for the period subsequent to the date of acquisition, did not have a material impact on revenue, operating results, or sales for 2015. See Note 13 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further details on the acquisitions. 2014 Long-term Care Reserve Increase Policy reserves for our long-term care block of business are determined using the gross premium valuation method and, prior to the fourth quarter of 2014, were valued based on assumptions established as of December 31, 2011, the date of the initial loss recognition. Gross premium valuation assumptions do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient. We undertake a review of policy reserve adequacy annually during the fourth quarter of each year, or more frequently if appropriate, using best estimate assumptions as of the date of the review. Included in our fourth quarter of 2014 review was an analysis of our reserve assumptions, including those for the discount rate, mortality and morbidity rates, persistency, and premium rate increases. Our analysis of reserve discount rate assumptions considered the continued historic low interest rate environment, future market expectations, and our view of future portfolio yields. The assumptions we established in 2011 were set at a level that we estimated would be sustainable in a low interest rate environment for three to five years, with improvements in market yields beginning after the third year. Since that time, however, interest rates continued to hover near historic lows, and credit spreads tightened. Our assumption update for mortality incorporated the last three years of Company-specific experience and emerging trends as well as industry data, where available and appropriate, and reflected improvements in life expectancies beyond what was initially anticipated in 2011. Our morbidity assumptions were updated to reflect trends from our own emerging Company experience in claim incidence and terminations, as well as trends based on available and appropriate industry data and studies. Our premium rate increase assumptions were updated to reflect progress-to-date and our on-going rate increase strategy. Based on our analysis, as of December 31, 2014 we lowered the discount rate assumption to reflect the low interest rate environment and our revised expectation of future investment portfolio yield rates. Our revised assumptions anticipated the low 34 interest rate environment persisting for the next three to five years, with a return to more historical averages over the following five year period. We updated our mortality assumptions to reflect emerging experience due to an increase in life expectancies which increases the ultimate number of people who will utilize long-term care benefits and also lengthens the amount of time a claimant may receive long-term care benefits. We changed our morbidity assumptions to reflect emerging industry experience as well as our own company experience, and we updated our projection of future premium rate increase approvals. Using our revised best estimate assumptions, as of December 31, 2014 we determined that our policy and claim reserves should be increased $698.2 million to reflect our current estimate of future benefit obligations. This charge decreased our 2014 net income $453.8 million. 2014 Retirement Benefit Amendment In 2014, we amended our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan to allow a limited-time offer of benefit payouts to eligible former employees with a vested right to a pension benefit. The offer provided eligible former employees, regardless of age, with an option to elect to receive a lump-sum settlement of his or her entire accrued pension benefit in December 2014 or to elect receipt of monthly pension benefits commencing in January 2015. We recognized a settlement loss of $64.4 million before tax, or $41.9 million after tax, during the fourth quarter of 2014. This non-operating retirement-related loss represented the applicable portion of the unrecognized actuarial loss which had previously been included in accumulated other comprehensive income and which pertained to the settled benefit obligation. Consolidated Company Outlook for 2017 We believe our disciplined approach to providing financial protection products at the workplace puts us in a position of strength as we seek to capitalize on the growing and largely unfilled need for our products and services. We believe the need for our products and services remains strong, and we intend to continue protecting our solid margins and returns through our pricing and risk actions. We continue to invest in our infrastructure and our employees, with a focus on quality and simplification of processes and offerings. Our strategy is centered on market expansion, enhancing the customer experience, providing an innovative product portfolio of financial protection choices, and investing in new solutions to further improve productivity. Our outlook for 2017 is for continued solid premium growth trends in our core businesses, with strong persistency and a disciplined approach to sales growth. We expect to have generally stable benefits experience due to our focus on disciplined pricing, risk selection, and management of renewals. We will maintain our commitment to expense discipline and improving our operational efficiencies. The low interest rate environment continues to place pressure on our profit margins and could unfavorably impact the adequacy of our reserves for some products. Tax reform may impact our operating results or the statutory capital of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries. Our reported consolidated financial results may also continue to be unfavorably impacted by the weakening of the British pound sterling. We continue to analyze and employ strategies that we believe will help us navigate the current environment and allow us to maintain solid operating margins and significant financial flexibility to support the needs of our businesses, while also continuing to return capital to our shareholders. We have substantial leverage to rising interest rates and an improving economy which generates payroll growth and wage inflation. We believe that consistent operating results, combined with the implementation of strategic initiatives and the effective deployment of capital, will allow us to meet our long-term financial objectives. Further discussion is included in "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures," "Consolidated Operating Results," "Segment Results," "Investments," and "Liquidity and Capital Resources" contained herein in this Item 7 and in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Reconciliation of Non-GAAP and Other Financial Measures We analyze our performance using non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company's performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. The non-GAAP financial measure of "after-tax operating income" differs from net income as presented in our consolidated operating results and income statements prepared in accordance with GAAP due to the exclusion of net realized investment gains and losses and non-operating retirement-related gains or losses as specified in the reconciliations below. We believe operating income is a better performance measure and better indicator of the profitability and underlying trends in our business. 35 Realized investment gains or losses depend on market conditions and do not necessarily relate to decisions regarding the underlying business of our segments. Our investment focus is on investment income to support our insurance liabilities as opposed to the generation of realized investment gains or losses. Although we may experience realized investment gains or losses which will affect future earnings levels, a long-term focus is necessary to maintain profitability over the life of the business since our underlying business is long-term in nature, and we need to earn the interest rates assumed in calculating our liabilities. The amortization of prior period actuarial gains or losses, a component of the net periodic benefit cost for our pensions and other postretirement benefit plans, is driven by market performance as well as plan amendments and is not indicative of the operational results of our businesses. We believe that excluding the amortization of prior period gains or losses, as well as the 2014 settlement loss from our pension plan amendment, from operating income or loss provides investors with additional information for comparison and analysis of our operating results. Although we manage our non-operating retirement-related gains or losses separately from the operational performance of our business, these gains or losses impact the overall profitability of our company and have historically increased or decreased over time, depending on plan amendments and market conditions and the resulting impact on the actuarial gains or losses in our pensions and other postretirement benefit plans. We believe that excluding the 2014 costs related to the early retirement of debt is appropriate because in conjunction with the debt redemption, we recognized in realized investment gains and losses a deferred gain from previously terminated derivatives which were associated with the hedge of this debt. The amount recognized as a realized investment gain, which basically offsets the cost of the debt redemption, is also excluded from our non-GAAP financial measures since we analyze our performance excluding amounts reported as realized investment gains or losses. We believe it provides investors with a more realistic view of our overall profitability if we are consistent in excluding both the cost of the debt retirement as well as the gain on the hedge of the debt. We may at other times exclude certain other items from our discussion of financial ratios and metrics in order to enhance the understanding and comparability of our operational performance and the underlying fundamentals, but this exclusion is not an indication that similar items may not recur and does not replace net income or net loss as a measure of our overall profitability. A reconciliation of GAAP financial measures to our non-GAAP financial measures is as follows: Year Ended December 31 2016 2015 2014 (in millions) per share * (in millions) per share * (in millions) per share * Net Income $ 931.4 $ 3.95 $ 867.1 $ 3.50 $ 402.1 $ 1.57 Excluding: Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) (net of tax expense (benefit) of $8.4; $(17.7); $3.3) 15.8 0.07 (26.1 ) (0.11 ) 12.8 0.05 Non-operating Retirement-related Loss (net of tax benefit of $5.7; $4.1; $24.4) (10.6 ) (0.04 ) (7.8 ) (0.03 ) (45.6 ) (0.18 ) Costs Related to Early Retirement of Debt (net of tax benefit of $-; $-, $2.8) (10.4 ) (0.04 ) Long-term Care Reserve Increase (net of tax benefit of $-; $-; $244.4) (453.8 ) (1.77 ) After-tax Operating Income $ 926.2 $ 3.92 $ 901.0 $ 3.64 $ 899.1 $ 3.51 * Assuming Dilution 36 We measure and analyze our segment performance on the basis of "operating revenue" and "operating income" or "operating loss", which differ from total revenue and income before income tax as presented in our consolidated statements of income due to the exclusion of net realized investment gains and losses and non-operating retirement-related gains or losses as specified in the reconciliations below. These performance measures are in accordance with GAAP guidance for segment reporting, but they should not be viewed as a substitute for total revenue, income before income tax, or net income. A reconciliation of total revenue to "operating revenue" and income before income tax to "operating income" is as follows: Year Ended December 31 2016 2015 2014 (in millions of dollars) Total Revenue $ 11,046.5 $ 10,731.3 $ 10,524.5 Excluding: Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 24.2 (43.8 ) 16.1 Operating Revenue $ 11,022.3 $ 10,775.1 $ 10,508.4 Income Before Income Tax $ 1,347.7 $ 1,238.3 $ 542.0 Excluding: Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 24.2 (43.8 ) 16.1 Non-operating Retirement-related Loss (16.3 ) (11.9 ) (70.0 ) Costs Related to Early Retirement of Debt for Corporate (13.2 ) Long-term Care Reserve Increase for Closed Block (698.2 ) Operating Income $ 1,339.8 $ 1,294.0 $ 1,307.3 Critical Accounting Estimates We prepare our financial statements in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. Estimates and assumptions could change in the future as more information becomes known, which could impact the amounts reported and disclosed in our financial statements. The accounting estimates deemed to be most critical to our financial position and results of operations are those related to reserves for policy and contract benefits, deferred acquisition costs, valuation of investments, pension and postretirement benefit plans, income taxes, and contingent liabilities. For additional information, refer to our significant accounting policies in Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Reserves for Policy and Contract Benefits Reserves for policy and contract benefits are our largest liabilities and represent claims that we estimate we will eventually pay to our policyholders. The two primary categories of reserves are policy reserves for claims not yet incurred and claim reserves for claims that have been incurred or are estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to us. Reserves for policy and contract benefits equaled $ 41.5 billion and $ 41.4 billion at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively, or approximately 78.3 percent and 79.9 percent of our total liabilities, respectively. Reserves ceded to reinsurers were $ 7.1 billion and $6.9 billion at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively, and are reported as a reinsurance recoverable in our consolidated balance sheets. 37 Policy Reserves Policy reserves are established in the same period we issue a policy and equal the difference between projected future policy benefits and future premiums, allowing a margin for expenses and profit. These reserves relate primarily to our non-interest sensitive products, including our individual disability and voluntary benefits products in our Unum US segment; individual disability products in our Unum UK segment; disability and cancer and critical illness policies in our Colonial Life segment; and individual disability, long-term care, and other products in our Closed Block segment. The reserves are calculated based on assumptions that were appropriate at the date the policy was issued and are not subsequently modified unless the policy reserves become inadequate (i.e. loss recognition occurs). Persistency assumptions are based on our actual historical experience adjusted for future expectations. Claim incidence and claim resolution rate assumptions related to mortality and morbidity are based on actual experience or industry standards adjusted as appropriate to reflect our actual experience and future expectations. Discount rate assumptions are based on our current and expected net investment returns. In establishing policy reserves, we use assumptions that reflect our best estimate while considering the potential for adverse variances in actual future experience, which results in a total policy reserve balance that has an embedded reserve for adverse deviation. We do not, however, establish an explicit and separate reserve as a provision for adverse deviation from our assumptions. We perform loss recognition tests on our policy reserves annually, or more frequently if appropriate, using best estimate assumptions as of the date of the test, without a provision for adverse deviation. We group the policy reserves for each major product line within a segment when we perform the loss recognition tests. If the policy reserves determined using these best estimate assumptions are higher than our existing policy reserves net of any deferred acquisition cost balance, the existing policy reserves are increased or deferred acquisition costs are reduced to immediately recognize the deficiency. Thereafter, the policy reserves for the product line are calculated using the same method we used for the loss recognition testing, referred to as the gross premium valuation method, wherein we use our best estimate as of the gross premium valuation (loss recognition) date rather than the initial policy issue date to determine the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay and the expected future gross premiums we will receive. Because the key policy reserve assumptions for policy persistency, mortality and morbidity, and discount rates are all locked in at policy issuance based on assumptions appropriate at that time, policy reserve assumptions are generally not changed due to a change in claim status from active to disabled subsequent to policy issuance. Depending on the funding mechanism, a full policy reserve is held during disability reflecting continued funding of the full policy reserve during a disability claim, or a fractional policy reserve is held reflecting that the individual policyholder would need to recover before he or she can again generate future claims for a separate occurrence. The policy reserves build up and release over time based on assumptions made at the time of policy issuance such that the reserve is eliminated as policyholders either reach the terminal age for coverage, die, or voluntarily lapse the policy. Policy reserves for Unum US, Unum UK, and Colonial Life products are determined using the net level premium method as prescribed by GAAP. In applying this method, we use, as applicable by product type, morbidity and mortality incidence rate assumptions, claim resolution rate assumptions, and policy persistency assumptions, among others, to determine our expected future claim payments and expected future premium income. We then apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims and claim expenses we will pay and the expected future premiums we will receive, with a provision for profit allowed. Policy reserves for our Closed Block segment include certain older policy forms for individual disability, individual and group long-term care, and certain other products, all of which are no longer actively marketed. The reserves for individual disability and individual and group long-term care are determined using the gross premium valuation method. Key assumptions are persistency, mortality and morbidity, claim incidence, claim resolution rates, commission rates, and maintenance expense rates. For long-term care, premium rate increases are also a key assumption. We apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay as well as the expected future premiums we will receive, with no provision for future profit. The interest rate is based on our expected net investment returns on the investment portfolio supporting the reserves for these blocks of business. Under the gross premium valuation method, we do not include an embedded provision for the risk of adverse deviation from these assumptions. Gross premium valuation assumptions do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient in the future. Policy reserves for certain other products, excluding individual disability and individual and group long-term care, which are no longer actively marketed and are reported in our Closed Block segment represent $ 5.8 billion on a gross basis. We have ceded $5.0 billion of these other products' policy reserves to reinsurers. The ceded reserve balance is reported in our consolidated 38 balance sheets as a reinsurance recoverable. We continue to service a block of group pension products, which we have not ceded, and the policy reserves for these products are based on expected mortality rates and retirement rates. Expected future payments are discounted at interest rates reflecting the anticipated investment returns for the assets supporting the liabilities. Claim Reserves Claim reserves are established when a claim is incurred or is estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported (IBNR) to us and, as prescribed by GAAP, equals our long-term best estimate of the present value of the liability for future claim payments and claim adjustment expenses. A claim reserve is based on actual known facts regarding the claim, such as the benefits available under the applicable policy, the covered benefit period, the age, and, as appropriate, the occupation and cause of disability of the claimant, as well as assumptions derived from our actual historical experience and expected future changes in experience for factors such as the claim duration, discount rate, and policy benefit offsets, including those for social security and other government-based welfare benefits. Reserves for IBNR claims, similar to incurred claim reserves, include our assumptions for claim duration and discount rates, but because we do not yet know the facts regarding the specific claims, these reserves are also established based on historical incidence rate assumptions, including claim reporting patterns, the average cost of claims, and the expected volumes of incurred claims. Our incurred claim reserves and IBNR claim reserves do not include any provision for the risk of adverse deviation from our assumptions. Claim reserves, unlike policy reserves, are subject to revision as current claim experience and projections of future factors affecting claim experience change. Each quarter we review our emerging experience to ensure that our claim reserves are appropriate. If we believe, based on our actual experience and our view of future events, that our long-term assumptions need to be modified, we adjust our reserves accordingly with a charge or credit to our current period income. Multiple estimation methods exist to establish claim reserve liabilities, with each method having its own advantages and disadvantages. Available reserving methods utilized to calculate claim reserves include the tabular reserve method, the paid loss development method, the incurred loss development method, the count and severity method, and the expected claim cost method. No single method is better than the others in all situations and for all product lines. The estimation methods we have chosen are those that we believe produce the most reliable reserves. We use a tabular reserve methodology for our Unum US group and individual long-term disability claims and for our Closed Block group and individual long-term care claims that have been reported. Under the tabular reserve methodology, reserves for reported claims are based on certain characteristics of the actual reported claimants, such as age, length of time disabled, and medical diagnosis, as well as assumptions regarding claim duration, discount rate, and policy benefit offsets. We believe the tabular reserve method is the most accurate to calculate long-term liabilities and allows us to use the most available known facts about each claim. IBNR claim reserves for our long-term products are calculated using the count and severity method using historical patterns of the claims to be reported and the associated claim costs. For Unum US group short-term disability products, an estimate of the value of future payments to be made on claims already submitted, as well as on IBNR claims, is determined in aggregate using a paid loss development method rather than on the individual claimant basis that we use for reported claims on long-term products. The average length of time between the event triggering a claim under a policy and the final resolution of those claims is much shorter for these products than for our long-term liabilities and results in less estimation variability. Claim reserves for Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment products are related primarily to death claims reported but not yet paid, IBNR death claims, and a liability for waiver of premium benefits. The death claim reserve is based on the actual face amount to be paid, the IBNR reserve is calculated using the paid loss development method, and the waiver of premium benefits reserve is calculated using the tabular reserve methodology. Claim reserves supporting the group and individual dental and vision products reported in our Unum US segment have a short claim payout period. As a result, the reserves, which primarily represent IBNR and a small amount of claims pending payment, are calculated using the paid loss development method. Claim reserves supporting our Unum UK segment are calculated using generally the same methodology that we use for Unum US disability and group term life reserves. Claim reserves for our Unum UK group dependent life product are calculated using discounted cash flows, based on our assumptions for claim duration and discount rates. The assumptions used in calculating claim reserves for this segment are based on standard United Kingdom industry experience, adjusted for Unum UK's own experience. 39 The majority of the Colonial Life segment lines of business have short-term benefits, which generally have less estimation variability than our long-term products because of the shorter claim payout period. Our claim reserves for Colonial Life's lines of business are predominantly determined using the incurred loss development method based on our own experience. The incurred loss development method uses the historical patterns of payments by loss date to predict future claim payments for each loss date. Where the incurred loss development method may not be appropriate, we estimate the incurred claims using an expected claim cost per policy or other measure of exposure. The key assumptions for claim reserves for the Colonial Life lines of business are: (1) the timing, rate, and amount of estimated future claim payments; and (2) the estimated expenses associated with the payment of claims. The following table displays policy reserves, incurred claim reserves, and IBNR claim reserves by major product line, with the summation of the policy reserves and claim reserves shown both gross and net of the associated reinsurance recoverable. Incurred claim reserves represent the expected benefits payable under each incurred claim, along with other expenses associated with the payment of the claims. IBNR claim reserves include provisions for incurred but not reported claims and a provision for reopened claims for our disability products. The IBNR and reopened claim reserves for our disability products are developed and maintained in aggregate based on historical monitoring. See "Executive Summary" contained herein in this Item 7 and Note 6 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion. (in millions of dollars) December 31, 2016 Gross Total Reinsurance Ceded Policy Reserves Claim Reserves Total Net % Incurred IBNR % Total Group Disability $ % $ 6,201.0 $ 608.6 29.3 % $ 6,809.6 $ 74.3 $ 6,735.3 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 65.4 0.3 704.8 192.6 3.9 962.8 4.1 958.7 Individual Disability 544.6 3.0 1,298.5 130.6 6.1 1,973.7 201.0 1,772.7 Voluntary Benefits 1,492.7 8.2 45.5 50.6 0.4 1,588.8 27.7 1,561.1 Dental and Vision 3.9 8.1 0.1 12.0 0.2 11.8 Unum US Segment 2,102.7 11.5 8,253.7 990.5 39.8 11,346.9 307.3 11,039.6 Unum UK Segment 18.2 0.1 1,714.2 113.3 7.9 1,845.7 81.8 1,763.9 Colonial Life Segment 1,871.0 10.3 277.8 132.0 1.8 2,280.8 7.9 2,272.9 Individual Disability 513.6 2.8 9,696.4 251.6 42.8 10,461.6 1,601.2 8,860.4 Long-term Care 7,898.4 43.3 1,360.4 136.6 6.4 9,395.4 41.8 9,353.6 Other 5,848.3 32.0 189.8 132.1 1.3 6,170.2 5,030.6 1,139.6 Closed Block Segment 14,260.3 78.1 11,246.6 520.3 50.5 26,027.2 6,673.6 19,353.6 Subtotal $ 18,252.2 100.0 % $ 21,492.3 $ 1,756.1 100.0 % 41,500.6 7,070.6 34,430.0 Adjustment Related to Unrealized Investment Gains and Losses 4,253.2 321.3 3,931.9 Consolidated $ 45,753.8 $ 7,391.9 $ 38,361.9 40 December 31, 2015 Gross Total Reinsurance Ceded Policy Reserves Claim Reserves Total Net % Incurred IBNR % Total Group Disability $ % $ 6,347.0 $ 597.2 29.2 % $ 6,944.2 $ 66.3 $ 6,877.9 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 68.3 0.4 725.9 186.8 3.8 981.0 4.8 976.2 Individual Disability 552.9 3.1 1,238.2 130.8 5.8 1,921.9 109.9 1,812.0 Voluntary Benefits 1,434.4 8.1 48.9 48.5 0.4 1,531.8 28.6 1,503.2 Unum US Segment 2,055.6 11.6 8,360.0 963.3 39.2 11,378.9 209.6 11,169.3 Unum UK Segment 21.0 0.1 2,053.6 135.0 9.2 2,209.6 101.2 2,108.4 Colonial Life Segment 1,760.0 10.0 276.5 132.2 1.7 2,168.7 8.1 2,160.6 Individual Disability 620.0 3.5 9,922.8 259.2 42.8 10,802.0 1,568.5 9,233.5 Long-term Care 7,383.3 41.9 1,225.4 123.4 5.7 8,732.1 42.5 8,689.6 Other 5,810.8 32.9 204.2 140.5 1.4 6,155.5 4,991.0 1,164.5 Closed Block Segment 13,814.1 78.3 11,352.4 523.1 49.9 25,689.6 6,602.0 19,087.6 Subtotal $ 17,650.7 100.0 % $ 22,042.5 $ 1,753.6 100.0 % 41,446.8 6,920.9 34,525.9 Adjustment Related to Unrealized Investment Gains and Losses 3,578.4 263.2 3,315.2 Consolidated $ 45,025.2 $ 7,184.1 $ 37,841.1 Key Assumptions The calculation of policy and claim reserves involves numerous assumptions, but the primary assumptions used to calculate reserves are (1) the discount rate, (2) the claim resolution rate, and (3) the claim incidence rate for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves. Of these assumptions, our discount rate and claim resolution rate assumptions have historically had the most significant effects on our level of reserves because many of our product lines provide benefit payments over an extended period of time. 1. The discount rate , which is used in calculating both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the interest rate that we use to discount future claim payments to determine the present value. A higher discount rate produces a lower reserve. If the discount rate is higher than our future investment returns, our invested assets will not earn enough investment income to support our future claim payments. In this case, the reserves may eventually be insufficient. We set our assumptions based on our current and expected future investment yield of the assets supporting the reserves, considering current and expected future market conditions. If the investment yield on new investments that are purchased differs from the investment yield of the existing investment portfolio, it is likely that the discount rate assumption on claims will be adjusted to reflect the impact of the new investment yield. 2. The claim resolution rate , used for both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the probability that a disability or long-term care claim will close due to recovery or death of the insured. It is important because it is used to estimate how long benefits will be paid for a claim. Estimated resolution rates that are set too high will result in reserves that are lower than they need to be to pay the claim benefits over time. Claim resolution assumptions involve many factors, including the cause of disability, the policyholder's age, the type of contractual benefits provided, and the time since initial disability. We primarily use our own claim experience to develop our claim resolution assumptions. These assumptions are established for the probability of death and the probability of recovery from disability. Our studies review actual claim resolution experience over a number of years, with more weight placed on our experience in the more recent years. We also consider any expected future changes in claim resolution experience. 41 3. The incidence rate , used for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves, is the rate at which new claims are submitted to us. The incidence rate is affected by many factors, including the age of the insured, the insured's occupation or industry, the benefit plan design, and certain external factors such as consumer confidence and levels of unemployment. We establish our incidence assumption using a historical review of actual incidence results along with an outlook of future incidence expectations. Establishing reserve assumptions is complex and involves many factors. Reserves, particularly for policies offering insurance coverage for long-term disabilities and long-term care, are dependent on numerous assumptions other than just those presented in the preceding discussion. The impact of internal and external events, such as changes in claims operational procedures, economic trends such as the rate of unemployment and the level of consumer confidence, the emergence of new diseases, new trends and developments in medical treatments, and legal trends and legislative changes, including changes to social security and other government-based welfare benefits programs which provide policy benefit offsets, among other factors, will influence claim incidence rates, claim resolution rates, and claim costs. In addition, for policies offering coverage for disability or long-term care at advanced ages, the level and pattern of mortality rates at advanced ages will impact overall benefit costs. Reserve assumptions differ by product line and by policy type within a product line. Additionally, in any period and over time, our actual experience may have a positive or negative variance from our long-term assumptions, either singularly or collectively, and these variances may offset each other. We test the overall adequacy of our reserves using all assumptions and with a long-term view of our expected experience over the life of a block of business rather than test just one or a few assumptions independently that may be aberrant over a short period of time. Therefore, it is not possible to bifurcate the assumptions to evaluate the sensitivity of a change in each assumption, but rather in the aggregate by product line. The following section presents an overview of our trend analysis for key assumptions and the results of variability in our assumptions, in aggregate, for the reserves which we believe are reasonably possible to have a material impact on our future financial results if actual claims yield a materially different amount than what we currently expect and have reserved for, either favorable or unfavorable. Trends in Key Assumptions Generally, we do not expect our mortality and morbidity claim incidence trends or our persistency trends to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time. We have historically experienced an increase in our group long-term disability morbidity claim incidence trends during and following a recessionary period and believe claim incidence trends may continue to somewhat follow general economic conditions and demographics of the general workforce. Claim incidence rates for Unum US and Unum UK group long-term disability were lower during 2016 compared to the prior year. Claim incidence rates for our Closed Block long-term care line of business continue to be generally consistent with the revised assumptions we established during our 2014 reserve review and assumption update. See "2014 Long-term Care Reserve Increase" contained herein in this Item 7. Interest rates were slightly higher at the end of 2016 compared to the overall level of 2015. However, they remain well below historical norms. The assumptions we used to discount our reserves during this period were slightly lower for certain of our product lines. Reserve discount rate assumptions for new policies and new claims are periodically adjusted to reflect our current and expected net investment returns. Changes in our average discount rate assumptions tend to occur gradually over a longer period of time because of the long-duration investment portfolios which support the reserves for the majority of our lines of business. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period, both favorably and unfavorably. Claim resolution rates are very sensitive to operational and environmental changes and have a greater chance of significant variability in a shorter period of time than our other reserve assumptions. These rates are reviewed on a quarterly basis for the death and recovery components separately. Claim resolution rates in our Unum US group long-term disability product line and in our Closed Block individual disability product line have over the last several years exhibited some variability. Relative to the resolution rate we expect to experience over the life of the block of business, actual quarterly rates during 2015 and 2016 have varied by -5 and +3 percent in our Unum US group long-term disability line of business and between -3 and +5 percent in our Closed Block individual disability line of business, which represent the majority of our claim reserves. During 2016, claim resolution rates pertaining to life and overall mortality experience were relatively consistent with the levels of 2015 and 2014. On an annual basis for the years 2014 to 2016 , our overall claim resolution rates were fairly consistent with or slightly favorable to our long-term assumptions. 42 We monitor and test our reserves for adequacy relative to all of our assumptions in the aggregate. In our estimation, scenarios based on reasonably possible variations in each of our reserve assumptions, when modeled together in aggregate, could produce potential results as illustrated in the chart below. The major contributor to the variance for both the Unum US group long-term disability line of business and the Closed Block individual disability line of business is the claim resolution rate. Potential impact, positive or negative, of variations in reserve assumptions on our December 31, 2016 claim reserve balance (in millions of dollars) Unum US group long-term disability 3.3% $220 Closed Block individual disability 2.5% $237 In addition, we consider variability in our reserve assumptions related to long-term care policy reserves. These reserves are held under the gross premium valuation method with assumptions established as of December 31, 2014, the date of loss recognition. Assumptions for policy reserves do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient. As such, positive developments will result in the accumulation of reserve margin, while adverse developments would result in an additional reserve charge. Policy reserves for long-term care are based upon a number of key assumptions, and each assumption has various factors which may impact the long-term outcome. Key assumptions with respect to morbidity, mortality, persistency, interest rates, and future premium rate increases must incorporate extended views of expectations for many years into the future. Reserves are highly sensitive to these estimates. For example, a 25 basis point change in the assumed discount rate over the lifetime of our long-term care business would impact reserves by approximately $450 million, assuming all other factors held constant. Key assumptions and related impacts are also heavily interrelated in both their outcome and in their effects on reserves. For example, changes in the view of morbidity and mortality might be mitigated by either potential future premium rate increases and/or morbidity improvements due to general improvement in health and/or medical breakthroughs. There is potentially a wide range of outcomes for each assumption and in totality. We believe that these ranges provide a reasonable estimate of the possible changes in reserve balances for those product lines where we believe it is possible that variability in the assumptions, in the aggregate, could result in a material impact on our reserve levels, but we record our reserves based on our long-term best estimate. Because these product lines have long-term claim payout periods, there is a greater potential for significant variability in claim costs, either positive or negative. We closely monitor emerging experience and use these results to inform our view of long-term assumptions. Deferred Acquisition Costs (DAC) We defer incremental direct costs associated with the successful acquisition of new or renewal insurance contracts and amortize (expense) these costs over the life of the related policies. Deferred costs include certain commissions, other agency compensation, selection and policy issue expenses, and field expenses. Acquisition costs that do not vary with the production of new business, such as commissions on group products which are generally level throughout the life of the policy, are excluded from deferral. Approximately 87.6 percent of our DAC relates to non-interest sensitive products, and we amortize DAC for these products in proportion to the premium income we expect to receive over the life of the policies. DAC related to interest sensitive policies is amortized over the lives of the policies in relation to the present value of estimated gross profits from surrender charges, mortality margins, investment returns, and expense margins. Key assumptions used in developing the future amortization of DAC are persistency, premium income, and for our interest sensitive products, mortality margins and investment returns. We use our own historical experience and expectation of the future performance of our businesses in determining our assumptions. For non-interest sensitive products, the estimated premium income in the early years of the amortization period is generally higher than in the later years due to the anticipated cumulative effect of policy persistency in the early years, which results in a greater proportion of the costs being amortized in the early years of the life of the policy. During 2016 , our key assumptions used to develop the future amortization of acquisition costs deferred during 2016 did not change materially from those used in 2015 . Generally, we do not expect our key assumptions to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time. 43 The following are our current assumptions regarding the length of our amortization periods, the approximate DAC balance that remains at the end of years 3, 10, and 15 as a percentage of the cost initially deferred, and our DAC balances as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 . Balance Remaining as a % DAC Balances Amortization of Initial Deferral at December 31 Period Year 3 Year 10 Year 15 2016 2015 (in millions of dollars) Unum US Group Disability 6 29% 0% 0% $ 89.8 $ 79.3 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 6 34% 0% 0% 73.4 66.9 Supplemental and Voluntary: Individual Disability 20 70% 43% 20% 432.4 421.4 Voluntary Benefits 20 54% 21% 7% 580.0 568.8 Dental and Vision 6 31% 0% 0% 0.9 Unum UK Group Long-term Disability 3 0% 0% 0% 3.6 4.7 Group Life 3 0% 0% 0% 1.3 1.3 Supplemental 20 55% 13% 2% 16.5 21.1 Colonial Life Accident, Sickness, and Disability 15 45% 11% 1% 451.8 415.1 Life 25 68% 30% 14% 243.1 238.8 Cancer and Critical Illness 19 58% 25% 10% 201.4 191.1 Totals $ 2,094.2 $ 2,008.5 Amortization of DAC is adjusted to reflect actual experience for assumptions which deviate compared to the anticipated experience. Any deviations from projections may result in a change to the rate of amortization in the period such events occur. As an example, for our non-interest sensitive products, we may experience accelerated amortization if policies terminate earlier than projected, or we may experience a slower rate of amortization if policies persist longer than projected. Our actual experience has not varied materially from our assumptions during the last three years. See Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our DAC accounting policy. Fair Value of Investments All of our fixed maturity securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value. Our derivative financial instruments, including certain derivative instruments embedded in other contracts, are reported as either assets or liabilities and measured at fair value. We hold an immaterial amount of equity securities, which are also reported at fair value. Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date and therefore represents an exit price, not an entry price. The exit price objective applies regardless of our intent and/or ability to sell the asset or transfer the liability at the measurement date. We generally use valuation techniques consistent with the market approach, and to a lesser extent, the income approach. The market approach uses prices and other relevant information from market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities and the income approach converts future amounts, such as cash flows or earnings, to a single present amount, or a discounted amount. We believe the market approach valuation technique provides more observable data than the income approach, considering the types of investments we hold. The degree of judgment utilized in measuring the fair value of financial instruments generally correlates to the level of pricing observability. Financial instruments with readily available active quoted prices or for which fair value can be measured from actively quoted prices in active markets generally have more pricing observability and less judgment utilized in measuring fair value. The market sources from which we obtain or derive the fair values of our assets and liabilities carried at market value 44 include quoted market prices for actual trades, price quotes from third party pricing vendors, price quotes we obtain from outside brokers, matrix pricing, discounted cash flow, and observable prices for similar publicly traded or privately traded issues that incorporate the credit quality and industry sector of the issuer. Our fair value measurements could differ significantly based on the valuation technique and available inputs. Inputs to valuation techniques refer broadly to the assumptions that market participants use in pricing assets or liabilities, including assumptions about risk, for example, the risk inherent in a particular valuation technique used to measure fair value and/or the risk inherent in the inputs to the valuation technique. We use observable and unobservable inputs in measuring the fair value of our financial instruments. Observable inputs are inputs that reflect the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on market data obtained from independent sources. Unobservable inputs are inputs that reflect our own assumptions about the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability developed based on the best information available in the circumstances. Certain of our investments do not have readily determinable market prices and/or observable inputs or may at times be affected by the lack of market liquidity. For these securities, we use internally prepared valuations combining matrix pricing with vendor purchased software programs, including valuations based on estimates of future profitability, to estimate the fair value. Additionally, we may obtain prices from independent third-party brokers to aid in establishing valuations for certain of these securities. Key assumptions used by us to determine fair value for these securities include risk-free interest rates, risk premiums, performance of underlying collateral (if any), and other factors involving significant assumptions which may or may not reflect those of an active market. As of December 31, 2016 , the key assumptions we generally used to estimate the fair value of these types of securities included those listed below. Where appropriate, we have noted the assumption used for the prior period as well as the reason for the change. Risk-free interest rates of 1.93 percent for five-year maturities to 3.07 percent for 30-year maturities were derived from the December 31, 2016 yield curve for U.S. Treasury Bonds with similar maturities. This compares to interest rates of 1.76 percent for five-year maturities to 3.02 percent for 30-year maturities used at December 31, 2015. Baa corporate bond spread adjustments ranging from 1.20 percent to 2.32 percent were added to the risk-free rate to reflect additional credit risk and the lack of liquidity. We used spread adjustments ranging from 1.60 percent to 3.30 percent at December 31, 2015. The changes were based on observable market spreads. Newly issued private placement securities have historically offered yield premiums higher than a similar interest rate spread on comparable newly issued public securities. Additional basis points were added as deemed appropriate for foreign investments, certain industries, and individual securities in certain industries that are considered to be of greater risk. As of December 31, 2016 , approximately 9.2 percent of our fixed maturity securities were categorized as Level 1, 86.6 percent as Level 2, and 4.2 percent as Level 3. Level 1 is the highest category of the three-level fair value hierarchy classification wherein inputs are unadjusted and represent quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities. The Level 2 category includes assets or liabilities valued using inputs (other than those included in the Level 1 category) that are either directly or indirectly observable for the asset or liability through correlation with market data at the measurement date and for the duration of the instrument's anticipated life. The Level 3 category is the lowest category of the fair value hierarchy and reflects the judgment of management regarding what market participants would use in pricing assets or liabilities at the measurement date using unobservable inputs to extrapolate an estimated fair value. Rapidly changing credit and equity market conditions can materially impact the valuation of securities, and the period to period changes in value can vary significantly. See Note 2 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. 45 Investment Impairments One of the significant estimates related to investments is our impairment valuation. In determining when a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, we evaluate the following factors: Whether we expect to recover the entire amortized cost basis of the security Whether we intend to sell the security or will be required to sell the security before the recovery of its amortized cost basis Whether the security is current as to principal and interest payments The significance of the decline in value The time period during which there has been a significant decline in value Current and future business prospects and trends of earnings The valuation of the security underlying collateral Relevant industry conditions and trends relative to their historical cycles Market conditions Rating agency and governmental actions Bid and offering prices and the level of trading activity Adverse changes in estimated cash flows for securitized investments Changes in fair value subsequent to the balance sheet date Any other key measures for the related security We evaluate available information, including the factors noted above, both positive and negative, in reaching our conclusions. In particular, we also consider the strength of the issuer balance sheet, its debt obligations and near term funding requirements, cash flow and liquidity, the profitability of its core businesses, the availability of marketable assets which could be sold to increase liquidity, its industry fundamentals and regulatory environment, and its access to capital markets. Although all available and applicable factors are considered in our analysis, our expectation of recovering the entire amortized cost basis of the security, whether we intend to sell the security, whether it is more likely than not we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost, and whether the security is current on principal and interest payments are the most critical factors in determining whether impairments are other than temporary. The significance of the decline in value and the length of time during which there has been a significant decline are also important factors, but we generally do not record an impairment loss based solely on these two factors, since often other more relevant factors will impact our evaluation of a security. While determining other-than-temporary impairments is a judgmental area, we utilize a formal, well-defined, and disciplined process to monitor and evaluate our fixed income investment portfolio, supported by issuer specific research and documentation as of the end of each period. The process results in a thorough evaluation of problem investments and the recording of losses on a timely basis for investments determined to have an other-than-temporary impairment. We use a comprehensive rating system to evaluate the investment and credit risk of our mortgage loans and to identify specific properties for inspection and reevaluation. Mortgage loans are considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. We establish an allowance for probable losses on mortgage loans based on a review of individual loans, considering the value of the underlying collateral, the value of which is periodically assessed. Mortgage loans are not reported at fair value in our consolidated balance sheets unless the mortgage loan is considered impaired, in which case the impairment is recognized as a realized investment loss in our consolidated statements of income. 46 There are a number of significant risks inherent in the process of monitoring our investments for impairments and determining when and if an impairment is other than temporary. These risks and uncertainties include the following possibilities: The assessment of a borrower's ability to meet its contractual obligations will change. The economic outlook, either domestic or foreign, may be less favorable or may have a more significant impact on the borrower than anticipated, and as such, the investment may not recover in value. New information may become available concerning the security, such as disclosure of accounting irregularities, fraud, or corporate governance issues. Significant changes in credit spreads may occur in the related industry. Significant increases in interest rates may occur and may not return to levels similar to when securities were initially purchased. Adverse rating agency actions may occur. See Notes 1 and 3 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans We sponsor several defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit (OPEB) plans for our employees, including non-qualified pension plans. The U.S. qualified and non-qualified defined benefit pension plans comprise the majority of our total benefit obligation and benefit cost. We have a separate defined benefit plan for eligible employees in our U.K. operation. The U.S. defined benefit pension plans were closed to new entrants and were amended to freeze participation as of December 31, 2013. The U.K. defined benefit pension plan was closed to new entrants effective December 31, 2002 and was subsequently amended to freeze participation effective June 30, 2014. The OPEB plan was closed to new entrants effective December 31, 2012. Assumptions Our net periodic benefit costs and the value of our benefit obligations for these plans are determined based on a set of economic and demographic assumptions that represent our best estimate of future expected experience. Major assumptions used in accounting for these plans include the expected discount (interest) rate, the long-term rate of return on plan assets, and mortality rates. We also use, as applicable, expected increases in compensation levels and a weighted average annual rate of increase in the per capita cost of covered benefits, which reflects a health care cost trend rate, and the U.K. pension plan also uses expected cost of living increases to plan benefits. The assumptions chosen for our pension and OPEB plans are reviewed annually, using a December 31 measurement date for each of our plans unless we are required to perform an interim remeasurement. The discount rate, expected long-term rate of return, and mortality rate assumptions have the most significant effect on our net periodic benefit costs associated with these plans. In addition to the effect of changes in our assumptions, the net periodic cost or benefit obligation under our pension and OPEB plans may change due to factors such as plan amendments, actual experience being different from our assumptions, special benefits to terminated employees, and/or changes in benefits provided under the plans. Discount rate - This interest assumption is based on the yield derived from a portfolio of high quality fixed income corporate debt instruments that reasonably match the timing and amounts of projected future benefits for each of our retirement-related benefit plans. The rate is determined at the measurement date. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations and increases our net periodic benefit cost. Long-term rate of return - This assumption is selected from a range of probable return outcomes generated by statistical analysis of the asset portfolio. The market-related value as it relates to our estimate of long-term rate of return equals the fair value of plan assets, determined as of the measurement date. The return on plan assets recognizes all asset gains and losses, including changes in fair value, through the measurement date. Our expectations for the future investment returns of the asset categories are based on a combination of historical market performance, evaluations of investment forecasts obtained from external consultants and economists, and current market yields. The expected return for the total portfolio is calculated based on the plan's current asset holdings. The actual rate of return on plan assets is determined based on the fair value of the plan assets at the beginning and the end of the period, adjusted for contributions and benefit payments. A lower long-term rate of return on plan assets increases our net periodic benefit cost. 47 Investment risk is measured and monitored on an ongoing basis through annual liability measurements, periodic asset/liability studies, and quarterly investment portfolio reviews. Risk tolerance is established through consideration of plan liabilities, plan funded status, and corporate financial condition. We believe our investment portfolios are well diversified by asset class and sector, with no undue risk concentrations in any one category. See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of the investment portfolios for our plans. Mortality rate - This assumption reflects our best estimate, as of the measurement date, of the life expectancies of plan participants in order to determine the expected length of time for benefit payments. We derive our assumptions from industry mortality tables. The weighted average assumptions used in the measurement of our net periodic benefit costs for the years ended December 31 are as follows: Pension Benefits U.S. Plans U.K. Plan OPEB Assumption 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 Discount Rate 4.40 % 4.80 % 2.70 % 3.80 % 4.20 % 4.70 % Expected Long-term Rate of Return on Plan Assets 7.25 % 7.50 % 3.50 % 4.90 % 5.75 % 5.75 % The following illustrates the sensitivity of the below items to a 50 basis point change in the discount rate or the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets: ($ in millions) At or for the Year Ended December 31, 2016 Assumption Change Net Periodic Benefit Cost, Before Tax Benefit Obligation Stockholders' Equity, After Tax Discount Rate + 50 bp $ (2.6 ) $ (174.9 ) $ 117.6 Discount Rate - 50 bp 2.9 196.6 (132.2 ) Expected Long-term Rate of Return on Plan Assets + 50 bp (8.0 ) N/A N/A Expected Long-term Rate of Return on Plan Assets - 50 bp 8.0 N/A N/A Benefit Obligation and Fair Value of Plan Assets During 2016 , the fair value of plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan increased $50.8 million , or 3.6 percent due to a favorable return on assets of approximately 8 percent, partially offset by the payment of benefits and expenses. The fair value of plan assets in our U.K. pension plan increased 28.1 million , or 17.9 percent, due to a favorable return on assets of approximately 20 percent, partially offset by the payment of benefits and expenses. Although our rate of return on plan assets for 2016 exceeded our assumptions used in the measurement of our net periodic benefit costs, we believe our assumptions appropriately reflect the impact of the current economic environment and our expectations for the future investment returns based on the plan's asset allocation. As of December 31, 2016, our pension and OPEB plans have an aggregate unrecognized net actuarial loss of $736.0 million and an unrecognized prior service credit of $11.1 million , which together represent the cumulative liability and asset gains and losses as well as the portion of prior service credits that have not been recognized in pension expense. The unrecognized net actuarial loss for our pension plans, which is $ 746.1 million at December 31, 2016 , will be amortized over the average remaining life expectancy of the plan, which is approximately 25 years for the U.S. plan and 33 years for the U.K. plan, to the extent that it exceeds the 10 percent corridor, as described below. The unrecognized net actuarial gain of $10.1 million for our OPEB plan will be amortized over the average future working life of OPEB plan participants, estimated at four years, to the extent the loss is outside of the corridor. The corridor for the pension and OPEB plans is established based on the greater of 10 percent of the plan assets or 10 percent of the benefit obligation. At December 31, 2016 , $ 506.6 million of the actuarial loss was outside of the corridor for the U.S. plans and 17.2 million was outside of the corridor for the U.K. plan. At December 31, 2016 , none of the actuarial gain was outside of the corridor for the OPEB plan. The amortization of the unrecognized actuarial gain or loss and the unrecognized prior service credit is a component of our net periodic benefit cost and equaled $ 15.8 million , $ 11.6 million , and $ 3.9 million in 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 , respectively. The fair value of plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan was $ 1,454.1 million at December 31, 2016 , compared to $ 1,403.3 million at December 31, 2015 . The plan was in an underfunded position of $ 312.1 million and $ 233.8 48 million at December 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015 , respectively. This year-over-year change was due primarily to the increase in period benefit obligations due to the decrease in discount rate, partially offset by higher than expected asset returns. The fair value of plan assets in our U.K. pension plan was 185.1 million at December 31, 2016 , compared to 157.0 million at December 31, 2015 . The U.K. pension plan was in an overfunded position of 4.3 million and 18.8 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. The fair value of plan assets in our OPEB plan was $ 10.8 million and $ 11.2 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. These assets represent life insurance contracts to fund the life insurance benefit portion of our OPEB plan. Our OPEB plan represents a non-vested, non-guaranteed obligation, and current regulations do not require specific funding levels for these benefits, which are comprised of retiree life, medical, and dental benefits. It is our practice to use general assets to pay medical and dental claims as they come due in lieu of utilizing plan assets for the medical and dental benefit portions of our OPEB plan. See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion. Income Taxes We provide for federal, state, and foreign income taxes currently payable, as well as those deferred due to temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Our accounting for income taxes represents our best estimate of various events and transactions. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws in a multitude of jurisdictions, both domestic and foreign. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits in various jurisdictions, and a material assessment by a governing tax authority could affect profitability. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Significant judgment is required in determining valuation allowances. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we determine that we most likely will not be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance is charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets will be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance is reversed. In establishing a liability for unrecognized tax benefits, assumptions are made in determining whether, and to what extent, a tax position may be sustained. GAAP prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns. The evaluation of a tax position is a two step process. The first step is to determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. The second step is to measure a position that satisfies the recognition threshold at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold but that now satisfy the recognition threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not recognition threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. If a previously recognized tax position is settled for an amount that is different from the amount initially measured, the difference will be recognized as a tax benefit or expense in the period the settlement is effective. Future events, such as changes in tax laws, tax regulations, or interpretations of such laws or regulations, could have an impact on our provision for income tax and our effective tax rate, which could significantly affect the amounts reported in our financial statements. See Note 7 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. 49 Contingent Liabilities On a quarterly basis, we review relevant information with respect to litigation and contingencies to be reflected in our consolidated financial statements. An estimated loss is accrued when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. It is possible that our results of operations or cash flows in a particular period could be materially affected by an ultimate unfavorable outcome of pending litigation or regulatory matters depending, in part, on our results of operations or cash flows for the particular period. See Note 14 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. Accounting Developments For information on new accounting standards and the impact, if any, on our financial position or results of operations, see Note 1 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. 50 Consolidated Operating Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Revenue Premium Income $ 8,357.7 3.4 % $ 8,082.4 3.7 % $ 7,797.2 Net Investment Income 2,459.0 (0.9 ) 2,481.2 (0.4 ) 2,492.2 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 24.2 (155.3 ) (43.8 ) N.M. 16.1 Other Income 205.6 (2.8 ) 211.5 (3.4 ) 219.0 Total Revenue 11,046.5 2.9 10,731.3 2.0 10,524.5 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 6,941.8 2.3 6,782.8 (7.2 ) 7,310.8 Commissions 1,026.7 3.1 996.3 6.5 935.3 Interest and Debt Expense 166.0 8.6 152.8 (8.8 ) 167.5 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (592.4 ) 4.0 (569.7 ) 8.7 (524.0 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 493.0 2.2 482.3 9.4 440.8 Compensation Expense 832.1 (0.4 ) 835.1 1.7 820.9 Other Expenses 831.6 2.2 813.4 (2.1 ) 831.2 Total Benefits and Expenses 9,698.8 2.2 9,493.0 (4.9 ) 9,982.5 Income Before Income Tax 1,347.7 8.8 1,238.3 128.5 542.0 Income Tax 416.3 12.1 371.2 165.3 139.9 Net Income $ 931.4 7.4 $ 867.1 115.6 $ 402.1 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage The comparability of our financial results between years is affected by the fluctuation in the British pound sterling to dollar exchange rate. The functional currency of our U.K. operations is the British pound sterling. In periods when the pound weakens relative to the preceding period, translating pounds into dollars decreases current period results relative to the prior period. In periods when the pound strengthens, translating pounds into dollars increases current period results relative to the prior period. Our weighted average pound/dollar exchange rate was 1.357 , 1.528 , and 1.646 for years ended 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively. If the 2015 and 2014 results for our U.K. operations had been translated at the lower exchange rate of 2016, our operating revenue by segment in 2015 and 2014 would have been lower by approximately $80 million and $135 million, respectively, and our operating income in 2015 and 2014 would have been lower by approximately $25 million and $10 million, respectively. However, it is important to distinguish between translating and converting foreign currency. Except for a limited number of transactions, we do not actually convert pounds into dollars. As a result, we view foreign currency translation as a financial reporting item and not a reflection of operations or profitability in the U.K. We continued to report year-over-year premium growth in 2016 and 2015 in each of our principal operating business segments, as measured in local currency, due to sales growth, premium rate increases, the addition of the dental and vision product offerings, and generally stable to favorable persistency. Premium income continues to decline, as expected, in our Closed Block segment. Net investment income declined slightly in 2016 relative to 2015 due primarily to a decrease in yield on invested assets and the unfavorable impact of the lower foreign currency exchange rate on translated financial results for 2016, partially offset by higher levels of invested assets. Net investment income declined in 2015 relative to 2014 due primarily to a decrease in yield on invested assets and lower income from inflation index-linked bonds in our Unum UK segment, partially offset by higher levels of invested assets and higher miscellaneous investment income, which includes income from bond call premiums, mortgage fees and payoffs, and partnership investments. We recognized $30.5 million of other-than-temporary impairment losses on fixed maturity securities in 2016 compared to losses of $32.4 million and $13.5 million in 2015 and 2014, respectively. We recognized hedge gains of $35.9 million during 2015 associated with the maturity of debt issued by one of our U.K. subsidiaries and $13.1 million during 2014 associated with the early retirement of a portion of that debt. Also included in net realized investment gains and losses were changes in the fair 51 value of an embedded derivative in a modified coinsurance arrangement, which resulted in realized gains (losses) of $40.9 million , $(37.7) million, and $3.3 million in 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively. See Notes 4 and 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion. Overall benefits experience was favorable in 2016 relative to the prior periods, with a consolidated benefit ratio of 83.1 percent in 2016 compared to 83.9 percent in 2015 and 93.8 percent in 2014. Excluding the 2014 reserve adjustment, the benefit ratio for 2014 was 84.8 percent. The underlying benefits experience for each of our operating business segments is discussed more fully in "Segment Results" contained herein in this Item 7. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs increased year-over-year in each of the years presented above due primarily to sales growth. Growth in the level of the deferred asset resulted in higher amortization in each of the years presented, relative to the preceding period. Also affecting the year-over-year comparability of amortization of acquisition costs was the increase in amortization in 2015 due to a higher level of Unum US supplemental and voluntary policy terminations relative to assumptions for certain issue years. Interest and debt expense was higher in 2016 relative to 2015 due primarily to higher levels of outstanding debt during 2016. Interest and debt expense was lower in 2015 relative to the prior year due primarily to $13.2 million of costs incurred in 2014 related to the early retirement of a portion of the debt issued by one of our U.K. subsidiaries. See Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion. Other expenses, including compensation expense, increased in 2016 relative to 2015. However, the premium income growth rate in 2016 more than offset the growth rate in other expenses as we continue our focus on expense management and operating efficiencies, resulting in a decline in the other expense ratio during 2016 relative to the prior year. Other expenses, including compensation expense, decreased in 2015 compared to 2014 primarily due to the impact of the settlement loss recognized in 2014 in conjunction with a pension plan amendment. See Note 9 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our employee benefit plans. Our effective income tax rate for 2016 was 30.9 percent, compared to 30.0 percent in 2015 and 25.8 percent in 2014. Our effective tax rate differs from the U.S. statutory rate of 35 percent primarily due to tax credits and foreign earnings taxed at lower rates than the U.S. statutory rate. Our effective tax rates for 2016 and 2015 were favorably impacted by the enactment of income tax rate reductions by the U.K government. The enactments reduced the net deferred tax liability related to our U.K. operations by $4.5 million in 2016 and $6.5 million in 2015. Our 2015 income tax also includes a reduction in federal income taxes of $6.8 million related to our resolution with the Internal Revenue Service of certain outstanding issues. In 2014, our U.S. earnings included a long-term care reserve charge that resulted in a larger proportion of our 2014 earnings derived from our foreign operations and taxed at the lower rate, therefore reducing our overall effective tax rate. See Note 7 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion. In describing our results, we may at times note certain items and exclude the impact on financial ratios and metrics to enhance the understanding and comparability of our operational performance and the underlying fundamentals, but this exclusion is not an indication that similar items may not recur. We also measure and analyze our segment performance on the basis of "operating revenue" and "operating income" or "operating loss", which differ from total revenue and income before income tax as presented in our consolidated statements of income due to the exclusion of net realized investment gains and losses and non-operating retirement-related gains or losses. These performance measures are in accordance with GAAP guidance for segment reporting, but they should not be viewed as a substitute for total revenue, income before income tax, or net income. See "Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures" contained herein in this Item 7. See also "Segment Results" contained herein in this Item 7 for further discussion of operating and sales results for each of our segments and major product lines. 52 Consolidated Sales Results Shown below are sales results for our three principal operating business segments. (in millions) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Unum US $ 943.8 0.4 % $ 939.6 4.2 % $ 902.1 Unum UK 62.7 13.8 % 55.1 6.2 % 51.9 Colonial Life $ 483.6 10.3 % $ 438.5 6.9 % $ 410.1 Sales shown in the preceding chart generally represent the annualized premium income on new sales which we expect to receive and report as premium income during the next 12 months following or beginning in the initial quarter in which the sale is reported, depending on the effective date of the new sale. Sales do not correspond to premium income reported as revenue in accordance with GAAP. This is because new annualized sales premiums reflect current sales performance and what we expect to recognize as premium income over a 12 month period, while premium income reported in our financial statements is reported on an "as earned" basis rather than an annualized basis and also includes renewals and persistency of in-force policies written in prior years as well as current new sales. Sales, persistency of the existing block of business, employment and salary growth, and the effectiveness of a renewal program are indicators of growth in premium income. Trends in new sales, as well as existing market share, also indicate the potential for growth in our respective markets and the level of market acceptance of price changes and new product offerings. Sales results may fluctuate significantly due to case size and timing of sales submissions. See "Segment Results" as follows for a discussion of sales by segment. 53 Segment Results Our reporting segments are comprised of the following: Unum US, Unum UK, Colonial Life, Closed Block, and Corporate. Financial information for each of our reporting segments is as follows. Unum US Segment The Unum US segment includes group long-term and short-term disability insurance, group life and accidental death and dismemberment products, and supplemental and voluntary lines of business, which are comprised of individual disability, voluntary benefits, and dental and vision products. During the third quarter of 2016, we acquired Starmount, a provider of dental and vision insurance in the U.S. workplace. The acquisition of Starmount did not have a material impact on our operating results or sales for 2016. See "Acquisition of Business" contained herein in this Item 7 and Note 13 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information. Unum US Operating Results Shown below are financial results for the Unum US segment. In the sections following, financial results and key ratios are also presented for the major lines of business within the segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 5,240.9 5.7 % $ 4,960.0 6.4 % $ 4,659.7 Net Investment Income 828.7 (4.2 ) 865.3 (1.5 ) 878.9 Other Income 113.3 (4.9 ) 119.2 (2.4 ) 122.1 Total 6,182.9 4.0 5,944.5 5.0 5,660.7 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 3,624.3 4.2 3,476.7 5.7 3,288.1 Commissions 580.4 3.2 562.2 6.3 528.7 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (314.1 ) 2.2 (307.3 ) 5.0 (292.7 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 275.2 1.1 272.3 9.8 248.1 Other Expenses 1,102.9 1.1 1,090.6 4.5 1,043.6 Total 5,268.7 3.4 5,094.5 5.8 4,815.8 Operating Income $ 914.2 7.6 $ 850.0 0.6 $ 844.9 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 69.2 % 70.1 % 70.6 % Other Expense Ratio 21.0 % 22.0 % 22.4 % Operating Income Ratio 17.4 % 17.1 % 18.1 % 54 Unum US Group Disability Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group disability. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability $ 1,726.6 5.0 % $ 1,644.7 5.9 % $ 1,553.5 Group Short-term Disability 626.1 3.1 607.4 8.8 558.1 Total Premium Income 2,352.7 4.5 2,252.1 6.7 2,111.6 Net Investment Income 479.5 (3.4 ) 496.5 (3.8 ) 515.9 Other Income 91.1 (1.9 ) 92.9 2.1 91.0 Total 2,923.3 2.9 2,841.5 4.5 2,718.5 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,863.8 1.6 1,834.0 5.0 1,746.4 Commissions 178.2 3.5 172.2 6.8 161.2 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (46.4 ) 7.4 (43.2 ) 7.5 (40.2 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 35.9 6.5 33.7 28.1 26.3 Other Expenses 572.1 (0.1 ) 572.4 4.1 550.0 Total 2,603.6 1.3 2,569.1 5.1 2,443.7 Operating Income $ 319.7 17.4 $ 272.4 (0.9 ) $ 274.8 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 79.2 % 81.4 % 82.7 % Other Expense Ratio 24.3 % 25.4 % 26.0 % Operating Income Ratio 13.6 % 12.1 % 13.0 % Persistency: Group Long-term Disability 91.0 % 92.1 % 90.6 % Group Short-term Disability 87.7 % 88.1 % 89.6 % Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Premium income increased compared to 2015, driven primarily by growth in the in-force block due to prior year sales, partially offset by lower persistency. Net investment income was lower relative to 2015 due primarily to a decline in yield on invested assets. Other income, which is comprised primarily of fees from administrative services products, is generally consistent with 2015. Benefits experience was favorable compared to 2015 due primarily to lower claim incidence rates and favorable claim recovery experience in our group long-term disability product line as well as lower prevalence rates in our group short-term disability product line. Our renewal premium rate increases over the past several quarters also contributed to the improvement in the benefit ratio. Partially offsetting the favorable claim experience was a 50 basis point decrease in the discount rate for group long-term disability new claim incurrals which we implemented in the fourth quarter of 2016. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were higher compared to 2015 due to prior year sales growth and the timing of certain sales-related expenses. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs increased relative to 2015 due to growth in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio was favorable to 2015 due to growth in premium income and a continued focus on expense management and operating efficiencies. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Premium income increased compared to 2014, driven by sales growth and premium rate increases, as well as favorable persistency in the group long-term disability product line. Net investment income declined relative to 2014 due to a decrease in the level of invested assets and a decline in yields. Other income increased slightly relative to 2014. 55 Benefits experience was favorable compared to 2014 due to lower claim incidence rates and favorable claim recovery experience in our group long-term disability product line, offset partially by the 50 basis point decrease in the discount rate which we implemented during the fourth quarter of 2014 for group long-term disability new claim incurrals. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were higher relative to 2014 due to sales growth and the corresponding increase in deferrable expenses. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs increased relative to 2014 due to growth in the level of the deferred asset. The growth in premium income during 2015 more than offset the growth in other expenses related to continued investment in the growth of our business, resulting in a decline in the other expense ratio compared to 2014. Unum US Group Life and Accidental Death and Dismemberment Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Life $ 1,410.0 4.6 % $ 1,347.4 6.7 % $ 1,262.3 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 140.3 6.5 131.7 4.6 125.9 Total Premium Income 1,550.3 4.8 1,479.1 6.5 1,388.2 Net Investment Income 113.4 (16.1 ) 135.1 (0.1 ) 135.2 Other Income 4.5 114.3 2.1 50.0 1.4 Total 1,668.2 3.2 1,616.3 6.0 1,524.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,112.6 4.8 1,061.6 8.8 975.8 Commissions 126.8 4.6 121.2 7.0 113.3 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (35.7 ) 7.2 (33.3 ) 6.4 (31.3 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 29.2 11.5 26.2 22.4 21.4 Other Expenses 213.5 (1.0 ) 215.7 5.1 205.2 Total 1,446.4 4.0 1,391.4 8.3 1,284.4 Operating Income $ 221.8 (1.4 ) $ 224.9 (6.4 ) $ 240.4 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 71.8 % 71.8 % 70.3 % Other Expense Ratio 13.8 % 14.6 % 14.8 % Operating Income Ratio 14.3 % 15.2 % 17.3 % Persistency: Group Life 90.7 % 89.2 % 90.8 % Accidental Death & Dismemberment 90.3 % 89.8 % 91.1 % Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Premium income increased compared to 2015 due to sales growth and improved persistency. Net investment income was lower compared to 2015 due primarily to a decrease in the level of invested assets. Benefits experience was consistent with 2015, with favorable benefits experience under group life waiver of premium benefits generally offset by a higher average claim size in accidental death & dismemberment. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were higher compared to 2015 due to sales growth. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs increased relative to 2015 due to growth in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio was favorable to 2015 due to growth in premium income and a continued focus on expense management. 56 Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Premium income increased compared to 2014 primarily due to growth in the in-force block resulting from prior year sales, partially offset by lower persistency. Net investment income was generally consistent with 2014, with an increase in the level of invested assets offset by a decline in yield. Benefits experience was unfavorable compared to 2014 due to a higher average paid claim size in both group life and accidental death and dismemberment. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were higher compared to 2014 due to strong sales in the second half of 2014 and a corresponding increase in deferrable commissions which were expensed during the applicable periods of 2015. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs increased compared to 2014 due to growth in the level of the deferred asset. The growth in premium income during 2015 more than offset the growth in other expenses related to continued investment in the growth of our business, resulting in a slight decline in the other expense ratio compared to 2014. Unum US Supplemental and Voluntary Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US supplemental and voluntary product lines. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Premium Income Individual Disability $ 480.3 0.3 % $ 478.9 2.7 % $ 466.1 Voluntary Benefits 796.5 6.2 749.9 8.1 693.8 Dental and Vision 61.1 Total Premium Income 1,337.9 8.9 1,228.8 5.9 1,159.9 Net Investment Income 235.8 0.9 233.7 2.6 227.8 Other Income 17.7 (26.9 ) 24.2 (18.5 ) 29.7 Total 1,591.4 7.0 1,486.7 4.9 1,417.4 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 647.9 11.5 581.1 2.7 565.9 Commissions 275.4 2.5 268.8 5.7 254.2 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (232.0 ) 0.5 (230.8 ) 4.3 (221.2 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 210.1 (1.1 ) 212.4 6.0 200.4 Other Expenses 317.3 4.9 302.5 4.9 288.4 Total 1,218.7 7.5 1,134.0 4.3 1,087.7 Operating Income $ 372.7 5.7 $ 352.7 7.0 $ 329.7 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratios: Individual Disability 52.9 % 51.8 % 51.6 % Voluntary Benefits 44.3 % 44.4 % 46.9 % Dental and Vision 66.6 % % % Other Expense Ratio 23.7 % 24.6 % 24.9 % Operating Income Ratio 27.9 % 28.7 % 28.4 % Persistency: Individual Disability 91.1 % 90.3 % 90.0 % Voluntary Benefits 76.9 % 75.9 % 77.6 % Dental and Vision 84.6 % % % 57 Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Premium income was higher compared to 2015, driven by the addition of the dental and vision product offering as a result of the Starmount acquisition during the third quarter of 2016 as well as growth in the in-force block of voluntary benefits products due to sales and favorable persistency. Premium income for our individual disability product line was generally consistent with 2015, with growth in premium income mostly offset by the impact of a reinsurance agreement we entered into during the fourth quarter of 2016 whereby we ceded 30 percent of the risk for certain blocks of our individual disability business on a non-proportional modified coinsurance basis. Net investment income was slightly higher compared to 2015 due to growth in the level of invested assets, partially offset by a decline in yield on invested assets. Other income decreased relative to 2015 due primarily to the expected decline in surrender fees as our interest sensitive life products mature. Benefits experience for the individual disability product line was less favorable compared to 2015 due primarily to a higher average claim size and lower claim recoveries. Benefits experience for voluntary benefits was generally consistent with 2015, with favorable experience in our disability and critical illness product lines offset somewhat by less favorable experience in our life product line. The dental and vision product line will typically have a higher benefit ratio than the other product lines reported in our supplemental and voluntary line of business, but the benefits experience since acquisition was consistent with expectations. Commissions were higher compared to 2015 due primarily to the addition of the dental and vision product line, partially offset by commissions ceded in the individual disability product line related to the fourth quarter of 2016 reinsurance agreement. The deferral of acquisition costs was generally consistent with the prior year. Amortization of deferred acquisition costs declined year over year due to a higher level of policy terminations in 2015 relative to assumptions for certain issue years within certain product lines. Our other expense ratio improved relative to 2015 as we continue our focus on expense management and operating efficiencies. We had goodwill of $271.1 million at December 31, 2016, none of which is currently believed to be at risk for future impairment. The increase in goodwill during 2016 is attributable to the acquisition of Starmount. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Premium income was higher compared to 2014 due to sales growth, partially offset by a decline in persistency in the voluntary benefits product line. Net investment income was higher relative to 2014 due to growth in the level of invested assets and higher miscellaneous investment income, partially offset by a decrease in yield on invested assets. Other income decreased relative to 2014 due primarily to an expected decline in surrender fees as our interest sensitive products mature. Benefits experience for the individual disability product line was generally consistent with 2014. Benefits experience for voluntary benefits was favorable compared to 2014 due primarily to improved claim experience in our disability product line and a release of active life reserves in the critical illness product line resulting from a higher level of policy terminations during 2015 relative to 2014. Commissions and deferral of acquisition costs were higher compared to 2014 due primarily to sales growth. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs was higher compared to 2014 due primarily to growth in the level of the deferred asset and the impact of a higher level of policy terminations in 2015 relative to assumptions for certain issue years within certain product lines. The growth in premium income during 2015 more than offset the growth in other expenses related to continued investment in the growth of our business, resulting in a slight decline in the other expense ratio compared to 2014. 58 Sales (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Sales by Product Group Disability and Group Life and AD&D Group Long-term Disability $ 217.8 (9.1 )% $ 239.7 7.2 % $ 223.6 Group Short-term Disability 114.6 (4.3 ) 119.7 0.8 118.8 Group Life and AD&D 270.1 8.0 250.1 (5.6 ) 264.8 Subtotal 602.5 (1.1 ) 609.5 0.4 607.2 Supplemental and Voluntary Individual Disability 65.1 (3.6 ) 67.5 18.8 56.8 Voluntary Benefits 261.7 (0.3 ) 262.6 10.3 238.1 Dental and Vision 14.5 Subtotal 341.3 3.4 330.1 11.9 294.9 Total Sales $ 943.8 0.4 $ 939.6 4.2 $ 902.1 Sales by Market Sector Group Disability and Group Life and AD&D Core Market (< 2,000 employees) $ 378.1 (6.7 )% $ 405.4 0.9 % $ 401.7 Large Case Market 224.4 9.9 204.1 (0.7 ) 205.5 Subtotal 602.5 (1.1 ) 609.5 0.4 607.2 Supplemental and Voluntary 341.3 3.4 330.1 11.9 294.9 Total Sales $ 943.8 0.4 $ 939.6 4.2 $ 902.1 Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Group disability sales decreased compared to 2015 due to lower sales to new customers in both the core market segment, which we define as employee groups with fewer than 2,000 employees, and in the large case market segment, partially offset by an increase in sales to existing customers. Sales for group life and accidental death and dismemberment increased compared to 2015 , primarily driven by higher sales in the large case market. The sales mix in the group market sector for 2016 was approximately 63 percent core market and 37 percent large case market. Individual disability sales, which are primarily concentrated in the multi-life market, decreased compared to 2015 due to lower sales to large case customers. Voluntary benefits sales were generally consistent with 2015 , with an increase in sales in the core market offset by lower sales to new customers in the large case market. We also reported sales of $14.5 million for the Starmount dental and vision products for the period subsequent to the date of acquisition. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Group disability sales increased compared to 2014 due to higher sales to existing customers in both the core market and in the large case market. Sales for group life and accidental death and dismemberment declined compared to 2014 due to lower sales to new customers, partially offset by higher sales to existing customers in the core market. The sales mix in the group market sector for 2015 was approximately 67 percent core market and 33 percent large case market, generally consistent with the level of 2014 . Individual disability sales increased due primarily to sales to new customers. Sales of voluntary benefits were higher compared to 2014 , with increases in both core and large case market sales. 59 Segment Outlook We remain committed to offering consumers a broad set of financial protection benefit products at the worksite. During 2017, we will focus on client expansion, consumer engagement, and collaborative partnerships, all underpinned by strong risk management. We intend to broaden our client relationships and build additional partnerships to open new digital channels. We also aim to enhance the customer experience through new product offerings such as dental and vision, investing in processes with a focus on quality and simplification, and the utilization of technology to enhance enrollment, underwriting, and online claims. We believe our active client management and differentiated integrated customer experience across our product lines will continue to enable us to grow our market. We anticipate solid operating income growth in 2017, with disciplined sales and premium growth, consistent risk management, and improving operational efficiency. We believe further improvement in our premium and sales growth rates will occur if overall economic conditions continue to improve and/or industry pricing levels increase to better align with our view of adequate premium rates. We believe future profit margin improvement is achievable, driven primarily by our continued product mix shift, expense efficiencies, and consistent operating effectiveness. Underpinning our strategy is our continued commitment to risk management discipline, talent development, and our core values. The low interest rate environment continues to place pressure on our profit margins by impacting net investment income yields as well discount rates on our insurance liabilities. Our net investment income may be impacted, either favorably or unfavorably, by fluctuations in miscellaneous investment income. As part of our continued pricing discipline and our reserving strategy, we continuously monitor emerging interest rate experience and adjust our pricing and reserve discount rates, as appropriate. We believe the group long-term disability reserve discount rate reduction during 2016 provides a strong balance sheet position for 2017. We currently expect our group disability benefit ratio for full year 2017 to be generally consistent with the level of 2016, although unfavorable economic conditions could lead to a higher rate of claim incidence or lower levels of claim recoveries. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. 60 Unum UK Segment The Unum UK segment includes insurance for group long-term disability, group life, and supplemental lines of business which include dental, individual disability, and critical illness products. Unum UK's products are sold primarily in the United Kingdom through field sales personnel and independent brokers and consultants. Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Unum UK segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability $ 355.2 (10.6 )% $ 397.4 (5.1 )% $ 418.9 Group Life 105.7 (13.0 ) 121.5 (8.8 ) 133.2 Supplemental 68.4 19.4 57.3 4.0 55.1 Total Premium Income 529.3 (8.1 ) 576.2 (5.1 ) 607.2 Net Investment Income 118.1 (5.4 ) 124.9 (17.3 ) 151.0 Other Income 0.2 N.M. Total 647.6 (7.6 ) 701.1 (7.5 ) 758.2 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 367.4 (6.9 ) 394.8 (8.4 ) 431.0 Commissions 38.9 (6.9 ) 41.8 (2.3 ) 42.8 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (8.2 ) (14.6 ) (9.6 ) (8.6 ) (10.5 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 9.7 (14.2 ) 11.3 (9.6 ) 12.5 Other Expenses 111.2 (9.0 ) 122.2 (9.2 ) 134.6 Total 519.0 (7.4 ) 560.5 (8.2 ) 610.4 Operating Income $ 128.6 (8.5 ) $ 140.6 (4.9 ) $ 147.8 61 Foreign Currency Translation The functional currency of Unum UK is the British pound sterling. Unum UK's premium income, net investment income, claims, and expenses are received or paid in pounds, and we hold pound-denominated assets to support Unum UK's pound-denominated policy reserves and liabilities. We translate Unum UK's pound-denominated financial statement items into dollars for our consolidated financial reporting. We translate income statement items using an average exchange rate for the reporting period, and we translate balance sheet items using the exchange rate at the end of the period. We report unrealized foreign currency translation gains and losses in accumulated other comprehensive income in our consolidated balance sheets. Fluctuations in the pound to dollar exchange rate have an effect on Unum UK's reported financial results and our consolidated financial results. In periods when the pound strengthens relative to the preceding period, translating pounds into dollars increases current period results relative to the prior period. In periods when the pound weakens, translating pounds into dollars decreases current period results relative to the prior period. The discussion of financial and sales results as follows is based on local currency. (in millions of pounds, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Disability 262.0 0.8 % 259.9 2.2 % 254.4 Group Life 78.0 (1.9 ) 79.5 (1.6 ) 80.8 Supplemental 50.5 34.7 37.5 12.3 33.4 Total Premium Income 390.5 3.6 376.9 2.3 368.6 Net Investment Income 87.3 7.0 81.6 (10.9 ) 91.6 Other Income 0.1 N.M. N.M. 0.1 Total 477.9 4.2 458.5 (0.4 ) 460.3 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 270.9 5.0 258.1 (1.3 ) 261.4 Commissions 28.9 5.5 27.4 5.4 26.0 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (6.1 ) (3.2 ) (6.3 ) (1.6 ) (6.4 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 7.2 (2.7 ) 7.4 (2.6 ) 7.6 Other Expenses 82.2 2.9 79.9 (2.4 ) 81.9 Total 383.1 4.5 366.5 (1.1 ) 370.5 Operating Income 94.8 3.0 92.0 2.4 89.8 Weighted Average Pound/Dollar Exchange Rate 1.357 1.528 1.646 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 69.4 % 68.5 % 70.9 % Other Expense Ratio 21.0 % 21.2 % 22.2 % Operating Income Ratio 24.3 % 24.4 % 24.4 % Persistency: Group Long-term Disability 89.5 % 89.2 % 90.1 % Group Life 81.3 % 80.0 % 76.0 % Supplemental 89.9 % 87.7 % 86.6 % 62 Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Premium income was higher compared to 2015 due primarily to growth in the supplemental product line resulting from the acquisition of the dental product offering in September 2015. Sales growth and favorable persistency in the group long-term disability product line also contributed to the growth in premium income. Net investment income increased compared to 2015 due primarily to growth in the level of invested assets and higher investment income from inflation index-linked bonds. We invest in inflation index-linked bonds to support the claim reserves associated with certain of our group policies that provide for inflation-linked increases in benefits. The year-over-year increase in net investment income attributable to these index-linked bonds was more than offset by changes in the reserves for future claims payments related to the inflation-linked group long-term disability and group life policies. Overall benefits experience was unfavorable compared to 2015 due primarily to an increase in the claim incidence rate in our group life product line. Group long-term disability benefits experience was slightly favorable compared to 2015 due primarily to a higher level of net claim settlements and lower claims incidence. Benefits experience for our supplemental line of business was less favorable due to a higher average claim size in our group critical illness product line and the addition of the dental product line, which typically has a higher benefit ratio than other product lines in our supplemental line of business. Commissions were higher compared to 2015 due primarily to sales growth in 2016. The deferral of acquisition costs and amortization of deferred acquisition costs were generally consistent in 2016 compared to 2015 . The other expense ratio was lower relative to 2015 due to our continued focus on expense management. We had goodwill of 29.4 million, or $36.3 million, at December 31, 2016, none of which is currently believed to be at risk for future impairment. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Premium income was higher compared to 2014 due primarily to growth in our in-force group long-term disability product line resulting from prior year sales growth and stable persistency and in the supplemental product line resulting from the acquisition of the dental product offering. Net investment income declined compared to 2014 due primarily to lower income from inflation index-linked bonds. The year-over-year decrease in net investment income attributable to these index-linked bonds was largely offset by a more favorable year-over-year change in the reserves for future claims payments related to the inflation-linked group long-term disability and group life policies. Benefits experience was favorable compared to 2014 due as a result of favorable experience in both the group long-term disability and group life product lines. The favorable group long-term disability benefits experience was due primarily to favorable claim recoveries, partially offset by unfavorable mortality experience. The favorable group life experience was due to a lower claim incidence rate and a lower average claim size. Commissions were higher compared to 2014 due primarily to sales growth in 2015. The deferral of acquisition costs and amortization of deferred acquisition costs were generally consistent compared to 2014. The other expense ratio decreased in 2015 relative to 2014 due to our focus on expense management. 63 Sales (in millions of dollars and pounds) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Sales by Product Group Long-term Disability $ 50.2 (6.0 )% $ 53.4 (7.0 )% $ 57.4 Group Life 23.8 (7.4 ) 25.7 8.0 23.8 Supplemental 10.5 110.0 5.0 28.2 3.9 Total Sales $ 84.5 0.5 $ 84.1 (1.2 ) $ 85.1 Sales by Market Sector Group Long-term Disability and Group Life Core Market (< 500 employees) $ 42.0 (5.2 )% $ 44.3 4.2 % $ 42.5 Large Case Market 32.0 (8.0 ) 34.8 (10.1 ) 38.7 Subtotal 74.0 (6.4 ) 79.1 (2.6 ) 81.2 Supplemental 10.5 110.0 5.0 28.2 3.9 Total Sales $ 84.5 0.5 $ 84.1 (1.2 ) $ 85.1 Sales by Product Group Long-term Disability 37.2 6.3 % 35.0 (0.3 )% 35.1 Group Life 17.8 6.0 16.8 16.7 14.4 Supplemental 7.7 133.3 3.3 37.5 2.4 Total Sales 62.7 13.8 55.1 6.2 51.9 Sales by Market Sector Group Long-term Disability and Group Life Core Market (< 500 employees) 31.2 7.6 % 29.0 12.4 % 25.8 Large Case Market 23.8 4.4 22.8 (3.8 ) 23.7 Subtotal 55.0 6.2 51.8 4.6 49.5 Supplemental 7.7 133.3 3.3 37.5 2.4 Total Sales 62.7 13.8 55.1 6.2 51.9 Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Group long-term disability sales increased compared to 2015 due to higher sales to new customers in our core market, or employee groups with fewer than 500 employees, and higher sales to existing customers in our large case market. Group life sales increased compared to 2015 due to higher sales to existing customers in both the core and large case markets, partially offset by a decline in sales to new customers in our large case market. Supplemental sales increased compared to 2015 due primarily to the addition of sales related to our dental product offering as well as higher sales in our group critical illness product line. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Sales in group long-term disability were generally consistent compared to 2014 . In the group long-term disability core market sales increased in 2015 relative to 2014 due primarily to sales to new customers. Sales in the group long-term disability large case market were lower due to a decline in sales to existing customers partially offset by higher sales to new customers. Group life sales increased compared to 2014 due to higher sales to new customers in both the core and large case markets, partially offset by a decline in sales to existing customers. Supplemental sales were higher relative to 2014 due primarily to higher sales in our group critical illness and individual disability product lines. 64 Segment Outlook We remain committed to driving growth in the U.K. market, and during 2017 we will continue to build on those capabilities that we believe will generate growth and profitability in our businesses. Expanding our group long-term disability market position remains a significant opportunity and priority. Our key priorities in 2017 include the implementation of price increases across interest sensitive product lines while maintaining solid persistency results, continuing to follow a disciplined approach to new sales activity in the competitive pricing environment. We intend to accelerate growth in non-interest sensitive product lines such as group life, critical illness, and dental. We will expand our distribution and build marketing and digital capabilities which we believe will drive sustainable growth. We are simplifying our processes and operations to deliver efficiencies and maintain service levels. We will remain focused on risk discipline and putting our customers first. We may see some near-term dampening of growth in Unum UK due to the current disruption and uncertainty in the U.K. economy as a result of the referendum by the U.K. to withdraw from the EU. The magnitude and longevity of potential negative economic impacts on our growth will depend on the agreements reached by the U.K. and EU as a result of exit negotiations and the resulting response of the U.K. marketplace. We anticipate returning to more normal levels of premium growth when economic conditions improve and there are higher levels of employment, increases in corporate payrolls, and expansion of benefit spending. We expect the lower interest rate environment to continue to have a negative impact on our growth expectations in the near-term, and unfavorable economic conditions may also lead to a higher rate of claim incidence, lower levels of claim recoveries, or lower claim discount rates. As part of our continued pricing discipline and our reserving strategy, we continuously monitor emerging interest rate experience and adjust our pricing and reserve discount rates, as appropriate. We believe the current low levels of inflation in the U.K. may adversely impact our index-linked net investment income, with an expected corresponding reduction in the cost of benefits. There are no indications currently that capital requirements for our U.K. operations will change, but economic conditions may in the near term cause volatility in our solvency ratios. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. 65 Colonial Life Segment The Colonial Life segment includes insurance for accident, sickness, and disability products, life products, and cancer and critical illness products issued primarily by Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company and marketed to employees, on both a group and an individual basis, at the workplace through an independent contractor agency sales force and brokers. Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Colonial Life segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Premium Income Accident, Sickness, and Disability $ 830.0 5.2 % $ 789.0 3.8 % $ 759.8 Life 273.8 8.5 252.4 8.9 231.8 Cancer and Critical Illness 313.3 5.4 297.2 5.4 282.1 Total Premium Income 1,417.1 5.9 1,338.6 5.1 1,273.7 Net Investment Income 141.5 (2.7 ) 145.4 (0.1 ) 145.5 Other Income 1.2 N.M. 0.1 0.1 Total 1,559.8 5.1 1,484.1 4.6 1,419.3 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 726.4 6.4 683.0 3.4 660.6 Commissions 313.6 6.8 293.5 11.9 262.3 Deferral of Acquisition Costs (270.1 ) 6.8 (252.8 ) 14.5 (220.8 ) Amortization of Deferred Acquisition Costs 208.1 4.7 198.7 10.3 180.2 Other Expenses 267.6 5.9 252.6 6.1 238.0 Total 1,245.6 6.0 1,175.0 4.9 1,120.3 Operating Income $ 314.2 1.6 $ 309.1 3.4 $ 299.0 Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Benefit Ratio 51.3 % 51.0 % 51.9 % Other Expense Ratio 18.9 % 18.9 % 18.7 % Operating Income Ratio 22.2 % 23.1 % 23.5 % Persistency: Accident, Sickness, and Disability 75.6 % 74.8 % 75.5 % Life 85.0 % 84.9 % 85.2 % Cancer and Critical Illness 82.9 % 81.2 % 83.5 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Premium income increased in 2016 relative to 2015 as a result of sales growth and favorable persistency in all lines of business. Net investment income decreased relative to the prior year, due to a decline in yield and lower miscellaneous investment income, partially offset by an increase in the level of invested assets. Benefits experience was less favorable in 2016 compared to 2015 due to higher claim incidence rates in the life line of business, partially offset by improved claims experience in the accident, sickness, and disability and the cancer and critical illness product lines. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were higher relative to 2015 due to an increase in deferrable expenses related to sales growth. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs increased compared to the prior year due primarily to growth in 66 the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio was consistent with 2015 as the growth rate in expenses was commensurate with our premium growth rate. We had goodwill of $27.7 million at December 31, 2016 related to the acquisition of Starmount, none of which is currently believed to be at risk for future impairment. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Premium income increased relative to 2014 as a result of sales growth in all lines of business, partially offset by a decline in persistency. Net investment income was generally consistent in 2015 relative to 2014, with an increase in the level of invested assets offset by a decline in yield and lower miscellaneous investment income. Benefits experience was favorable compared to 2014 due to favorable incurred benefits in the accident, sickness, and disability product line and the release of active life reserves in the cancer and critical illness product lines related to policy terminations. Commissions and the deferral of acquisition costs were higher relative to 2014 due to an increase in deferrable expenses related to sales growth. The amortization of deferred acquisition costs increased compared to 2014 due primarily to growth in the level of the deferred asset. The other expense ratio was slightly higher compared to 2014 due primarily to continued investment in our business. Sales (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Sales by Product Accident, Sickness, and Disability $ 310.6 12.5 % $ 276.1 5.9 % $ 260.7 Life 94.0 9.8 85.6 8.6 78.8 Cancer and Critical Illness 79.0 2.9 76.8 8.8 70.6 Total Sales $ 483.6 10.3 $ 438.5 6.9 $ 410.1 Sales by Market Sector Commercial Core Market (< 1,000 employees) $ 309.0 6.3 % $ 290.8 5.5 % $ 275.6 Large Case Market 59.8 10.3 54.2 1.9 53.2 Subtotal 368.8 6.9 345.0 4.9 328.8 Public Sector 114.8 22.8 93.5 15.0 81.3 Total Sales $ 483.6 10.3 $ 438.5 6.9 $ 410.1 Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 We reported year-over-year sales growth in both new and existing customer account sales for 2016. By market sector, commercial market sales increased due to higher new and existing customer account sales in both the core market, which we define as accounts with fewer than 1,000 employees, and the large case market. The growth in our public sector market for 2016 was primarily attributable to existing customer account sales. The number of new accounts increased 17.3 percent in 2016 compared to 2015 , and the average new case size decreased 5.9 percent. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Sales were higher in 2015 compared to 2014 due to growth in new and existing customer account sales. Commercial market sales increased compared to 2014 due to higher new and existing customer account sales in the core market and higher existing customer account sales in the large case market. The growth in our public sector market for 2015 was attributable to new and existing customer account sales. The number of new accounts increased 10.0 percent in 2015 compared to 2014 , and the average new case size decreased 7.5 percent. 67 Segment Outlook We remain committed to providing employees and their families with simple, modern, and personal benefit solutions. During 2017, we intend to focus on expanding our distribution, introducing new products and services, enhancing the customer experience, and investing in new solutions to further improve productivity. We believe there is significant opportunity for growth in our core market, particularly those employers with fewer than 100 employees. This market is currently underserved, and we believe having a large national distribution system is critical to reaching those markets. We intend to focus on accelerating growth during 2017 through territory expansion, territory growth, and persistency investments. We believe our distribution system, enrollment capabilities, public sector expertise, and ability to serve all market sizes position us well for future growth. We expect to see continued favorable sales and premium growth trends in 2017. The lower interest rate environment will continue to have an unfavorable impact on our profit margins, and volatility in miscellaneous investment income is likely to continue. We expect our annual benefit ratio for 2017 to be generally consistent with the level of 2016. While we believe our underlying profitability will remain strong, current economic conditions and increasing competition in the voluntary workplace market are seen as external risks to achievement of our business plans. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. 68 Closed Block Segment The Closed Block segment consists of individual disability, group and individual long-term care, and other insurance products no longer actively marketed. The individual disability line of business in this segment generally consists of policies we sold prior to the mid-1990s and entirely discontinued selling in 2004, other than update features contractually allowable on existing policies. We discontinued offering individual long-term care in 2009 and group long-term care in 2012. Other insurance products include group pension, individual life and corporate-owned life insurance, reinsurance pools and management operations, and other miscellaneous product lines. Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Closed Block segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Premium Income Individual Disability $ 521.9 (8.8 )% $ 572.4 (8.4 )% $ 624.8 Long-term Care 643.9 1.6 633.5 0.4 630.9 All Other 4.6 170.6 1.7 88.9 0.9 Total Premium Income 1,170.4 (3.1 ) 1,207.6 (3.9 ) 1,256.6 Net Investment Income 1,352.2 2.4 1,320.0 3.0 1,281.5 Other Income 86.0 (3.7 ) 89.3 (2.7 ) 91.8 Total 2,608.6 (0.3 ) 2,616.9 (0.5 ) 2,629.9 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 2,223.7 (0.2 ) 2,228.3 (24.0 ) 2,931.1 Commissions 93.8 (5.1 ) 98.8 (2.7 ) 101.5 Interest and Debt Expense 6.9 4.5 6.6 (9.6 ) 7.3 Other Expenses 154.7 (5.7 ) 164.1 (2.4 ) 168.2 Total 2,479.1 (0.7 ) 2,497.8 (22.1 ) 3,208.1 Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses 129.5 8.7 119.1 120.6 (578.2 ) Long-term Care Reserve Increase 698.2 Operating Income $ 129.5 8.7 $ 119.1 (0.8 ) $ 120.0 Interest Adjusted Loss Ratios: Individual Disability 83.6 % 82.8 % 83.6 % Long-term Care 91.1 % 87.6 % 196.6 % Long-term Care Excluding the Reserve Increase % % 85.9 % Operating Ratios (% of Premium Income): Other Expense Ratio 13.2 % 13.6 % 13.4 % Income (Loss) Ratio 11.1 % 9.9 % (46.0 )% Operating Income Ratio 11.1 % 9.9 % 9.5 % Persistency: Individual Disability 90.9 % 90.9 % 91.3 % Long-term Care 94.8 % 95.7 % 95.4 % 69 Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Premium income for individual disability decreased compared to 2015 due to expected policy terminations and maturities. Premium income for long-term care increased due to rate increases, partially offset by policy terminations. We continue to file requests with various state insurance departments for premium rate increases on certain of our individual and group long-term care policies. The rate increases reflect current interest rates and claim experience, higher expected future claims, longevity, persistency, and other factors related to pricing long-term care coverage. In states for which a rate increase is submitted and approved, we routinely provide customers options for coverage changes or other approaches that might fit their current financial and insurance needs. Net investment income was higher relative to 2015 due to increased invested asset levels and higher miscellaneous investment income. Other income, which includes the underlying results of certain blocks of individual disability reinsured business and the net investment income of portfolios held by those ceding companies to support the block we have reinsured, was lower compared to 2015 primarily due to lower investment income on those investment portfolios driven by a decrease in the level of invested assets. Individual disability benefits experience was unfavorable relative to 2015 due to unfavorable mortality experience, lower recoveries, and a reduction in the claim reserve discount rate to recognize the impact on future portfolio yields from the higher than normal level of bond tenders and calls experienced during 2016. Long-term care benefits experience was unfavorable relative to the prior year due to higher submitted claims as well as the unfavorable impact of a large group case moving to an individual policy ported status during 2016. Interest and debt expense was slightly higher compared to 2015 due to increases in the underlying floating rate for the outstanding debt issued by Northwind Holdings, LLC (Northwind Holdings), partially offset by a lower level of outstanding debt resulting from principal repayments. The other expense ratio was lower than 2015 due to lower litigation expenses and our continued focus on operating effectiveness and expense management. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Premium income for individual disability decreased compared to 2014 due to expected policy terminations and maturities. Premium income for long-term care increased slightly due to rate increases and stable persistency. Net investment income was higher relative to 2014 due to increased invested asset levels and higher miscellaneous investment income, partially offset by a decrease in yield on invested assets. Other income was lower compared to 2014 primarily due to lower investment income from the investment portfolios held by the ceding companies. Individual disability benefits experience was favorable relative to 2014 primarily due to favorable mortality. Long-term care benefits experience was favorable relative to the prior year due to the 2014 reserve increase, as previously discussed. Excluding this reserve increase, long-term care benefits experience was unfavorable compared to 2014 due to less favorable development in active life reserves as a result of higher persistency. Interest and debt expense was lower than 2014 due to principal repayments on the outstanding debt issued by Northwind Holdings. The other expense ratio was generally consistent with 2014. 70 Segment Outlook Our strategy for our Closed Block remains substantially unchanged. During 2017, we intend to continue our focus on long-term care premium rate increases and the offer of policyholder options, operational effectiveness, financial analysis, and capital management. Despite continued anticipated premium rate increases in our long-term care business, we expect overall premium income and operating revenue to decline over time as these closed blocks of business wind down. We will likely experience volatility in net investment income due to fluctuations of miscellaneous investment income. We expect the low interest rate environment to continue to place pressure on our earnings and the adequacy of our reserves. We continuously monitor key indicators to assess our risks and attempt to adjust our business plans accordingly. Profitability of our long-tailed products is affected by claims experience related to mortality and morbidity, investment returns, premium rate increases, and persistency. We believe that the interest adjusted loss ratios for the individual disability and long-term care lines of business will be relatively flat over the long term, but these product lines may continue to experience quarterly volatility, particularly in the near term for our long-term care product lines as our claim block matures. We also believe the implementation of our long-term care rate increases contributed to higher claim submissions and may continue to do so in the near term. Claim resolution rates, which measure the resolution of claims from recovery, deaths, settlements, and benefit expirations, are very sensitive to operational and external factors and can be volatile. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period. It is possible that variability in any of our reserve assumptions, including, but not limited to, interest rates, mortality, morbidity, premium rate increases, benefit change elections, and persistency, could result in a material impact on the adequacy of our reserves, including adjustments to reserves established under loss recognition. 71 Corporate Segment The Corporate segment includes investment income on corporate assets not specifically allocated to a line of business, interest expense on corporate debt other than non-recourse debt, and certain other corporate income and expense not allocated to a line of business. Operating Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2016 % Change 2015 % Change 2014 Operating Revenue Net Investment Income $ 18.5 (27.7 )% $ 25.6 (27.5 )% $ 35.3 Other Income 4.9 69.0 2.9 (42.0 ) 5.0 Total 23.4 (17.9 ) 28.5 (29.3 ) 40.3 Interest and Other Expenses 170.1 11.0 153.3 (2.9 ) 157.9 Operating Loss Including Costs Related to Early Retirement of Debt (146.7 ) (17.5 ) (124.8 ) (6.1 ) (117.6 ) Costs Related to Early Retirement of Debt (100.0 ) 13.2 Operating Loss $ (146.7 ) (17.5 ) $ (124.8 ) (19.5 ) $ (104.4 ) Year Ended December 31, 2016 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2015 Net investment income was lower relative to 2015 due primarily to the decrease in the yield on invested assets and lower miscellaneous investment income. Interest and other expenses were higher relative to 2015 due primarily to higher levels of outstanding debt and expenses related to the acquisition of Starmount. Year Ended December 31, 2015 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2014 Net investment income was lower relative to 2014 due primarily to lower levels of invested assets. Interest and other expenses decreased relative to 2014 due to $13.2 million of costs incurred in 2014 related to the early retirement of a portion of the debt issued by one of our U.K. subsidiaries. The remaining balance on the debt matured in 2015. Partially offsetting this favorable year-over-year comparison were higher legal expenses incurred during 2015. Segment Outlook We expect the low interest rate environment to continue to place pressure on investment income. We are currently holding capital at our insurance subsidiaries and holding companies at levels that exceed our long-term requirements, and we expect to continue to generate excess capital on an annual basis through our statutory earnings. While we intend to maintain our disciplined approach to risk management, we believe we are well positioned with substantial flexibility to preserve our capital strength and at the same time explore opportunities to deploy the excess capital that is generated. 72 Investments Overview Our investment portfolio is well diversified by type of investment and industry sector. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations and allow us to hold our securities through periods where significant decreases in fair value occur. We believe our emphasis on risk management in our investment portfolio, including credit and interest rate management, has positioned us well and generally reduced the volatility in our results. We have a formal investment policy that includes overall quality and diversification objectives and establishes limits by asset class, investment rating, and single issuer. The majority of our investments are in investment-grade publicly traded securities. This ensures the desired liquidity and preserves the capital value of our portfolios, although due to the long-term nature of our insurance liabilities we are also able to invest in less liquid investments to obtain superior returns within the limits of our investment policy. Our asset mix guidelines and limits are established by us, reviewed by the risk and finance committee of Unum Group's board of directors, and approved by the boards of directors of our insurance subsidiaries. We review our policies and guidelines annually, or more frequently if deemed necessary, and recommend adjustments as appropriate. See "Critical Accounting Estimates" contained herein in this Item 7 for further discussion of our valuation of investments. Fixed Maturity Securities The fair values and associated unrealized gains and losses of our fixed maturity securities portfolio, by industry classification, are as follows: Fixed Maturity Securities - By Industry Classification As of December 31, 2016 (in millions of dollars) Classification Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain Fair Value of Fixed Maturity Securities with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Fair Value of Fixed Maturity Securities with Gross Unrealized Gain Gross Unrealized Gain Basic Industry $ 2,580.5 $ 191.1 $ 488.3 $ 23.8 $ 2,092.2 $ 214.9 Capital Goods 4,218.6 426.5 527.2 16.8 3,691.4 443.3 Communications 3,032.1 359.4 397.7 24.1 2,634.4 383.5 Consumer Cyclical 1,413.4 132.2 128.9 2.8 1,284.5 135.0 Consumer Non-Cyclical 6,510.8 606.1 1,222.1 53.6 5,288.7 659.7 Energy 5,016.4 482.4 696.7 35.0 4,319.7 517.4 Financial Institutions 3,269.9 251.7 412.1 12.6 2,857.8 264.3 Mortgage/Asset-Backed 2,230.4 125.5 514.0 9.2 1,716.4 134.7 Sovereigns 914.7 199.9 914.7 199.9 Technology 1,579.3 78.5 324.6 7.8 1,254.7 86.3 Transportation 1,888.1 235.1 216.8 7.7 1,671.3 242.8 U.S. Government Agencies and Municipalities 3,540.4 469.6 265.0 8.3 3,275.4 477.9 Public Utilities 8,022.7 1,106.6 275.8 16.9 7,746.9 1,123.5 Total $ 44,217.3 $ 4,664.6 $ 5,469.2 $ 218.6 $ 38,748.1 $ 4,883.2 73 The following two tables show the length of time our investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2016 and at the end of the prior four quarters. The relationships of the current fair value to amortized cost are not necessarily indicative of the fair value to amortized cost relationships for the securities throughout the entire time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position nor are they necessarily indicative of the relationships after December 31, 2016 . The decrease in the unrealized loss on fixed maturity securities during 2016 was due primarily to a decrease in credit spreads, partially offset by an increase in U.S. Treasury rates which occurred during the period. Unrealized Loss on Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position (in millions of dollars) 2016 2015 December 31 September 30 June 30 March 31 December 31 Fair Value < 100% >= 70% of Amortized Cost <= 90 days $ 119.2 $ 2.2 $ 0.8 $ 15.7 $ 73.2 > 90 <= 180 days 12.5 0.3 4.8 34.0 56.0 > 180 <= 270 days 0.1 4.0 0.4 26.3 157.9 > 270 days <= 1 year 8.9 2.7 68.9 24.9 > 1 year <= 2 years 9.5 8.1 25.5 24.2 17.3 > 2 years <= 3 years 0.5 3.3 9.7 > 3 years 1.1 1.1 2.2 2.5 2.9 Sub-total 151.8 15.7 36.4 174.9 341.9 Fair Value < 70% >= 40% of Amortized Cost > 90 <= 180 days 3.8 > 180 <= 270 days 11.1 > 1 year <= 2 years 3.6 Sub-total 18.5 Total $ 151.8 $ 15.7 $ 36.4 $ 174.9 $ 360.4 74 Unrealized Loss on Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position (in millions of dollars) 2016 2015 December 31 September 30 June 30 March 31 December 31 Fair Value < 100% >= 70% of Amortized Cost <= 90 days $ 8.2 $ 0.4 $ 2.4 $ 3.7 $ 10.2 > 90 <= 180 days 1.4 0.3 3.5 4.5 50.8 > 180 <= 270 days 0.5 1.6 1.9 41.5 51.1 > 270 days <= 1 year 4.1 0.9 14.5 43.0 1.3 > 1 year <= 2 years 19.7 30.6 71.3 38.7 34.5 > 2 years <= 3 years 16.0 11.4 11.3 15.0 > 3 years 16.9 10.2 19.9 10.5 5.3 Sub-total 66.8 55.4 113.5 153.2 168.2 Fair Value < 70% >= 40% of Amortized Cost > 90 <= 180 days 9.6 > 180 <= 270 days 22.8 21.6 > 270 days <= 1 year 8.9 33.9 4.1 > 1 year <= 2 years 6.4 26.0 21.8 > 2 years <= 3 years 13.5 7.6 > 3 years 6.6 6.8 0.2 5.0 Sub-total 13.0 15.7 96.4 69.7 Fair Value <= 40% of Amortized Cost > 180 <= 270 days 20.4 > 1 year <= 2 years 10.3 > 2 years <= 3 years 13.3 Sub-total 44.0 Total $ 66.8 $ 68.4 $ 129.2 $ 249.6 $ 281.9 At December 31, 2016, we held one below-investment grade fixed maturity security with a gross unrealized loss greater than $10.0 million. The security was in the communications sector and had a fair value of $60.5 million and a gross unrealized loss of $10.9 million. During 2016, we recognized an other-than-temporary impairment loss of $11.6 million on fixed maturity securities issued by a large U.S.-based energy company. At the time of the impairment loss, the company had a high debt-to-equity ratio, and its projected liquidity had decreased significantly as a result of the declines in oil prices and the likelihood that prices may stay at depressed levels for an extended period of time. The company has assets it can sell, but liquidation may be difficult in the current environment. Additionally, the lower oil prices resulted in the company's banks significantly reducing the availability on the company revolving line of credit. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. During 2015, we recognized an other-than-temporary impairment loss of $10.3 million on fixed maturity securities issued by a large U.S.-based coal company. At the time of the impairment loss, the company had a high debt-to-equity ratio, and its projected liquidity had decreased significantly as a result of the declines in coal prices and the likelihood that prices may stay at depressed levels for an extended period of time. The company has assets it can sell, but liquidation may be difficult in the current environment. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. During 2014, we recognized an other-than-temporary impairment loss of $13.5 million on fixed maturity securities issued by a U.S.-based oil and natural gas exploration and production company. At the time of the impairment loss, the company had a high 75 debt-to-equity ratio, and its projected liquidity had decreased significantly as a result of the declines in oil and natural gas prices. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 90 days but less than 180 days. We had no individual realized investment losses of $10.0 million or greater from the sale of fixed maturity securities during 2016 , 2015 , or 2014. At December 31, 2016 , we had minimal exposure to investments for which the payment of interest and principal is guaranteed under a financial guaranty insurance policy, and the securities in aggregate have a weighted average credit rating of investment-grade absent the guaranty insurance policy. At December 31, 2016 , we held $83.2 million fair value ($71.9 million amortized cost) of perpetual debentures, or "hybrid" securities, that generally have no fixed maturity date. Interest on these securities due on any payment date may be deferred by the issuer. The interest payments are generally deferrable only to the extent that the issuer has suspended dividends or other distributions or payments to any of its shareholders or any other perpetual debt instrument. At December 31, 2016 , our mortgage/asset-backed securities had an average life of 5.14 years, effective duration of 5.66 years, and a weighted average credit rating of Aaa. The mortgage/asset-backed securities are valued on a monthly basis using valuations supplied by the brokerage firms that are dealers in these securities as well as independent pricing services. One of the risks involved in investing in mortgage/asset-backed securities is the uncertainty of the timing of cash flows from the underlying loans due to prepayment of principal with the possibility of reinvesting the funds in a lower interest rate environment. We use models which incorporate economic variables and possible future interest rate scenarios to predict future prepayment rates. The timing of prepayment cash flows may also cause volatility in our recognition of investment income. We recognize investment income on these securities using a constant effective yield based on projected prepayments of the underlying loans and the estimated economic life of the securities. Actual prepayment experience is reviewed periodically, and effective yields are recalculated when differences arise between prepayments originally projected and the actual prepayments received and currently projected. The effective yield is recalculated on a retrospective basis, and the adjustment is reflected in net investment income. We have no exposure to subprime mortgages, "Alt-A" loans, or collateralized debt obligations in our investment portfolios. We have not invested in mortgage-backed derivatives, such as interest-only, principal-only, or residuals, where market values can be highly volatile relative to changes in interest rates. The credit quality of our mortgage-backed securities portfolio has not been negatively impacted by the issues in the market concerning subprime mortgage loans. The change in value of our mortgage-backed securities portfolio has moved in line with that of prime agency-backed mortgage-backed securities. As of December 31, 2016 , the amortized cost and fair value of our below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities was $3,346.1 million and $3,398.0 million , respectively. Below-investment-grade securities are inherently more risky than investment-grade securities since the risk of default by the issuer, by definition and as exhibited by bond rating, is higher. Also, the secondary market for certain below-investment-grade issues can be highly illiquid. Additional downgrades may occur, but we do not anticipate any liquidity problems resulting from our investments in below-investment-grade securities, nor do we expect these investments to adversely affect our ability to hold our other investments to maturity. Fixed Maturity Securities - Foreign Exposure Our investments in issuers in foreign countries are chosen for specific portfolio management purposes, including asset and liability management and portfolio diversification across geographic lines and sectors to minimize non-market risks. In our approach to investing in fixed maturity securities, specific investments within approved countries and industry sectors are evaluated for their market position and specific strengths and potential weaknesses. For each security, we consider the political, legal, and financial environment of the sovereign entity in which an issuer is domiciled and operates. The country of domicile is based on consideration of the issuer's headquarters, in addition to location of the assets and the country in which the majority of sales and earnings are derived. We do not have exposure to foreign currency risk, as the cash flows from these investments are either denominated in currencies or hedged into currencies to match the related liabilities. We continually evaluate our foreign investment risk exposure. Our monitoring is also heightened for investments in certain other countries due to our concerns over the current economic and political environments, and we believe these investments are more vulnerable to potential credit problems. At December 31, 2016, we had minimal exposure in those countries and had no direct exposure to financial institutions of those countries. 76 Fixed Maturity Securities - Energy Sector Our investment portfolio has exposure to companies whose businesses are negatively impacted by lower oil and natural gas prices. These include exploration and production companies, refineries, midstream and pipeline companies, and oilfield service businesses. The sharp drop in the price of oil, which began in 2014 and accelerated in 2015, put pressure on the earnings and cash flows of some of these businesses. During the latter part of 2016, the price of oil recovered from the low levels experienced in 2015 and early 2016, which alleviated some of the pressure on these businesses. The degree to which a business is affected by oil and gas prices can vary greatly depending on, among other things, its energy subsector, exposure to different types of oil and gas within a subsector, geographic locations, cost structure flexibility, capital structure, and hedging policies. At December 31, 2016, approximately one-third of our exposure to the energy sector was represented by the independent and oilfield subsectors where demand for products is highly correlated with oil and gas prices. The remaining two-thirds of our exposure to the energy sector was represented by the midstream, integrated, refining, and other energy subsectors, which tend to be more correlated to product volume sales as opposed to the commodity price. The majority of our energy sector holdings are investment-grade fixed maturity securities. During 2016, we recognized other-than-temporary impairment losses totaling $30.3 million on fixed maturity securities issued by energy sector companies, including the $11.6 million loss as previously discussed. At December 31, 2016, the fair value of investment-grade fixed maturity securities in the energy sector was $4,376.1 million, with a gross unrealized gain of $505.8 million and a gross unrealized loss of $15.5 million. The fair value of below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities in the energy sector was $640.3 million, with a gross unrealized gain of $11.6 million and a gross unrealized loss of $19.5 million. The following table shows additional information related to our holdings in the energy sector. Fixed Maturity Securities - Energy Sector At December 31, 2016 (in millions of dollars) Classification by Subsector Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain Fair Value of Fixed Maturity Securities with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Fair Value of Fixed Maturity Securities with Gross Unrealized Gain Gross Unrealized Gain Midstream $ 2,217.0 $ 151.3 $ 337.2 $ 11.6 $ 1,879.8 $ 162.9 Oil and Gas-Independent 1,517.6 166.4 203.5 12.9 1,314.1 179.3 Oil Field 144.0 4.3 62.1 6.7 81.9 11.0 Oil-Integrated 828.6 136.5 22.5 1.3 806.1 137.8 Oil-Refining 258.1 22.8 61.9 2.0 196.2 24.8 Other Energy 51.1 1.1 9.5 0.5 41.6 1.6 Total $ 5,016.4 $ 482.4 $ 696.7 $ 35.0 $ 4,319.7 $ 517.4 Mortgage Loans Our mortgage loan po rtfolio was $2,038.9 million and $1,883.6 million on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Our mortgage loan portfolio is comprised entirely of commercial mortgage loans. We believe our mortgage loan portfolio is well diversified geographically and among property types. The incidence of problem mortgage loans and foreclosure activity continues to be low. Due to conservative underwriting, we expect the level of problem loans to remain low relative to the industry. We held no impaired mortgage loans at December 31, 2016 or 2015. Derivative Financial Instruments We use derivative financial instruments primarily to manage reinvestment, duration, foreign currency, and credit risks. Historically, we have utilized current and forward interest rate swaps and options on forward interest rate swaps and U.S. Treasury rates, current and forward currency swaps, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, forward contracts on specific fixed income securities, and credit default swaps. Our current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position, including accrued interest receivable less collateral held, was $0.8 million at December 31, 2016 . We held $26.1 million of cash collateral from our counterparties at December 31, 2016 . The carrying value of fixed maturity securities posted as collateral to our counterparties was $35.2 million at December 31, 2016 . We had no cash collateral posted to our counterparties at December 31, 2016 . We believe that our credit risk is mitigated by our use of multiple counterparties, all of which have an investment-grade credit rating, and by our use of cross-collateralization agreements. 77 Other Our exposure to non-current investments, defined as foreclosed real estate and invested assets which are delinquent as to interest and/or principal payments, totaled $41.9 million and $36.8 million on a fair value basis at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. See Notes 3 and 4 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our investments and our derivative financial instruments. Liquidity and Capital Resources Overview Our liquidity requirements are met primarily by cash flows provided from operations, principally in our insurance subsidiaries. Premium and investment income, as well as maturities and sales of invested assets, provide the primary sources of cash. Debt and/or securities offerings provide additional sources of liquidity. Cash is applied to the payment of policy benefits, costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions), operating expenses, and taxes, as well as purchases of new investments. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations. We attempt to match our asset cash flows and durations with expected liability cash flows and durations to meet the funding requirements of our business. However, deterioration in the credit market may delay our ability to sell our positions in certain of our fixed maturity securities in a timely manner and adversely impact the price we receive for such securities, which may negatively impact our cash flows. Furthermore, if we experience defaults on securities held in the investment portfolios of our insurance subsidiaries, this will negatively impact statutory capital, which could reduce our insurance subsidiaries' capacity to pay dividends to our holding companies. A reduction in dividends to our holding companies could force us to seek external financing to avoid impairing our ability to pay dividends to our stockholders or meet our debt and other payment obligations. Our policy benefits are primarily in the form of claim payments, and we have minimal exposure to the policy withdrawal risk associated with deposit products such as individual life policies or annuities. A decrease in demand for our insurance products or an increase in the incidence of new claims or the duration of existing claims could negatively impact our cash flows from operations. However, our historical pattern of benefits paid to revenues is consistent, even during cycles of economic downturns, which serves to minimize liquidity risk. The liquidity requirements of the holding company Unum Group are met by fixed maturity securities, short-term investments and cash, and dividends from our subsidiaries, primarily our insurance subsidiaries, as well as the issuance of common stock, debt, or other capital securities and borrowings from our credit facilities, as needed. As of December 31, 2016, Unum Group and our intermediate holding companies held fixed maturity securities, short-term investments, and cash of $594 million, excluding amounts committed for subsidiary contributions. The balance was comprised primarily of commercial paper, fixed maturity securities with a current average maturity of 5.4 years, and various money-market funds. Our sources of liquidity and cash flow support the general corporate needs of the holding company, including its common stock dividends, interest and debt service, acquisitions, and ongoing investments in our businesses. Approximately $110 million of the amount held at December 31, 2016 was held in certain of our U.K. subsidiaries. No significant restrictions exist on our ability to use or access these funds. We currently have no intent, nor do we foresee a need, to repatriate funds from our foreign subsidiaries in the U.K. We believe we hold domestic resources sufficient to fund our liquidity requirements for the next 12 months. If we repatriate additional funds from our subsidiaries in the U.K., the amounts repatriated would be subject to repatriation tax effects which generally equal the difference in the U.S. tax rate and the U.K. tax rate. As part of our capital deployment strategy, we have in recent years repurchased shares of Unum Group's common stock, as authorized by our board of directors. Our current share repurchase program was approved by our board of directors in May 2016 and authorizes the repurchase of up to $750 million of common stock through November 2017, with the pace of repurchase activity to depend upon various factors such as the level of available cash, alternative uses for cash, and our stock price. This new authorization replaced the previous authorization of $750 million that was scheduled to expire in November 2016. During 2016 , we repurchased 11.9 million shares at a cost of approximately $403 million . The dollar value of shares remaining under the current repurchase program was approximately $496 million at December 31, 2016 . See Note 10 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8. 78 Cash Available from Subsidiaries Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries depend on payments from subsidiaries to pay dividends to stockholders, to pay debt obligations, and/or to pay expenses. These payments by our insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries may take the form of dividends, operating and investment management fees, and/or interest payments on loans from the parent to a subsidiary. Restrictions under applicable state insurance laws limit the amount of dividends that can be paid to a parent company from its insurance subsidiaries in any 12-month period without prior approval by regulatory authorities. For life insurance companies domiciled in the U.S., that limitation generally equals, depending on the state of domicile, either ten percent of an insurer's statutory surplus with respect to policyholders as of the preceding year end or the statutory net gain from operations, excluding realized investment gains and losses, of the preceding year. The payment of dividends to a parent company from a life insurance subsidiary is generally further limited to the amount of unassigned funds. Certain of our domestic insurance subsidiaries cede blocks of business to Northwind Reinsurance Company (Northwind Re) and Fairwind Insurance Company (Fairwind), both of which are affiliated captive reinsurance subsidiaries domiciled in the United States with Unum Group as the ultimate parent. The ability of Northwind Re and Fairwind to pay dividends to their respective parent companies will depend on their satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the business reinsured by Northwind Re and Fairwind. The ability of Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries to continue to receive dividends from their insurance subsidiaries also depends on additional factors such as RBC ratios and capital adequacy and/or solvency requirements, funding growth objectives at an affiliate level, and maintaining appropriate capital adequacy ratios to support desired ratings. At December 31, 2016 , the capital adequacy and individual RBC ratios for each of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries, including our captive reinsurers, is above the range that would require state regulatory action. Unum Group and/or certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries may also receive dividends from our U.K. subsidiaries, the payment of which may be subject to applicable insurance company regulations and capital guidance in the U.K. As of January 1, 2016, Solvency II, an EU directive that prescribes new capital requirements and risk management standards for the European insurance industry, replaced the previous capital requirements for Unum Limited. Our European holding company is also subject to the Solvency II requirements relevant to insurance holding companies, while its subsidiaries (the Unum European Economic Area (EEA) Group), which includes Unum Limited, are subject to group supervision under Solvency II. The Unum EEA Group received approval from the U.K. Prudential Regulatory Authority to use its own internal model for calculating regulatory capital and also received approval for certain associated regulatory permissions including transitional relief as the Solvency II capital regime is implemented. As a result there was no material change to capital requirements or to solvency ratios for the Unum EEA Group. There are currently no indications that capital requirements for the Unum EEA Group will change as a result of the U.K. referendum to withdraw from the EU, but economic conditions may in the near term cause volatility in our solvency ratios. The payment of dividends to the parent company from our subsidiaries also requires the approval of the individual subsidiary's board of directors. The amount available during 2016 for the payment of ordinary dividends from Unum Group's traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, which excludes our captive reinsurers, was approximately $664 million, of which $605.2 million was declared and paid. The amount available during 2016 from Unum Limited was approximately 148 million, as assessed under the requirements prior to Solvency II, of which 70.0 million was declared and paid to one of our U.K. holding companies. During 2016 , Northwind Re paid dividends of $92.7 million to Northwind Holdings. Fairwind paid no dividends during 2016 . During 2017 , we intend to maintain a level of capital in our U.S. and U.K. insurance subsidiaries above the applicable capital adequacy requirements and minimum solvency margins. Although we may not utilize the entire amount of available dividends, based on applicable restrictions under current law, approximately $859 million is available, without prior approval by regulatory authorities, during 2017 for the payment of dividends from Unum Group's traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, which excludes our captive reinsurers. Following the changes established by Solvency II regarding dividend capacity, approximately 271 million is available for the payment of dividends from Unum Limited during 2017 , subject to regulatory approval. 79 Insurance regulatory restrictions do not limit the amount of dividends available for distribution from non-insurance subsidiaries except where the non-insurance subsidiaries are held directly or indirectly by an insurance subsidiary and only indirectly by Unum Group. Funding for Employee Benefit Plans We made contributions of $64.8 million and 3.6 million to our U.S. and U.K. defined contribution plans, respectively, in 2016 and expect to make contributions of approximately $75 million and 4 million during 2017 . We made no contributions to our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan or our U.K. defined benefit pension plan during 2016 , nor do we expect to make any contributions to either plan during 2017 . We have met all minimum pension funding requirements set forth by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act. We have estimated our future funding requirements under the Pension Protection Act of 2006 and under applicable U.K. law and do not believe that any future funding requirements will cause a material adverse effect on our liquidity. See Note 9 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our employee benefit plans. Debt There are no significant financial covenants associated with any of our outstanding debt obligations. We continually monitor our debt covenants to ensure we remain in compliance. We have not observed any current trends that would cause a breach of any debt covenants. Maturities, Purchases, and Retirement of Debt Our $350.0 million 7.125% senior unsecured notes matured during 2016, and the remaining balance of our $151.9 million 6.85% senior secured notes matured during 2015. In 2014, we purchased and retired $145.0 million principal of the 6.85% notes, including a make-whole amount of $13.2 million, for a total cost of $158.2 million. Northwind Holdings made principal payments on its floating rate, senior secured notes of $64.0 million , $74.4 million , and $41.6 million in 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 , respectively. Issuance of Debt In 2016, we issued a total of $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes: (i) $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes due in 2021 with an annual coupon rate of 3.00%, and (ii) $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes due in 2042 with an annual coupon rate of 5.75%, pursuant to a reopening of the $250.0 million aggregate principal amount outstanding of our 5.75% senior notes due 2042 issued in 2012. Both issuances are callable at or above par and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt. A portion of the net proceeds of the offering were used for repayment of the debt which matured in 2016. The remainder of the proceeds are expected to be used for general corporate purposes. In 2015, we issued $275.0 million of unsecured senior notes. These notes, due 2025, bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.875% and are payable semi-annually. The notes are callable at or above par and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt. In 2014, we issued $350.0 million of unsecured senior notes. These notes, due 2024, bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.00% and are payable semi-annually. The notes are callable at or above par and rank equally in right of payment with all of our other unsecured and unsubordinated debt. Credit Facility In 2016, we amended the terms of our five-year, $400 million unsecured revolving credit facility, which was previously set to expire in 2018, to extend through March 2021. Under the terms of the agreement, we may request that the credit facility be increased up to $600 million. Borrowings under the credit facility are for general corporate uses and are subject to financial covenants, negative covenants, and events of default that are customary. The credit facility provides for borrowing at an interest rate based either on the prime rate or LIBOR. In addition, the credit facility provides for the issuance of letters of credit subject to certain terms and limitations. At December 31, 2016 , letters of credit totaling $2.1 million had been issued from the credit facility, but there was no borrowed amount outstanding. Our credit facility's financial covenants contain provisions regarding our leverage and net worth. We do not anticipate any violation of these covenants. However, if economic conditions 80 worsen and we incur unexpected losses, we could violate certain of the financial covenants imposed by the credit facility and lose access to available funds or lines of credit through the facility. While maintenance of the unsecured, revolving credit facility provides a valuable source of contingent liquidity, we believe operating cash flows are sufficient to support our short-term liquidity needs. Shelf Registration We filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission in 2014 to issue various types of securities, including common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depository shares, stock purchase contracts, units and warrants, or preferred securities of wholly-owned finance trusts. The shelf registration enables us to raise funds from the offering of any securities covered by the shelf registration as well as any combination thereof, subject to market conditions and our capital needs. See Note 8 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on our debt. Commitments The following table summarizes contractual obligations and our reinsurance recoverable by period as of December 31, 2016 : (in millions of dollars) Total In 1 Year or Less After 1 Year up to 3 Years After 3 Years up to 5 Years After 5 Years Payments Due Long-term Debt $ 4,929.7 $ 152.3 $ 484.2 $ 993.1 $ 3,300.1 Policyholder Liabilities 43,488.1 4,625.5 6,956.5 5,388.7 26,517.4 Pension and OPEB 655.9 20.5 40.4 39.5 555.5 Payables for Collateral on Investments 410.5 410.5 Miscellaneous Liabilities 804.1 624.2 32.6 10.7 136.6 Operating Leases 189.6 50.8 48.3 31.9 58.6 Purchase Obligations 327.9 322.4 5.0 0.5 Total $ 50,805.8 $ 6,206.2 $ 7,567.0 $ 6,464.4 $ 30,568.2 Receipts Due Reinsurance Recoverable $ 7,846.6 $ 328.4 $ 611.6 $ 618.7 $ 6,287.9 Long-term debt includes contractual principal and interest payments and therefore exceeds the amount shown in the consolidated balance sheets. Policyholder liability maturities and the related reinsurance recoverable represent the projected payout of the current in-force policyholder liabilities and the expected cash inflows from reinsurers for liabilities ceded and therefore incorporate uncertainties as to the timing and amount of claim payments. We utilize extensive liability modeling to project future cash flows from the in-force business. The primary assumptions used to project future cash flows are claim incidence rates for mortality and morbidity, claim resolution rates, persistency rates, and interest rates. These cash flows are discounted to determine the current value of the projected claim payments. The timing and amount of payments on policyholder liabilities may vary significantly from the projections above. 81 Pensions and OPEB commitments represent the expected benefit payments related to our U.S. non-qualified defined benefit pension and other postretirement benefit plans as it is our policy to pay those benefits, as incurred, from our general assets. Our funding policy for our U.S. qualified defined benefit and our U.K. defined benefit pension plans is to make only contributions necessary to meet minimum funding requirements under U.S. and U.K. legislation. We do not currently expect to make any contributions to either of these plans and therefore have not included amounts in the preceding chart. However, to the extent contributions are required, we will make the necessary contributions to these plans. Payables for collateral on investments include obligations to return unrestricted cash collateral to our securities lending and derivative counterparties and obligations to repay advances from regional Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs). The amounts presented in the preceding chart include contractual interest payments and therefore exceed what is reported in the consolidated balance sheets. Miscellaneous liabilities include commissions due and accrued, deferred compensation liabilities, contingent considerations, state premium taxes payable, amounts due to reinsurance companies, legally binding commitments to fund investments, and various other liabilities that represent contractual obligations. Obligations where the timing of the payment is uncertain are included in the one year or less category. See "Critical Accounting Estimates" contained herein in this Item 7 and Notes 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 13, and 14 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information on our various commitments and obligations. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements Operating leases include noncancelable obligations on certain office space, equipment, and software. Purchase obligations include commitments of $314.0 million to fund certain of our investments. These are included in the preceding table based on the expiration date of the commitments. The funds are due upon satisfaction of contractual notice from appropriate external parties and may or may not be funded. Also included are obligations with outside parties for computer data processing services, software maintenance agreements, and consulting services. The aggregate obligation remaining under these agreements was $13.8 million at December 31, 2016 . As part of our regular investing strategy, we receive collateral from unaffiliated third parties through transactions which include both securities lending and also short-term agreements to purchase securities with the agreement to resell them at a later specified date. For both types of transactions, we require that a minimum of 102 percent of the fair value of the securities loaned or securities purchased under repurchase agreements be maintained as collateral. Generally, cash is received as collateral under these agreements. In the event that securities are received as collateral, we are not permitted to sell or re-post them. We also post our fixed maturity securities as collateral to unaffiliated third parties through transactions including both securities lending and also short-term agreements to sell securities with the agreement to repurchase them at a later specified date. See "Transfers of Financial Assets" as follows for further discussion. To help limit the credit exposure of derivatives, we enter into master netting agreements with our counterparties whereby contracts in a gain position can be offset against contracts in a loss position. We also typically enter into bilateral, cross-collateralization agreements with our counterparties to help limit the credit exposure of the derivatives. These agreements require the counterparty in a loss position to submit acceptable collateral with the other counterparty in the event the net loss position meets or exceeds an agreed upon amount. Our current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position, including accrued interest receivable less collateral held, was $0.8 million at December 31, 2016 . We held cash collateral from our counterparties of $26.1 million at December 31, 2016 and had posted fixed maturity securities with a carrying value of $35.2 million as collateral to our counterparties. See Notes 3, 4, and 14 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. Transfers of Financial Assets Our investment policy permits us to lend fixed maturity securities to unaffiliated financial institutions in short-term securities lending agreements, which increases our investment income with minimal risk. We account for all of our securities lending agreements and repurchase agreements as secured borrowings. We had $29.9 million of securities lending agreements outstanding which were collateralized by cash at December 31, 2016 and were reported as payables for collateral on investments in our consolidated balance sheets. The cash received as collateral was reinvested in short-term investments. The 82 average balance during the year ended December 31, 2016 was $53.8 million, and the maximum amount outstanding at any month end was $73.9 million. In addition, at December 31, 2016 , we had $155.3 million of off-balance sheet securities lending agreements which were collateralized by securities that we were neither permitted to sell nor control. The average balance of these off-balance sheet transactions during the year ended December 31, 2016 was $170.5 million, and the maximum amount outstanding at any month end was $197.7 million. We had no repurchase agreements outstanding at December 31, 2016 , nor did we utilize any repurchase agreements during 2016. Our use of repurchase agreements and securities lending agreements can fluctuate during any given period and will depend on our liquidity position, the availability of long-term investments that meet our purchasing criteria, and our general business needs. Certain of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries are members of regional Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLB). As of December 31, 2016, we owned $31.6 million of FHLB common stock and had obtained $350.0 million in advances from the regional FHLBs for the purpose of purchasing fixed maturity securities. See Note 3 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for additional information. Consolidated Cash Flows (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2016 2015 2014 Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities $ 1,116.1 $ 1,292.1 $ 1,223.6 Net Cash Used by Investing Activities (710.0 ) (713.0 ) (886.6 ) Net Cash Used by Financing Activities (418.6 ) (568.7 ) (328.6 ) Net Change in Cash and Bank Deposits $ (12.5 ) $ 10.4 $ 8.4 Operating Cash Flows Operating cash flows are primarily attributable to the receipt of premium and investment income, offset by payments of claims, commissions, expenses, and income taxes. Premium income growth is dependent not only on new sales, but on policy renewals and growth of existing business, renewal price increases, and persistency. Investment income growth is dependent on the growth in the underlying assets supporting our insurance reserves and capital and on the earned yield. The level of commissions and operating expenses is attributable to the level of sales and the first year acquisition expenses associated with new business as well as the maintenance of existing business. The level of paid claims is affected partially by the growth and aging of the block of business and also by the general economy, as previously discussed in the operating results by segment. The variance in the change in insurance reserves and liabilities to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities as reported in our consolidated statements of cash flows for 2014 was due primarily to the 2014 reserve increase for our long-term care line of business. Investing Cash Flows Investing cash inflows consist primarily of the proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments. Investing cash outflows consist primarily of payments for purchases of investments. Our investment strategy is to match the cash flows and durations of our assets with the cash flows and durations of our liabilities to meet the funding requirements of our business. When market opportunities arise we may sell selected securities and reinvest the proceeds to improve the yield and credit quality of our portfolio. We may at times also sell selected securities and reinvest the proceeds to improve the duration matching of our assets and liabilities and/or re-balance our portfolio. As a result, sales before maturity may vary from period to period. The sale and purchase of short-term investments is influenced by proceeds received from issuance of debt, our securities lending program, and by the amount of cash which is at times held in short-term investments to facilitate the availability of cash to fund the purchase of appropriate long-term investments, repay maturing debt, and/or to fund our capital deployment program. Our cash flows for 2015 include the proceeds received from our FHLB funding advances and the subsequent deployment of those funds to purchase fixed maturity securities. Our cash flows for 2016 and 2015 include cash outflows, net of cash acquired, of $129.2 million and $54.3 million related to our purchases of Starmount and National Dental, respectively. See Notes 3 and 13 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information. 83 Financing Cash Flows Financing cash flows consist primarily of borrowings and repayments of debt, issuance or repurchase of common stock, and dividends paid to stockholders. During 2016, we repaid $350.0 million principal upon maturity of our 7.125% notes. During 2015, we repaid $151.9 million principal upon maturity of our 6.85% notes. During 2014, we retired $145.0 million principal of the 6.85% notes, including a make-whole amount of $13.2 million, for a total cash outflow of $158.2 million. During 2016, 2015, and 2014 we made principal payments of $64.0 million, $74.4 million, and $41.6 million, respectively, on our senior secured non-recourse notes issued by Northwind Holdings. During 2016, we issued $350.0 million of 3.00% unsecured senior notes due in 2021 and $250.0 million of 5.75% unsecured senior notes due in 2042 and received total proceeds of $609.1 million, excluding the associated debt issuance costs and discounts. During 2015, we issued $275.0 million of 3.875% unsecured senior notes due in 2025 and received proceeds of $271.4 million, excluding the associated debt issuance costs and discounts. During 2014, we issued $350.0 million of 4.00% unsecured senior notes due in 2024 and received proceeds of $347.2 million, excluding the associated debt issuance costs and discounts. Cash used to repurchase shares of Unum Group's common stock during 2016, 2015, and 2014 was $405.2 million, $417.9 million, and $306.0 million, respectively. During 2016, 2015, and 2014 we paid dividends of $182.6 million, $174.2 million, and $159.4 million, respectively, to holders of Unum Group's common stock. See "Debt" contained herein in this Item 7, and Notes 8 and 10 of the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" contained herein in Item 8 for further information. Ratings AM Best, Fitch, Moody's, and S&P are among the third parties that assign issuer credit ratings to Unum Group and financial strength ratings to our insurance subsidiaries. We compete based in part on the financial strength ratings provided by rating agencies. A downgrade of our financial strength ratings can be expected to adversely affect us and could potentially, among other things, adversely affect our relationships with distributors of our products and services and retention of our sales force, negatively impact persistency and new sales, particularly large case group sales and individual sales, and generally adversely affect our ability to compete. A downgrade in the issuer credit rating assigned to Unum Group can be expected to adversely affect our cost of capital or our ability to raise additional capital. The table below reflects the outlook as well as the issuer credit ratings for Unum Group and the financial strength ratings for each of our traditional insurance subsidiaries as of the date of this filing. AM Best Fitch Moody's S&P Outlook Stable Stable Stable Stable Issuer Credit Ratings bbb BBB Baa2 BBB Financial Strength Ratings Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company A A A2 A Provident Life and Casualty Insurance Company A A NR NR Unum Life Insurance Company of America A A A2 A First Unum Life Insurance Company A A A2 A Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company A A A2 A The Paul Revere Life Insurance Company A A A2 A Starmount Life Insurance Company A- NR NR NR Unum Insurance Company B++ A A2 NR Unum Limited NR NR NR A- NR = not rated We maintain an ongoing dialogue with the four rating agencies that evaluate us in order to inform them of progress we are making regarding our strategic objectives and financial plans as well as other pertinent issues. A significant component of our 84 communications involves our annual review meeting with each of the four agencies. We hold other meetings throughout the year regarding our business, including, but not limited to, quarterly updates. AM Best, Fitch, and S&P affirmed their ratings for our domestic insurance subsidiaries and issuer credit rating for Unum Group during 2016. Moody's affirmed its ratings during 2015. On August 5, 2016, AM Best upgraded its rating of Starmount Life Insurance Company to A- from the previous rating of B++, reflecting that company's favorable overall operating performance in recent periods, as well as the increased financial flexibility and potential operational efficiencies resulting from Unum Group's acquisition of Starmount. There have been no other changes in any of the rating agencies' outlook statements or ratings during 2016 or in 2017 prior to the date of this filing. Agency ratings are not directed toward the holders of our securities and are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities. Each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and each rating should be regarded as an independent assessment, not conditional on any other rating. Given the dynamic nature of the ratings process, changes by these or other rating agencies may or may not occur in the near-term. Based on our ongoing dialogue with the rating agencies concerning our insurance risk profile, our financial flexibility, our operating performance, and the quality of our investment portfolio, we do not expect any negative actions from any of the four rating agencies related to either Unum Group's current issuer credit ratings or the financial strength ratings of our insurance subsidiaries. However, in the event that we are unable to meet the rating agency specific guideline values to maintain our current ratings, including but not limited to maintenance of our capital management metrics at the threshold values stated and maintenance of our financial flexibility and operational consistency, we could be placed on a negative credit watch, with a potential for a downgrade to both our issuer credit ratings and our financial strength ratings. See "Ratings" contained herein in Item 1 and "Risk Factors" contained herein in Item 1A for further discussion. 
