CIK: 5513
Company Name: UNUMPROVIDENT CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-03-01


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The discussion and analysis presented in this section should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto in Item 8. Executive Summary In commenting on our results for 2006, we will discuss three major topics: operating performance of our three major business segments, strategic initiatives, and our outstanding legal and regulatory issues. Operating Performance of our Major Business Segments For 2006, we reported solid operating results in all of our Unum US (previously U.S. Brokerage) segment lines of business, with operating results generally meeting our expectations. Our supplemental and voluntary lines reported significantly improved results relative to the prior year. Our group life and accidental death and dismemberment lines of business reported somewhat lower results year over year due to the expected decline in premium revenue resulting from continued pricing discipline. Although our Unum US group long-term income protection line of business did not perform at the level of our long-term expectations due to claims management performance during the early months of 2006, we are very pleased with the progress made during 2006 in improving the profitability in this line of business. We believe we have taken the necessary actions to improve claim operational effectiveness over the long term and have experienced improvements in the area of claims management performance during 2006, with greater consistency in claim recovery rates and in the timing of claim decisions. We expect additional improvements to occur during 2007. Positive trends continue to emerge for our Unum US group long-term income protection line of business, including: favorable pricing trends; stable to declining claim incidence trends; renewal profit improvement; aggressive management of expenses; improvements in operating effectiveness; and the management of persistency of the in-force block of business, which includes retaining business that is more profitable than business which terminates. Separate and distinct from our current operational trends is the 2006 revision of our claim reassessment reserve, discussed more fully below, which reflects our commitment to comply fully with our regulatory settlement agreements. For 2006, sales in our Unum US segment reflect achievement of our strategy of disciplined pricing and a balanced business mix through diversification. For our group products, we had a sales mix of approximately 52 percent core market (employee groups with less than 2,000 lives) and 48 percent large case market, below our targeted 60 percent core/40 percent large case market distribution mix, but we maintained our disciplined pricing and underwriting for the large case group business we sold. We also reported sales growth in our Unum US voluntary workplace benefits, individual income protection multi-life, and group long-term care lines of business for 2006 relative to the prior year. In keeping with our sales strategy for multi-life sales, we are not aggressively marketing single individual sales of individual income protection and individual long-term care, as evidenced by the lower sales reported for these product lines. Our Unum UK (previously Unum Limited) segment continues to produce excellent operating results, with an increase in segment operating income of 35.0 percent, as measured in Unum UK local currency, compared to 2005. Sales in Unum UK, which were challenging throughout 2006, improved in the third and fourth quarters relative to the first two quarters of the year. Sales in this market were negatively impacted during 2006 by lower employee benefits purchase decisions caused by distraction in the U.K. employee benefits market due to changes in pension legislation. However, U.K. legislative changes that remove discrimination by employers on the basis of age, therefore encouraging the extension of insurance coverage, became effective in October 2006. As a result, we anticipate that Unum UK sales during 2007 will increase from the early 2006 levels. We expect to maintain our market leadership position in the highly competitive U.K. market. 28 Table of Contents Our Colonial segment also had excellent operating results in 2006, with an increase in segment operating income of 18.2 percent compared to the prior year. Colonial reported sales growth of 10.0 percent in 2006 compared to last year. The sales increase was primarily driven by sales growth in the core markets (employee groups with less than 2,000 lives). Sales in the large case market, which is comprised of employee groups with 2,000 lives or greater, also increased in 2006 relative to the prior year. We are focused on maintaining profitable and sustainable sales growth for this segment. During 2006, we continued to diversify and improve our business balance by concentrating on growth in Unum UK, Colonial, and our Unum US supplemental and voluntary product lines and by shifting our Unum US group lines of business into a more balanced mix between small and mid-employer core market segments and the large employer market segment. While facing challenging market conditions, we maintained our disciplined approach to pricing and underwriting, and we are willing to sacrifice market share, if necessary, to ensure that the business we are selling is appropriately priced. Although we have shifted our mix of group business, we continue to lead the U.S. disability income protection insurance marketplace, according to the 2005 JHA group and individual disability market survey results announced during the second quarter of 2006. As measured by inforce premium, we hold a 22.5 percent share in the U.S. group disability market and a 36 percent share in the U.S. individual disability market. It is the 30th consecutive year that we have led the U.S. group disability income protection industry. In the U.K. market, according to the GEIS 2006 survey which is based on inforce premium, we have maintained our significant market position, with approximately 56.9 percent of the U.K. group disability market. We believe that our continued leadership position is a testament to both the quality of our products and services as well as the strong relationships we have established over the years with both our customers and brokers. We believe, and independent market surveys indicate, that we have been successful in maintaining a solid reputation and strong relationships with our customers, brokers, and agents. Survey ratings for our products and services remain favorable, and ratings for our image and reputation are also favorable, with continued improving trends. We constantly look for opportunities to improve the consistency of business plan execution and have initiated actions to do so. We have improved technology solutions in our administration areas and implemented a focused plan for consistent service delivery in our customer service areas. We have completed the first phase of a customer-oriented business model which not only provides products and services that meet the needs of the marketplace but is also supported by front-to-back business processes and technology. We have also introduced a new web-based enrollment platform for our workplace benefits products that will help employees fully understand the benefit coverage provided by an employer and the additional insurance options that may be available at the workplace. During 2006, we joined with Matria Healthcare to create a new disability and disease management partnership aimed at helping employers combat rising healthcare costs and improve workforce productivity. We actively manage the credit risk and interest rate risk in our investment portfolio. During 2006, the relationship between our reserve discount rates and the respective portfolio yield rates remained within our target ranges. We strive to match the cash flows of our investment portfolios with the cash flows of our liabilities to eliminate as much as possible our exposure to changes in the overall level of interest rates. While our core investments are investment grade corporate fixed maturity securities, we also invest in other asset categories for diversification and yield. Our investment portfolio is well diversified across industry sectors and geographically diversified with respect to our mortgage loan portfolio. The average quality of our fixed maturity security portfolio was A2 at the end of 2006. We believe that the actions we have taken during the past several years and in 2006 have improved the effectiveness of the basic functions of our businesses, reduced our business volatility, and led to a greater consistency in the execution of our business plan. Strategic Initiatives Capital Management Initiatives Our significant capital management accomplishments during 2005 and 2006 have established a foundation for improved financial flexibility in 2007 and beyond. The risk-based capital (RBC) ratio for our traditional U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis using the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) Company Action Level formula, was approximately 300 percent at the end of 2006, our target level for the combined RBC ratio. 29 Table of Contents In November 2005, we repatriated $454.8 million in unremitted foreign earnings under the Homeland Investment Act of 2004. In 2005 we repaid $227.0 million of maturing debt and completed a long-term debt offering in conjunction with the November repatriation. In the first quarter of 2006, we purchased and subsequently retired $400.0 million of the senior note element of our remarketed adjustable conversion-rate equity security units issued during 2003. In May 2006, upon settlement of the common stock purchase contract of the adjustable conversion-rate equity security units, we received approximately $575.0 million and issued 43.3 million shares of common stock. We continued to lower our debt through the purchase of $300.0 million of debt in the second quarter of 2006 and $32.0 million in the fourth quarter of 2006. With these actions, we reduced our financing risk by lowering our consolidated debt and smoothing our debt maturity schedule. Further, during 2006 we made voluntary contributions of $92.0 million to our U.S. qualified defined benefit plan and $44.2 million to our U.K. defined benefit plan. We continue to execute our capital management initiatives to further build on our foundation of improved financial flexibility, and on November 1, 2006, we announced the completion of our securitization of approximately $1.5 billion of group long-term income protection claim reserves through the issuance of $130.0 million senior, secured notes by our wholly-owned subsidiary Tailwind Holdings, LLC (Tailwind Holdings). This offering, which we believe was the first of its kind in the disability insurance industry, increases our financial flexibility as we continue to implement long-term capital management strategies that are aligned with our capital management initiatives. We continue to examine strategies to improve the capital efficiency of our closed block of individual income protection business. Because we cannot reprice this closed block of business, our focus has been on how we can more effectively manage the capital supporting this business. Our three major operating segments, which at December 31, 2006 were supported by approximately $6.5 billion of allocated capital, produce a return on equity that is generally consistent with our current plan and on target to attain our long-term goal for return on equity. The closed block of individual income protection is supported by approximately $2.6 billion of allocated capital, and our return on equity for this business generally is in the low single digits. With the successful completion of the securitization of a small block of our group long-term income protection claim reserves in 2006, we are cautiously optimistic that we can complete a similar transaction for our closed block of individual income protection claim reserves, although any such transaction is subject to regulatory, market, and other conditions. We believe that a transaction of this nature would allow us to divert some of the capital currently supporting this block of business to support other initiatives and therefore increase our total consolidated return on equity. Our capital planning objectives are: maintain our RBC ratio at approximately its current level; maintain our leverage ratio at current levels while exploring the potential benefits of further reductions; maintain holding company liquidity to cover at least one year of fixed charges; and evaluate opportunities for the effective use of any holding company liquidity in excess of our target. Debt and Financial Ratings and Improved Stock Valuation Concerning our debt and financial strength ratings, we maintain an ongoing dialogue with the rating agencies to inform them of progress we are making regarding our strategic objectives and financial plans, as well as other pertinent issues. We also meet periodically with the investment community. We believe that we continue to build investor and rating agency confidence. The total return on our stock was approximately 38 percent from the end of 2003 to the end of 2006. Our stock no longer trades at a significant discount in price to book value relative to our return on equity, resulting in a stock valuation more consistent with our insurance peer group. We are focused on improving our return on equity as a means of further improving the valuation of our Company common stock. Our current ratings, as well as changes occurring during 2006, are discussed more fully under Ratings contained herein in Item 7. We believe that we are well positioned to achieve an investment grade debt rating from Moody and S&P, which should lead to tighter credit spreads and improved stock valuation, but an improvement in our rating is entirely at the discretion of the rating agencies. 30 Table of Contents Outstanding Legal and Regulatory Issues During 2006, we made progress in settling some of our outstanding legal and regulatory issues as described in Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8. During 2006, we reached an agreement in principle with the plaintiffs (subject to court approval) on the plan beneficiary class action, or 401(k) case, which is one of the multidistrict litigation matters outlined in our litigation footnote. In addition, we reached a settlement agreement on broker compensation with the Office of the New York Attorney General (NYAG) that directly resolves all issues raised by the NYAG in its review of our broker compensation practices. The review was part of a larger investigation of broker compensation practices in the insurance industry. We also resolved litigation filed by the California Insurance Commissioner against our Company and other insurers regarding disclosure practices in broker compensation. Under the settlements, we are implementing a new, simpler compensation program for our group products. Additionally, we are expanding our disclosure of broker compensation programs, enhancing a policy that we believe is already among the most comprehensive in the industry. We had previously taken a number of steps which we believe enhanced transparency by establishing, in March 2005, disclosure policies that provided customers with a means of obtaining information about the compensation paid to their brokers. At that time, we discontinued all programs that provided loans, equity investments, contests, and trips based on sales levels attained. As part of the settlement with the NYAG, we agreed to pay a fine of $1.9 million and to establish a fund of $15.5 million to provide restitution for any customer determined to be harmed by past practices. These charges are included in our 2006 results. We believe that we removed substantial regulatory uncertainty surrounding our claims practices through the settlement agreement with the California Department of Insurance (DOI) in 2005 and the settlement of the multistate market conduct examinations in 2004 and continue to focus a great deal of resources on meeting the requirements of these agreements. We meet periodically with regulators and maintain an ongoing dialogue with them to communicate the progress we are making. Additionally, we routinely engage in discussions related to other issues which could impact any of our companies. The revision of our claim reassessment reserve in the first and third quarters of 2006, discussed in the following section, reflects our continued commitment to comply fully with our regulatory settlement agreements. This is an unprecedented process, and thus the cost has been difficult to estimate. Because we based our revised third quarter of 2006 estimate on approximately 55 percent of the ultimate number of decisions rather than approximately 20 percent of the ultimate number, as was necessary in the first quarter of 2006, we believe that the data upon which it was based is more statistically credible. The reassessment process is completely separate from our ongoing claim operation and will be concluded by the end of 2007. Based on the claims already reviewed and our estimate for the remaining claims to be reassessed, both the number of claim decisions overturned and the associated claim payments on the reopened claims equal approximately two percent of the total group and individual long-term income protection claim decisions and claim payments made during the time period covered by the reassessment process. We have completed the mailing of virtually all of the required claim reassessment notices. Those individuals who want their claims reviewed have the opportunity to request a claim reassessment information form and have 60 days to complete the form once it is received. Through the end of 2006, approximately 27 percent of the recipients of the reassessment notice had requested claim reassessment information forms, and thus far we have sent the claim reassessment information forms to approximately 80 percent of these individuals. Of those to whom we have sent the claim reassessment information forms, 27 percent of the recipients of the forms have completed them and returned them to us for review. We expect that the rate of response for reassessment will increase over time as many of the individuals have unexpired time remaining to request and complete the necessary information forms. A more thorough discussion of these issues, as well as an update of our other outstanding legal and regulatory issues, is included in the following section 2006 Significant Transactions and Events and in Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8. 31 Table of Contents Focus for 2007 Our focus for 2007 remains much the same supporting employers and their employees . Themes that will guide our actions in 2007 include: Consistent execution . This will remain a priority as we work to ensure that each business and product line meets expectations. Continued innovation throughout the business. Our customers needs are changing, and as an industry leader we need to drive change in our industry and within our Company to respond to these changing conditions. The ability to react quickly to meet the needs in the market can be a powerful competitive advantage. Capitalizing on our strong brands and marketplace reputation will take on added importance as we seek to build on this year momentum. Execution of our strategic and capital initiatives . Continued resolution of outstanding legal and regulatory issues . 2006 Significant Transactions and Events Revised Claim Reassessment Reserve Estimate Each quarter we review our emerging experience to ensure that the reserves we established for our claim reassessment process are appropriate. The reassessment process was implemented as a result of the settlement agreements we entered into with various state insurance regulators in the fourth quarter of 2004 and the settlement agreement we entered into with the California DOI in the third quarter of 2005. See Settlement of Multistate Market Conduct Examination and California Settlement Agreement and Amendment of the Multistate Market Conduct Examination Settlement Agreements contained herein for further discussion of these agreements. In the first quarter of 2006, we recorded a charge to increase our provision for the estimated costs associated with our claim reassessment process. The charge was $86.0 million before tax and $55.9 million after tax and decreased before-tax operating results for our Unum US segment group income protection line of business $72.8 million and our Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment $13.2 million. When we recorded this charge, we based our estimate on the information that existed at that time, which was the actual cost related to approximately 20 percent of the projected ultimate total of 25,000 claims expected to be reassessed. The characteristics, profile, and cost of those initial 20 percent of claims were more statistically credible than the information on which we based the initial charges in 2004 and 2005. In the third quarter of 2006, we began to experience increasingly higher monthly benefit costs related to the claim reassessment process. In analyzing the reason for this increase, our experience for two of the major assumptions used to calculate the reserves had exceeded our expectations. Those two assumptions were: (1) the number of decisions being overturned by the reassessment process, and (2) the average cost per reassessed claim. The following provides additional information to highlight the shift in assumptions: 1. From the inception of the reassessment process in January 2005 through March 2006, approximately 23 percent of the decisions made when the claim was originally submitted were overturned in the reassessment. 2. From April through September 2006, the overturn rate averaged 50 percent, with the most dramatic shift occurring in the third quarter. 3. That recent change increased the average overturn rate from 23 percent experienced through March 2006 to 36 percent at September 2006 from inception to date. 4. The shift appeared to be due to a higher than expected level of claimants whose disability deteriorated since the initial claim decision and/or whose disability now qualifies the claimant to receive Social Security benefits. 5. The average incurred cost during the period April through September 2006 was also slightly higher than the average cost associated with the period from inception through March 2006. 32 Table of Contents 6. Our assumption concerning the total number of claims projected to be reassessed was generally consistent with the levels originally assumed. Based on these changes in our emerging experience, in the third quarter of 2006 we increased our provision for the cost of the reassessment process $325.4 million before tax and $211.5 million after tax. The revised third quarter estimate was based on the cost of approximately 55 percent of the projected ultimate total of 25,000 claims expected to be reassessed. The third quarter charge was comprised of $310.4 million to reflect our revised estimate of future obligations for benefit costs for claims reopened in the reassessment and $15.0 million for additional incremental direct claim reassessment operating expenses because of the additional time now estimated to complete the process. Our best estimate of $310.4 million for the reopened claims assumed that the nature and characteristics of the approximately 45 percent remaining claims estimated to be reassessed would be similar to the average profile of the 55 percent already reviewed at that time. The third quarter charge decreased before-tax operating results for our Unum US segment group income protection line of business $291.4 million and our Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment $34.0 million. As of the end of 2006, we had completed our review of approximately 55 percent of the total claims expected to be reassessed and had information on an additional 15 percent for which we had not yet finalized our review. Our review indicated the following regarding our assumptions: 1. From October through December 2006, the overturn rate averaged 41 percent compared to 50 percent for the period April through September 2006. 2. The average overturn rate was 37 percent at December 2006 from inception to date, compared to 36 percent at September 2006, and was consistent with the assumption we used for our third quarter 2006 revision. 3. The average incurred cost during the period October through December 2006 remained consistent with the higher average cost we experienced during the period April through September 2006 and was consistent with the assumption we used for our third quarter 2006 revision. 4. Our assumption concerning the total number of claims projected to be reassessed remained generally at the level originally assumed. Our best estimate remains consistent with that supporting the third quarter charge. Based on current information, we continue to believe that our ultimate claim reassessment costs could be lower or higher by approximately $90.0 million relative to the best estimate upon which our accruals are currently based. The estimate of the lower and upper end of the range of reasonably possible additional costs is much less certain than our best estimate and uses assumptions, among the range of reasonably possible outcomes, which are more favorable to us at the lower end of the cost range and less favorable to us at the upper end of the range. We continue to monitor our claim reassessment experience and review the adequacy of the associated reserves on a quarterly basis. Unfavorable experience relative to our revised assumptions could result in additional claim reassessment costs above our current accrual and in excess of our reasonably possible range. Regulatory Investigations Beginning in 2004, several of our insurance subsidiaries insurance regulators requested information relating to the subsidiaries policies and practices on one or more aspects of broker compensation, quoting insurance business, and related matters. Additionally, we have responded to investigations about certain of these same matters by state attorneys general and the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL). Following highly publicized litigation involving the alleged practices of a major insurance broker, the NAIC has undertaken to provide a uniform Compensation Disclosure Amendment to the Producer Licensing Model Act that can be adopted by states in an effort to provide uniform guidance to insurers, brokers, and customers relating to disclosure of broker compensation. We expect there to be continued uncertainty surrounding this matter until clearer regulatory guidelines are established. In June 2004, we received a subpoena from the NYAG requesting documents and information relating to compensation arrangements between insurance brokers or intermediaries and us and our subsidiaries. As previously discussed, in November 2006 we entered into a settlement agreement on broker compensation with the NYAG in the form of an assurance of discontinuance that provides for a national restitution fund of $15.5 million and a fine of $1.9 million. We expect that the restitution fund will be fully distributed by the end of 2007. 33 Table of Contents Since October 2004, we have received subpoenas or information requests from the NYAG, a Federal Grand Jury in San Diego, the District Attorney for the County of San Diego, insurance departments, and/or other state regulatory or investigatory agencies of at least seven additional states including Connecticut, Florida, Maine, Massachusetts, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee. The subpoenas and information requests sought information regarding, among other things, quoting processes, broker compensation, solicitation activities, policies sold to state or municipal entities, and information regarding compensation arrangements with brokers, particularly with regard to Universal Life Resources, Inc. We have cooperated fully with these investigations. With respect to the states listed, other than Florida and other than those with whom settlements have been reached, we have not received any further inquiries in the past 12 months and consider those investigations to be dormant. We have also had discussions with the DOL regarding compliance with the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), relating to our interactions with insurance brokers and relating to regulations concerning insurance information provided by us to plan administrators of ERISA plans, including specifically the reporting of fees and commissions paid to agents, brokers, and others in accordance with the requirements of Schedule A of Form 5500. The DOL is pursuing an investigation of the Company concerning these issues, both generally and specifically in connection with certain brokers, including Universal Life Resources, Inc. We are cooperating fully with the DOL investigation. We previously announced that we support the full disclosure of compensation paid to both brokers and agents. We have implemented policies to facilitate customers obtaining information regarding broker compensation from their brokers. Additionally, we provide appropriate notices to customers stating our policy surrounding disclosure and provide information on our Company website about our broker compensation programs. Under these policies, any customer who wants specific broker compensation related information can obtain this information by contacting our Broker Compensation Services at a toll-free number. Other changes include requiring customer approval of compensation paid by us to the broker when the customer is also paying a fee to the broker and strengthening certain policies and procedures associated with new business and quoting activities. In addition to various regulatory agencies investigating issues relating to broker compensation and quoting practices, the Company has been named as a defendant, along with other insurers and brokers, in litigation brought by regulatory agencies or private parties in putative class actions making allegations arising out of broker compensation arrangements or quoting practices. For further information on the various lawsuits, see Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8. In February 2006, we received from the Financial Services Authority (FSA) in the U.K. the results of the FSA risk assessment review of Unum Limited. The FSA now conducts risk assessment reviews on a regular basis in the normal course of its regulatory role. We have responded to all of the recommendations contained in the 2006 review results and continue to cooperate fully with the FSA in its regular review of risks in our U.K. regulated businesses. Beginning in March 2005, several of our insurance subsidiaries received requests from various regulatory agencies seeking information relating to finite reinsurance. The requests seek information on such matters as our use of finite reinsurance, controls relating to proper accounting treatment, existence of side agreements, and maintenance of underwriting files on the reinsurance agreements. We have responded to all requests. In March 2006, we received a subpoena from the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) seeking information regarding certain reinsurance transactions and transactions regarding Non Traditional Products entered into after January 1, 2002. We are cooperating fully with the SEC in its investigation. Financing The scheduled remarketing of the senior note element of our 2003 adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) occurred in February 2006, as stipulated by the terms of the original offering, and we reset the interest rate on $575.0 million of senior notes due May 15, 2008 to 5.997%. We purchased $400.0 million of the senior notes in the remarketing which were subsequently retired. The associated write-off of deferred debt costs decreased 2006 income by $5.3 million before tax, or $3.4 million after tax. In May 2006, we settled the purchase contract element 34 Table of Contents of the units by issuing 43.3 million shares of common stock. We received proceeds of approximately $575.0 million from the transaction. In the second quarter of 2006, we purchased $50.0 million of our outstanding 7.405% junior subordinated debt securities due 2038 and $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 7.625% notes due 2011. In the fourth quarter of 2006, we purchased $32.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 6.850% notes due 2015. The costs associated with these debt reductions decreased our 2006 income approximately $20.5 million before tax, or $13.5 million after tax. In November 2006, Tailwind Holdings, a newly formed Delaware limited liability company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Unum Group, issued $130.0 million of senior, secured notes in a private offering. The payment of principal, interest, and other amounts due on the notes will be dependent principally on the receipt of dividends from Tailwind Reinsurance Company (Tailwind Re), the sole subsidiary of Tailwind Holdings. The ability of Tailwind Re to pay dividends to Tailwind Holdings will depend on its satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the reinsured claims of Unum America reinsured by Tailwind Re. None of Unum Group, Unum America, Tailwind Re, or any other affiliate of Tailwind Holdings is an obligor or guarantor on the notes. See Liquidity and Capital Resources contained herein in Item 7 and Notes 9 and 16 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 for additional information on Tailwind Holdings and Tailwind Re. Dispositions During January 2007, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell our wholly-owned subsidiary, GENEX, a leading workers compensation and medical cost containment services provider. Our growth strategy is focused on the development of our primary markets, and GENEX specialty role in case management and medical cost containment related to the workers compensation market is no longer consistent with our overall strategic direction. We expect to close the transaction during the first quarter of 2007, subject to customary closing conditions. The expected gain on the transaction is not material. GENEX is accounted for as an asset held for sale at December 31, 2006 and is reported as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 for additional information. Income Tax Included in 2006 operating results is income of $2.6 million before tax and approximately $3.9 million after tax attributable to the receipt of interest and tax refunds on prior year tax items in excess of what was previously provided. Additionally, in 2006 we recognized an income tax benefit of approximately $91.9 million as the result of the reversal of tax liabilities related primarily to group relief benefits recognized from the use of net operating losses in a foreign jurisdiction in which our businesses operate. Accounting Pronouncements Effective January 1, 2006, we adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (revised 2004) (SFAS 123(R)), Share-Based Payment , which is a revision to Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123 (SFAS 123), Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation . SFAS 123(R) focuses primarily on accounting for transactions in which an entity obtains employee service in exchange for share-based payments. Under SFAS 123(R), share-based awards that do not require future service (i.e., vesting awards) are expensed immediately. Share-based employee awards that require future service are amortized over the relevant service period. We adopted SFAS 123(R) using the modified prospective transition method. Under this method, the provisions are generally applied only to share-based awards granted after adoption. The adoption of SFAS 123(R) did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. Additional information concerning the adoption of SFAS 123(R) can be found in Notes 1 and 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8. 35 Table of Contents Effective January 1, 2006, we adopted the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Staff Position No. FAS 115-1 (FSP 115-1), The Meaning of Other-Than-Temporary Impairment and Its Application to Certain Investments , which addresses the determination of when an investment is considered impaired, whether the impairment is other than temporary, and the measurement of an impairment loss. FSP 115-1 also includes accounting considerations subsequent to the recognition of other-than-temporary impairment and requires certain disclosures about unrealized losses. The adoption of FSP 115-1 did not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. Effective December 31, 2006, we adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 158 (SFAS 158), Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R) . SFAS 158 requires an employer to recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of defined benefit pension and other postretirement plans as an asset or liability in its balance sheet and to recognize changes in that funded status through comprehensive income. Also, under SFAS 158, defined benefit pension and other postretirement plan assets and obligations are to be measured as of the date of the employer fiscal year-end. The adoption of SFAS 158, which resulted in an $84.1 million decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income in stockholders equity, had no effect on our results of operations. Statement of Position 05-1 (SOP 05-1), Accounting by Insurance Enterprises for Deferred Acquisition Costs in Connection With Modifications or Exchanges of Insurance Contracts , was issued by the Accounting Standards Executive Committee in September 2005. SOP 05-1 provides guidance on accounting by insurance enterprises for deferred acquisition costs on internal replacements of insurance and investment contracts other than those specifically described in Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 97, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises for Certain Long-Duration Contracts and for Realized Gains and Losses from the Sale of Investments. SOP 05-1 is effective for internal replacements occurring in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2006, with earlier adoption encouraged. We will adopt the provisions of SOP 05-1 effective January 1, 2007. The cumulative effect of applying the provisions of SOP 05-1 will be reported in our first quarter of 2007 financial statements as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings for 2007. We estimate that the amount of the cumulative effect adjustment, which will equal the difference between the net amount of assets and liabilities recognized in our balance sheet at December 31, 2006, prior to the application of SOP 05-1, and the net amount of assets and liabilities recognized as a result of applying these provisions, will decrease retained earnings approximately $400.0 million to $450.0 million. We estimate that the adoption of SOP 05-1 will increase our amortization expense in the range of approximately $15.0 million to $25.0 million in 2007, with an immaterial change in expense levels thereafter. Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 155 (SFAS 155), Accounting for Certain Hybrid Financial Instruments, an amendment of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards Nos. 133 (SFAS 133) and 140 (SFAS 140) , was issued in February 2006. SFAS 155: (a) permits fair value remeasurement for any hybrid financial instrument that contains an embedded derivative that otherwise would require bifurcation; (b) clarifies which interest-only strips and principal-only strips are not subject to the requirements of SFAS 133; (c) establishes a requirement to evaluate beneficial interests in securitized financial assets to identify interests that are freestanding derivatives or that are hybrid financial instruments that contain an embedded derivative requiring bifurcation; (d) clarifies that concentrations of credit risk in the form of subordination are not embedded derivatives; and, (e) eliminates restrictions on a qualifying special-purpose entity ability to hold passive derivative financial instruments that pertain to beneficial interests that are or contain a derivative financial instrument. We will adopt the provisions of SFAS 155 effective January 1, 2007. The adoption of SFAS 155 will not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. FASB Interpretation No. 48 (FIN 48), Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes, an interpretation of Statement of Financial Accounting Standard No. 109 (SFAS 109) , was issued in June 2006. FIN 48 clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise financial statements in accordance with SFAS 109. Unlike SFAS 109, FIN 48 prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. Additionally, FIN 48 provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure, and transition. We will adopt the provisions of FIN 48 effective January 1, 2007. The cumulative effect of applying the provisions of FIN 48 will be reported in our first quarter of 2007 financial statements as an adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings for 2007. We estimate that the amount of the cumulative effect adjustment, 36 Table of Contents which will equal the difference between the net amount of assets and liabilities recognized in our balance sheet at December 31, 2006, prior to the application of FIN 48, and the net amount of assets and liabilities recognized as a result of applying these provisions, will increase retained earnings by up to $25.0 million. Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 (SFAS 157), Fair Value Measurements , was issued in September 2006. SFAS 157 defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. We will adopt the provisions of SFAS 157 effective January 1, 2008. The adoption of SFAS 157 will not have a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. 2005 Significant Transactions and Events California Settlement Agreement and Amendment of the Multistate Market Conduct Examination Settlement Agreements In October 2005, certain of our insurance subsidiaries entered into a settlement agreement with the California DOI in connection with a market conduct examination and investigation of the subsidiaries disability claims handling practices. The California DOI had chosen not to join the fourth quarter of 2004 multistate settlement agreements our insurance subsidiaries entered into with state insurance regulators of 48 states upon conclusion of a multistate market conduct examination. See further discussion under Settlement of Multistate Market Conduct Examination contained herein. As part of the settlement with the California DOI, we paid a civil penalty of $8.0 million and agreed to change certain practices and policy provisions related to our California business. The settlement also incorporates claims handling practices previously covered by the multistate settlement agreements and includes certain additional claims handling changes. In entering the settlement, we did not agree with the allegations and characterization of our past claims handling practices made by the California DOI. During the last several years, we have undertaken broad changes designed to improve the quality of claims decisions and our service levels to policyholders, including changes made as a result of the multistate settlement agreements. Because of this, we do not believe that the California DOI allegations or its market conduct examination report provide an accurate portrayal of our claim practices today. Under the terms of the settlement, we changed certain provisions specific to California disability policies. Additionally as part of the settlement, we received approval from the California DOI for the use of new individual and group disability policy forms, which became available for sale on November 1, 2005. The California settlement also incorporates the claim reassessment process contained in the 2004 multistate settlement agreements. California claimants were included in the 2004 multistate settlement agreements and could choose to participate in that claim reassessment process even though California did not join the multistate settlement agreements. Under the California agreement, reassessment notices are being mailed to approximately 26,000 individuals whose claims were denied or terminated between January 1, 1997, and September 30, 2005. Many of these individuals had already received reassessment notices under the multistate settlement agreements. Additionally, as part of the California agreement, an individual whose claim denial or termination is upheld by our reassessment unit may request an independent review by a member of a panel established for that purpose. Following such review, the final decision on the claim is that of our reassessment unit; however, if there is information that the reviewer believes is appropriate relating to the handling of the claim, the reviewer may add a report to the claim file. We amended the multistate settlement agreements to include mailing a notice of eligibility to participate in the claim reassessment process to approximately 29,500 individuals whose claims were denied or terminated between January 1, 1997, and December 31, 1999. Under the original multistate settlement agreements, claimants during this period could request participation in the reassessment process, but they were not sent a notice. Those claimants who were eligible to participate but did not receive notice pursuant to the amendment remained eligible to request participation until June 30, 2006. 37 Table of Contents Separately, we are offering to reassess private label, acquired, and reinsured block claims, as well as claims administered on behalf of certain employers from January 1, 1997, through January 18, 2005 (and through September 30, 2005 for California residents). These approximately 24,000 claims were not included in the 2004 multistate settlement agreements, but the offer being made generally follows the reassessment procedures contained in those agreements. Based on the settlement agreement and related matters as they existed at that time period, in the third quarter of 2005 we recorded a charge of $75.0 million before tax, or $51.6 million after tax, comprised of four elements: $14.3 million of incremental direct operating expenses to conduct the reassessment process; $37.3 million for benefit costs and reserves from claims reopened from the reassessment; $15.4 million for additional benefit costs and reserves for claims already incurred and currently in inventory that were anticipated as a result of the claim process changes being implemented; and the $8.0 million civil penalty. The charge decreased before-tax operating results for the Unum US segment group income protection line of business and supplemental and voluntary lines of business $37.4 million and $3.3 million, respectively, and the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment $34.3 million. The ongoing costs of changes in the claims handling process and governance improvements have subsequently been included in our operating expenses as incurred. See 2006 Significant Transactions and Events Revised Claim Reassessment Reserve Estimates for a discussion of subsequent increases to our 2005 charge. Acquisitions and Dispositions During 2005, GENEX acquired Independent Review Services, Inc., a provider of medical diagnostic networks and independent medical examinations, at a price of $3.5 million. During 2005, Unum UK completed the sale of its Netherlands branch. The gain on the sale was approximately $4.0 million after tax. During 2005, we disposed of our remaining 40 percent ownership position in our Argentinean operation and recognized an after tax gain of approximately $0.4 million. Income Tax Under the Life Insurance Company Tax Act of 1959, U.S. stock life insurance companies were required to maintain a policyholders surplus account containing the accumulated portion of income which had not been subjected to income tax in the year earned. The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 required that no future amounts be added after 1983 to the policyholders surplus account and that any future distributions to shareholders from the account would become subject to federal income tax at the general corporate federal income tax rate then in effect. During 2004, the Homeland Investment Act of 2004 was enacted. The Homeland Investment Act of 2004 provided in part, that distributions from policyholders surplus accounts during 2005 and 2006 would be taxed. The amount of the policyholders surplus accounts of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries at December 31, 2004, was approximately $228.8 million. Distributions made during 2005 by these life insurance subsidiaries, including dividend distributions, were deemed to occur first from the policyholders surplus accounts. As a result, our U.S. life insurance subsidiaries distributed as dividends the remaining balance of their policyholders surplus accounts to the holding company during 2005. This resulted in the elimination of a future potential tax of approximately $80.1 million which had not previously been provided for in current or deferred taxes because management considered the conditions under which such a tax would be paid to be remote. This will also allow us to engage in transactions in the future without concern for triggering a tax liability related to distributions from the policyholders surplus accounts. In April 2005, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) completed its examination of tax years 1999 through 2001 and issued its revenue agent report (RAR). Income tax liabilities of approximately $32.0 million that related primarily to interest on the timing of expense deductions were released in the first quarter of 2005, all of which was reflected as a reduction to income tax expense. In the fourth quarter of 2005, we paid the IRS proposed adjustments for its 1999 through 2001 tax years and subsequently filed claims for refund on disputed issues. 38 Table of Contents In the third quarter of 2005, we recognized an income tax benefit of approximately $10.8 million related to the finalization of income tax reviews of our U.K. subsidiaries. During the fourth quarter of 2005, we repatriated $454.8 million in unremitted foreign earnings from our U.K. subsidiaries under the Homeland Investment Act of 2004. In connection with the repatriation, we recorded current taxes payable on such previously unremitted foreign earnings of approximately $15.3 million and recorded a tax benefit of approximately $18.6 million as a result of the reversal of the deferred tax liability related to unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, both of which were included in the results reported for 2005. Financing During 2005, we repaid $227.0 million of maturing debt. In conjunction with the repatriation, in November 2005, we completed a long-term debt offering, issuing $400.0 million of 6.85% senior notes due November 15, 2015. Closed Block Reinsurance Recapture from Centre Life Reinsurance Ltd. During 2005, we recaptured a closed block of individual income protection business that included approximately $1.6 billion in invested assets and $185.0 million of annual premium. The effective date of the recapture was August 8, 2005. Prior to recapture, the reinsurance contract had an embedded derivative that required the bifurcation of the derivative from the basic reinsurance contract. The fair value attributed to the embedded derivative was reported in fixed maturity securities, and the change in the fair value of this embedded derivative was reported as a realized investment gain or loss during the period of change. At the date of recapture, the embedded derivative was terminated, and the time value component of this derivative was recognized as a realized investment loss of $9.4 million before tax. The underlying operating results of the reinsurance contract, prior to recapture, were reflected in other income. The recapture therefore did not have a material impact on operating income for the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment. On a statutory basis of reporting, the recapture increased statutory surplus $57.5 million in Unum America. The recapture did not have a material impact on our targeted RBC objectives for our U.S. insurance subsidiaries. 2004 Significant Transactions and Events Settlement of Multistate Market Conduct Examination Our U.S. insurance subsidiaries experienced increased market conduct examinations by state insurance departments during 2002 and 2003 focused specifically on our disability claims handling policies and practices. The insurance commissioners of Maine, Massachusetts, and Tennessee, the states in which our three principal U.S. insurance subsidiaries are domiciled, initiated a multistate targeted market conduct examination in September 2003 that focused on the disability claims handling policies and practices of these subsidiaries. This multistate examination resulted in a report and regulatory settlement agreements that became effective on December 21, 2004, which was agreed to by 48 states and the District of Columbia. The examination report made no findings of violations of law or regulations. The examination identified areas of concern which became the focus of certain changes to our disability claims handling operations. The settlement agreements also included a reassessment of certain previously denied or closed claims, additional corporate and board governance, and payment of a fine in the amount of $15.0 million that was allocated among the states and jurisdictions participating in the agreements. The agreements will remain in place until the later of January 1, 2007, or the completion of an examination of claims handling practices and an examination of the reassessment process, both of which will be conducted by the lead state regulators. The settlement agreements also provide for a contingent fine of up to $145.0 million on the Company U.S. insurance subsidiaries in the event that we fail to satisfactorily meet the performance standards in the settlement agreements relating to the examinations referred to above. The parties to the agreements have subsequently agreed to extend the reassessment process until December 31, 2007, and we expect to conclude the claim reassessment process by that time. The examinations will commence before or after that date. We believe that due to the changes we have made 39 Table of Contents to our claims operations to enhance our oversight functions, it is not probable that we will fail to meet the performance standards in the agreements when these examinations are concluded. In addition, the DOL, which had been conducting an inquiry relating to certain ERISA plans, joined the settlement agreements. The NYAG, which had engaged in its own investigation of our claims handling practices, notified us that it supported the settlement and closed its investigation on this issue. The reassessment process is a principal feature of the settlement agreements. Under the agreements, we are offering to reassess any individual or group long-term disability claim that was denied or closed since January 1, 2000, except for specific categories of closures such as settlement, death, or payment of maximum benefits. The potential pool of claims decided over the nearly five year period that are eligible for reassessment if the claimant elects to participate is approximately 215,000 claims. However, almost half of these claims are subject to a preliminary determination as to whether the claimant seeking reassessment returned to work under the policy, in which case the claim is not eligible for further reassessment. We will also accept requests for reassessment from other individuals whose claims were closed after January 1, 1997, and through December 31, 1999, subject to the same closure exceptions as the group receiving notice, and from claimants who dispute the category for closure if it affects their eligibility for reassessment. See previous discussion under 2005 Significant Transactions and Events California Settlement Agreement and Amendment of the Multistate Market Conduct Examination Settlement Agreements contained herein pertaining to subsequent amendments to the multistate settlement agreements reassessment process. In the fourth quarter of 2004, we recorded a charge related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination of $127.0 million before tax, or $87.8 million after tax, comprised of four elements: $27.5 million of incremental direct operating expenses to conduct the two-year reassessment process; $44.0 million for benefit costs and reserves from claims reopened from the reassessment; $40.5 million for additional benefit costs and reserves for claims already incurred and currently in inventory that are anticipated as a result of the claim process changes being implemented; and the $15.0 million fine. The charge decreased before-tax operating results for the Unum US segment group income protection and individual income protection recently issued lines of business $116.7 million and $1.7 million, respectively, and the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment $8.6 million. See 2006 Significant Transactions and Events Revised Claim Reassessment Reserve Estimates for a discussion of subsequent increases to our 2004 charge. Restructuring of Individual Income Protection Closed Block Business In the first quarter of 2004, we restructured our individual income protection closed block business wherein three of our insurance subsidiaries entered into reinsurance agreements to reinsure approximately 66.7 percent of potential future losses that occur above a specified retention limit. The individual income protection closed block reserves in these three subsidiaries comprise approximately 90 percent of our overall retained risk in the closed block of individual income protection. The reinsurance agreements effectively provide approximately 60 percent reinsurance coverage for our overall consolidated risk above the retention limit, which equaled approximately $8.0 billion in existing statutory reserves at the date of the transaction. The maximum risk limit for the reinsurer was approximately $783.0 million initially and is now estimated to grow to approximately $2.4 billion over time, after which any further losses will revert to us. These reinsurance transactions were effective as of April 1, 2004. We transferred cash equal to $521.6 million of reserves ceded in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment plus an additional $185.8 million in cash for a before-tax prepaid cost of insurance which was deferred and is being amortized into earnings over the expected claim payment period covered under our retention limit. We retained the higher yielding investments historically associated with these reserves and redeployed these investments to other lines of business. In conjunction with the restructuring of the individual income protection closed block business, effective January 1, 2004, we modified our reporting segments to include a separate segment for this business. The reporting, monitoring, and management of the closed block of individual income protection business as a discrete segment was consistent with our financial restructuring and separation of this business from the lines of business which actively market new products. In the past, this business had been reported in combination with the individual income protection recently issued line of business. Prior to 2004, detailed separate financial metrics and models were 40 Table of Contents unavailable to appropriately manage this block of business separately from the recently issued individual income protection block of business. The separation of the closed block business into a separate reporting segment required us to perform, separately for the individual income protection closed block business and individual income protection recently issued business, impairment testing for goodwill and loss recognition testing for the recoverability of deferred policy acquisition costs and value of business acquired. As required under GAAP, prior to the change in reporting segments, these tests were performed for the individual income protection line of business on a combined basis. The testing indicated impairment of the individual income protection closed block deferred policy acquisition costs, value of business acquired, and goodwill balances of $282.2 million, $367.1 million, and $207.1 million, respectively. These impairment charges, $856.4 million before tax and $629.1 million after tax, were recorded in the first quarter of 2004. Also as part of the restructuring, we analyzed the reserve assumptions related to our individual income protection closed block reserves as a stand-alone segment. Previously these reserves were analyzed for the individual income protection line of business on a combined basis. Included in the analysis was a review of morbidity assumptions, primarily claim resolution rates, and claim reserve discount rate assumptions. Based upon this analysis, we lowered the claim reserve discount rate to reflect the segmentation of assets between the individual income protection recently issued business and the individual income protection closed block business, the change in our investment portfolio yield rates during the first quarter of 2004, our expectation of future investment portfolio yield rates, and our desire to maintain the relationship between the claim reserve discount rate and the investment portfolio yield rate for the individual income protection closed block at our long-term objective. The segmentation of the investment portfolio was necessary to ensure appropriate matching of the duration of the assets and the related policy liabilities. Based on this analysis, in the first quarter of 2004 we increased the individual income protection closed block claim reserves by $110.6 million before tax, or $71.9 million after tax, to reflect our current estimate of future benefit obligations. The first quarter 2004 change represented a 1.2 percent increase in total net Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment reserves as of March 31, 2004, which equaled $9.530 billion prior to this increase. Financing As part of the restructuring, in May 2004, we issued 12.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units in a private offering for $300.0 million. We subsequently registered the privately placed securities for resale by the private investors. Proceeds from the offering were used to restore our U.S. insurance subsidiaries RBC to the approximate overall level that existed prior to the individual income protection closed block reinsurance transaction and to provide additional liquidity at the holding company level. Acquisitions and Dispositions In the first quarter of 2004, Unum UK became responsible for the ongoing administration and management of the United Kingdom portion of the group income protection claims portfolio of Swiss Life (UK) plc (Swiss Life), and Swiss Life reinsured this portfolio to Unum UK. Unum UK also became a multi-national pooling partner for Swiss Life Insurance & Pension Company with respect to business written in the United Kingdom. With the goal of focusing on our core operations, in 2004 we sold our Japanese operation, Unum Japan Accident Insurance Co., Ltd. We also entered into an agreement with the buyer to reinsure certain existing income protection business and intended to have a continuing presence in these operations for at least one year. We wrote down the book value of the Japan operations to the estimated fair value less cost to sell during 2003 and at that time recognized an impairment loss of $1.2 million before tax and $0.8 million after tax. We also recognized a tax benefit of $6.8 million, for a net after-tax gain of $6.0 million in 2003. During the second quarter of 2004, we completed the sale of our Canadian branch and reported a loss of $70.9 million after tax on the sale. On a statutory basis of reporting, our U.S. insurance subsidiaries reported a 2004 gain of $250.6 million after tax on the sale of the branch. Additionally, the transaction resulted in an approximate 29 point improvement in the RBC ratio for our U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis. Financial results for the Canadian branch are reported as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial 41 Table of Contents statements. See Discontinued Operations contained herein in Item 7 and Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our discontinued operations. In 2004, GENEX acquired Integrated Benefits Management, a provider of case management services, at a purchase price of $0.7 million. In conjunction with the restructuring of our Argentinean operation, we reduced our ownership position in this operation to 40 percent during 2004 and reported a before-tax loss of $4.7 million. We also recognized from this transaction a tax benefit of $7.4 million, for a net after-tax gain of $2.7 million on the 2004 transaction. Income Tax During 2004, we recognized tax benefits as a result of settlements with the IRS of certain tax issues (primarily related to insurance tax reserves and investment losses) affecting the federal income tax liability related to our 1996 through 1998 tax years. During the fourth quarter of 2004, we obtained a judgment in refund litigation for federal income tax paid for tax year 1984, plus interest, and as a result became entitled to a refund of tax plus interest for all tax years subsequent to tax year 1984 in which the IRS took inconsistent positions on the deductibility of insurance tax reserves that were the subject of the litigation and for which we paid tax based on the IRS inconsistent positions. Included in 2004 operating results is income of $14.0 million before tax and approximately $59.3 million after tax attributable to these prior year tax items. Critical Accounting Estimates We prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported in our financial statements and accompanying notes. The accounting estimates we deem to be most critical to our results of operations and balance sheets are those related to reserves for policy and contract benefits, deferred policy acquisition costs, investments, and income taxes. Estimates and assumptions could change in the future as more information becomes known, which could impact the amounts reported and disclosed in our financial statements. For additional information, refer to our significant accounting policies in Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. Reserves for Policy and Contract Benefits Our largest liabilities are reserves for claims that we estimate we will eventually pay to our policyholders. The two primary categories of reserves are policy reserves for claims not yet incurred and claim reserves for claims that have been incurred or are estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to us. These reserves equaled $36.9 billion and $35.0 billion at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, or approximately 80 percent of our total liabilities. Reserves ceded to reinsurers were $7.6 billion and $7.3 billion at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively, and are reported as a reinsurance recoverable in our consolidated balance sheets. Policy Reserves Policy reserves are established in the same period we issue a policy and equal the difference between projected future policy benefits and future premiums, allowing a margin for expenses and profit. These reserves relate primarily to our traditional non interest-sensitive products, including our individual income protection, individual and group long-term care, and voluntary workplace benefits products in our Unum US segment; individual income protection products in our Unum UK segment; income protection and cancer and critical illness policies in our Colonial segment; and, the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment products. The reserves are 42 Table of Contents calculated based on assumptions that were appropriate at the date the policy was issued and are not subsequently modified unless the policy reserves become inadequate (i.e., loss recognition occurs). Persistency assumptions are based on our actual historical experience adjusted for future expectations. Claim incidence and claim resolution rate assumptions related to mortality and morbidity are based on industry standards adjusted as appropriate to reflect our actual experience and future expectations. Discount rate assumptions are based on our current and expected net investment returns. In establishing policy reserves, we use assumptions that reflect our best estimate while considering the potential for adverse variances in actual future experience, which results in a total policy reserve balance that has an embedded reserve for adverse deviation. We do not, however, establish an explicit and separate reserve as a provision for adverse deviation from our assumptions. We perform loss recognition tests on our policy reserves annually, or more frequently if appropriate, using best estimate assumptions as of the date of the test, without a provision for adverse deviation. We group the policy reserves for each major product line within a segment when we perform the loss recognition tests. If the policy reserves determined using these best estimate assumptions are higher than our existing policy reserves net of any deferred policy acquisition cost balance, the existing policy reserves are increased or deferred policy acquisition costs are reduced to immediately recognize the deficiency. Thereafter, the policy reserves for the product line are calculated using the same method we used for the loss recognition testing, referred to as the gross premium valuation method, wherein we use our best estimate as of the gross premium valuation (loss recognition) date rather than the initial policy issue date to determine the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay and the expected future gross premiums we will receive. We maintain policy reserves for a policy for as long as the policy remains in force, even after a separate claim reserve is established. Policy reserves for Unum US, Unum UK, and Colonial products, which at December 31, 2006 represented approximately 26.5 percent, 0.2 percent, and 8.1 percent, respectively, of our total gross policy reserves, are determined using the net level premium method as prescribed by GAAP. In applying this method, we use, as applicable by product type, morbidity and mortality incidence rate assumptions, claim resolution rate assumptions, and policy persistency assumptions, among others, to determine our expected future claim payments and expected future premium income. We then apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay and the expected future premiums we will receive, with a provision for profit allowed. Policy reserves for our Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment, which at December 31, 2006, represented approximately 14.1 percent of our total gross policy reserves, are determined using the gross premium valuation method based on assumptions established as of January 1, 2004, the date of loss recognition. Key assumptions are policy persistency, claim incidence, claim resolution rates, commission rates, and maintenance expense rates. We then apply an interest, or discount, rate to determine the present value of the expected future claims, commissions, and expenses we will pay as well as the expected future premiums we will receive. There is no provision for profit. The interest rate is based on our expected net investment returns on the investment portfolio supporting the reserves for this segment. Under the gross premium valuation method, we do not include an embedded provision for the risk of adverse deviation from these assumptions. Gross premium valuation assumptions do not change after the date of loss recognition unless reserves are again determined to be deficient. We perform loss recognition tests on the policy reserves for this block of business quarterly. See our discussion entitled Restructuring of Individual Income Protection Closed Block Business under 2004 Significant Transactions and Events contained herein for a discussion of our reserve assumption changes as of January 1, 2004. The Other segment includes products no longer actively marketed, the majority of which have been reinsured. Policy reserves for this segment represent $6.4 billion on a gross basis, or approximately 51.1 percent, of our total policy reserves. We have ceded $4.8 billion of the related policy reserves to reinsurers. The ceded reserve balance is reported in our consolidated balance sheets as a reinsurance recoverable. We continue to service a block of group pension products, which we have not ceded, and the policy reserves for these products are based on expected 43 Table of Contents mortality rates and retirement rates. Expected future payments are discounted at interest rates reflecting the anticipated investment returns for the assets supporting the liabilities. Claim Reserves Claim reserves are established when a claim is incurred or is estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported (IBNR) to us and, as prescribed by GAAP, equals our long-term best estimate of the present value of the liability for future claim payments and claim adjustment expenses. A claim reserve is based on actual known facts regarding the claim, such as the benefits available under the applicable policy, the covered benefit period, and the age and occupation of the claimant, as well as assumptions derived from our actual historical experience and expected future changes in experience for factors such as the claim duration and discount rate. Reserves for IBNR claims, similar to incurred claim reserves, include our assumptions for claim duration and discount rates but because we do not yet know the facts regarding the specific claims, are also based on historical incidence rate assumptions, including claim reporting patterns, the average cost of claims, and the expected volumes of incurred claims. Our incurred claim reserves and IBNR claim reserves do not include any provision for the risk of adverse deviation from our assumptions. Claim reserves, unlike policy reserves, are subject to revision as current claim experience and projections of future factors affecting claim experience change. Each quarter we review our emerging experience to ensure that our claim reserves are appropriate. If we believe, based on our actual experience and our view of future events, that our long-term assumptions need to be modified, we adjust our reserves accordingly with a charge or credit to our current period income. Multiple estimation methods exist to establish claim reserve liabilities, with each method having its own advantages and disadvantages. Available reserving methods utilized to calculate claim reserves include the tabular reserve method, the paid development method, the incurred loss development method, the count and severity method, and the expected claim cost method. No singular method is better than the others in all situations and for all product lines. The estimation methods we have chosen are those that we believe produce the most reliable reserves at that time. Claim reserves supporting our Unum US group and individual income protection and group and individual long-term care lines of business and our Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment represent approximately 38.5 percent and 42.1 percent, respectively, of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2006. We use a tabular reserve methodology for group and individual long-term income protection and group and individual long-term care claims that have been reported. Under the tabular reserve methodology, reserves for reported claims are based on certain characteristics of the actual reported claimants, such as age, length of time disabled, and medical diagnosis. We believe the tabular reserve method is the most accurate to calculate long-term liabilities and allows us to use the most available known facts about each claim. IBNR claim reserves for our long-term products are calculated using the count and severity method using historical patterns of the claims to be reported and the associated claim costs. For group short-term income protection products, an estimate of the value of future payments to be made on claims already submitted, as well as IBNR claims, is determined in aggregate rather than on the individual claimant basis that we use for our long-term products, using historical patterns of claim incidence as well as historical patterns of aggregate claim resolution rates. The average length of time between the event triggering a claim under a policy and the final resolution of those claims is much shorter for these products than for our long-term liabilities and results in less estimation variability. Claim reserves supporting the Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment products represent approximately 3.9 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2006. Claim reserves for these products are related primarily to death claims reported but not yet paid, IBNR death claims, and a liability for waiver of premium benefits. The death claim reserve is based on the actual face amount to be paid, the IBNR reserve is calculated using the count and severity method, and the waiver of premium benefits reserve is calculated using the tabular reserve methodology. 44 Table of Contents Claim reserves supporting our Unum UK segment represent approximately 10.4 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2006, and are calculated using generally the same methodology that we use for Unum US income protection and group life reserves. The persistency rates we assume in calculating claim reserves for this line of business are based on standard United Kingdom industry experience, adjusted for Unum UK own experience. The majority of the Colonial segment lines of business have short-term benefits, which have less estimation variability than our long-term products because of the shorter claim payout period. Our claim reserves for Colonial lines of business, which approximate 1.4 percent of our total claim reserves at December 31, 2006, are predominantly determined using the incurred loss development method based on our own experience. The incurred loss development method uses the historical patterns of payments by loss date to predict future claim payments for each loss date. Where the incurred loss development method may not be appropriate, we estimate the incurred claims using an expected claim cost per policy or other measure of exposure. The key assumptions for claim reserves for the Colonial lines of business are: 1) the timing, rate, and amount of estimated future claim payments; and 2) the estimated expenses associated with the payment of claims. The following table displays policy reserves, incurred claim reserves, and IBNR claim reserves by major product line, with the summation of the policy reserves and claim reserves shown both gross and net of the associated reinsurance recoverable. Incurred claim reserves represent reserves determined for each incurred claim and also include estimated amounts for litigation expenses and other expenses associated with the payment of the claims as well as provisions for claims which we estimate will be reopened for our long-term care products. IBNR claim reserves include provisions for incurred but not reported claims and a provision for reopened claims for our income protection products. The IBNR and reopen claim reserves for our income protection products are developed and maintained in aggregate based on historical monitoring that has only been on a combined basis. 45 Table of Contents (in millions of dollars) December 31, 2006 Gross Total Policy Reserves % Claim Reserves Reinsurance Total Incurred IBNR % Total (1) Ceded Net Group Income Protection $ % $ 7,563.0 $ 790.3 34.3 % $ 8,353.3 $ 101.5 $ 8,251.8 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 63.1 0.5 736.5 202.2 3.9 1,001.8 2.7 999.1 Individual Income Protection Recently Issued 431.8 3.4 718.9 71.5 3.3 1,222.2 76.7 1,145.5 Long-term Care 2,067.2 16.4 195.0 31.6 0.9 2,293.8 57.1 2,236.7 Voluntary Workplace Benefits 787.9 6.2 22.3 36.3 0.2 846.5 13.3 833.2 Unum US Segment 3,350.0 26.5 9,235.7 1,131.9 42.6 13,717.6 251.3 13,466.3 Unum UK Segment 28.9 0.2 2,252.8 286.4 10.4 2,568.1 142.4 2,425.7 Colonial Segment 1,021.3 8.1 234.5 100.8 1.4 1,356.6 36.7 1,319.9 Individual Income Protection Closed Block Segment 1,777.8 14.1 9,794.9 443.9 42.1 12,016.6 1,498.7 10,517.9 Other Segment 6,444.3 51.1 561.4 282.1 3.5 7,287.8 5,686.4 1,601.4 Subtotal, Excl. Unrealized Adj. $ 12,622.3 100.0 % $ 22,079.3 $ 2,245.1 100.0 % $ 36,946.7 $ 7,615.5 29,331.2 Unrealized Adj. to Reserves for Unrealized Investment Gains 963.1 Consolidated $ 30,294.3 December 31, 2005 Gross Total Policy Reserves % Claim Reserves Reinsurance Total Incurred IBNR % Total (1) Ceded Net Group Income Protection $ % $ 7,207.9 $ 698.6 34.3 % $ 7,906.5 $ 112.4 $ 7,794.1 Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 63.2 0.5 669.9 237.6 3.9 970.7 4.5 966.2 Individual Income Protection Recently Issued 393.7 3.3 604.8 77.8 3.0 1,076.3 70.3 1,006.0 Long-term Care 1,683.9 14.1 165.2 32.1 0.9 1,881.2 52.5 1,828.7 Voluntary Workplace Benefits 734.8 6.2 23.0 32.3 0.2 790.1 12.6 777.5 Unum US Segment 2,875.6 24.1 8,670.8 1,078.4 42.3 12,624.8 252.3 12,372.5 Unum UK Segment 24.4 0.2 1,866.8 242.9 9.2 2,134.1 117.9 2,016.2 Colonial Segment 955.9 8.0 224.3 83.7 1.3 1,263.9 38.3 1,225.6 Individual Income Protection Closed Block Segment 1,880.0 15.8 9,588.5 428.9 43.5 11,897.4 1,492.4 10,405.0 Other Segment 6,200.0 51.9 623.8 239.6 3.7 7,063.4 5,436.1 1,627.3 Subtotal, Excl. Unrealized Adj. $ 11,935.9 100.0 % $ 20,974.2 $ 2,073.5 100.0 % $ 34,983.6 $ 7,337.0 27,646.6 Unrealized Adj. to Reserves for Unrealized Investment Gains 1,121.3 Consolidated $ 28,767.9 (1) Equals the sum of "Policy and Contract Benefits" and "Reserves for Future Policy and Contract Benefits," as reported in our consolidated balance sheets. 46 Table of Contents Key Assumptions The calculation of policy and claim reserves involves numerous assumptions, but the primary assumptions used to calculate reserves are (1) the discount rate, (2) the claim resolution rate, and (3) the claim incidence rate for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves. Of these assumptions, our discount rate and claim resolution rate assumptions have historically had the most significant effects on our level of reserves because many of our product lines provide benefit payments over an extended period of time. 1. The discount rate , which is used in calculating both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the interest rate that we use to discount future claim payments to determine the present value. A higher discount rate produces a lower reserve. If the discount rate is higher than our future investment returns, our invested assets will not earn enough investment income to support our future claim payments. In this case, the reserves may eventually be insufficient. We set our assumptions based on our current and expected future investment yield of the assets supporting the reserves, considering current and expected future market conditions. If the investment yield on new investments that are purchased is below or above the investment yield of the existing investment portfolio, it is likely that the discount rate assumption on new claims will be established below or above the discount rate assumption on existing claims to reflect the new investment yield. 2. The claim resolution rate , used for both policy reserves and incurred and IBNR claim reserves, is the probability that a disability claim will close due to recovery or death of the insured. It is important because it is used to estimate how long benefits will be paid for a claim. Estimated resolution rates that are set too high will result in reserves that are lower than they need to be to pay the claim benefits over time. Claim resolution assumptions involve many factors, including the cause of disability, the policyholder age, the type of contractual benefits provided, and the time since initially becoming disabled. We use our own claim experience to develop our claim resolution assumptions. These assumptions are established separately for the probability of death and the probability of recovery from disability. Our studies review actual claim resolution experience over a number of years, with more weight placed on our experience in the more recent years. We also consider any expected future changes in claim resolution experience. 3. The incidence rate , used for policy reserves and IBNR claim reserves, is the rate at which new claims are submitted to us. The incidence rate is affected by many factors including the age of the insured, the insured occupation or industry, the benefit plan design, and certain external factors such as consumer confidence and levels of unemployment. We establish our incidence assumption using a historical review of actual incidence results along with an outlook of future incidence expectations. Establishing reserve assumptions is complex and involves many factors. Reserves, particularly for policies offering insurance coverage for long-term disabilities, are dependent on numerous assumptions other than just those presented in the preceding discussion. The impact of internal and external events, such as changes in claims management procedures, economic trends such as the rate of unemployment and the level of consumer confidence, the emergence of new diseases, new trends and developments in medical treatments, and legal trends and legislative changes, among other factors, will influence claim incidence and resolution rates. Reserve assumptions differ by product line and by policy type within a product line. Additionally, in any period and over time, our actual experience may have a positive or negative variance from our long-term assumptions, either singularly or collectively, and these variances may offset each other. We test the overall adequacy of our reserves using all assumptions and with a long-term view of our expected experience over the life of a block of business rather than test just one or a few assumptions independently that may be aberrant over a short period of time. Therefore it is not possible to bifurcate the assumptions to evaluate the sensitivity of a change in each assumption, but rather in the aggregate by product line. We have presented in the following section an overview of our trend analysis for key assumptions and the results of variability in our assumptions, in aggregate, for the reserves which we believe are reasonably possible to have a material impact on our future financial results if actual claims yield a materially different amount than what we currently expect and have reserved for, either favorable or unfavorable. 47 Table of Contents Trends in Key Assumptions Because our actual experience regarding persistency and claim incidence has varied very little from our policy reserve and IBNR claim reserve assumptions, we have had minimal adjustments to our persistency assumptions and claim incidence assumptions during 2005 and 2006. Generally, we do not expect our mortality and morbidity claim incidence trends or our persistency trends to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time. Actual interest rates and the assumptions we use to discount our reserves have generally trended downward for all segments and product lines during 2005 and 2006. Reserve discount rate assumptions for new policies and new claims have been adjusted to reflect our current and expected net investment returns. Changes in our discount rate assumptions tend to occur gradually over a longer period of time because of the long duration investment portfolio needed to support the reserves for the majority of our lines of business. The mortality rate experience and the retirement rate experience for our block of group pension products have both remained stable and consistent with expectations. Claim resolution rates have a greater chance of significant variability in a shorter period of time than our other reserve assumptions. These rates are reviewed on a quarterly basis for the death and recovery components separately. Claim resolution rates in our Unum US segment group and individual long-term income protection product lines and our Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment have over the last several years exhibited some variability. Relative to the resolution rate we expect to experience over the life of the block of business, actual quarterly rates during 2004 through 2006 have varied by +/-7 percent in our Unum US group long-term income protection and between +2 and -4 percent in our Unum US individual income protection recently issued line of business and in our Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment. Claim resolution rates are very sensitive to operational and environmental changes and can be volatile over short periods of time. We consider the recent variability in our claim resolution rate experience to be primarily the result of a temporary reduction in the operating effectiveness of our Unum US and Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment claims management performance. It is possible that this variability could continue into 2007, but we believe that the actual rates in 2007 will more align with our expected rates. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period. We monitor and test our reserves for adequacy relative to all of our assumptions in the aggregate. In our estimation, scenarios based on reasonably possible variations in each of our reserve assumptions, when modeled together in aggregate, could produce a potential result, either positive or negative, in our Unum US group long-term income protection line of business that would change our reserve balance by +/- 2.4 percent. Using our actual claim reserve balance at December 31, 2006, this variation would have resulted in an approximate change (either positive or negative) of $200 million to our claim reserves. Using the same sensitivity analysis approach for our Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment, the claim reserve balance could potentially vary by +1.9 percent to -2.4 percent of our reported balance, which at December 31, 2006, would have resulted in an approximate reserve change in the range of $200 million lower claim reserves to $250 million higher claim reserves. The major contributor to the variance for both the group long-term income protection line of business and the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment is the claim resolution rate. We believe that these ranges provide a reasonable estimate of the possible changes in reserve balances for those product lines where we believe it is possible that variability in the assumptions, in the aggregate, could result in a material impact on our reserve levels, but we record our reserves based on our long-term best estimate. Because these product lines have long-term claim payout periods, there is a greater potential for significant variability in claim costs, either positive or negative. 48 Table of Contents Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs (DAC) We defer certain costs incurred in acquiring new business and amortize (expense) these costs over the life of the related policies. Deferred costs include certain commissions, other agency compensation, selection and policy issue expenses, and field expenses. Acquisition costs that do not vary with the production of new business, such as commissions on group products which are generally level throughout the life of the policy, are excluded from deferral. Over 90 percent of our DAC relates to traditional non interest-sensitive products, and we amortize DAC in proportion to the premium income we expect to receive over the life of the policies in accordance with the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 60, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises . Key assumptions used in developing the future amortization of DAC are future persistency and future premium income. We use our own historical experience and expectation of the future performance of our businesses in determining the expected persistency and premium income. The estimated premium income in the early years of the amortization period is generally higher than in the later years due to higher anticipated policy persistency in the early years, which results in a greater proportion of the costs being amortized in the early years of the life of the policy. During the years 2006, 2005, and 2004, our key assumptions used to develop the future amortization have not changed materially. We will adopt the provisions of SOP 05-1 effective January 1, 2007. We estimate that the adoption of SOP 05-1 will shorten the amortization period of our Unum US and Unum UK group income protection, group life, and group accidental death and dismemberment products from that shown below to approximately five to six years, with an estimated 20 percent to 25 percent of the initial deferral remaining at the end of year three, on average, for those products. We do not expect changes in the amortization periods for the other product lines. Generally, we do not expect our persistency or interest rates to change significantly in the short-term, and to the extent that these trends do change, we expect those changes to be gradual over a longer period of time. Presented below are our assumptions, prior to the adoption of SOP 05-1, for the years 2006, 2005, and 2004, regarding the length of our amortization periods and the approximate DAC balance that remains at the end of years 10 and 15, as a percentage of the cost initially deferred. Amortization Balance Remaining as a % of Initial Deferral Period Year 10 Year 15 Unum US Group Income Protection 20 25 % 10 % Group Life and Accidental Death & Dismemberment 15 15 % 0 % Supplemental and Voluntary Individual Income Protection Recently Issued 20 50 % 25 % Long-term Care 20 55 % 25 % Voluntary Workplace Benefits 15 15 % 0 % Unum UK 15 20 % 0 % Colonial 17 20 % 10 % Amortization of DAC on traditional products is adjusted to reflect the actual policy persistency as compared to the anticipated experience, and as a result, the unamortized balance of DAC reflects actual persistency. We may experience accelerated amortization if policies terminate earlier than projected. Because our actual experience regarding persistency and premium income has varied very little from our assumptions during the last three years, we have had minimal adjustments to our projected amortization of DAC during those years. We measure the recoverability of DAC annually by performing gross premium valuations. Our testing indicates that our DAC is recoverable. 49 Table of Contents Valuation of Fixed Maturity Securities In determining when a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, we evaluate the following factors: The probability of recovering principal and interest. Our ability and intent to retain the security for a sufficient period of time for it to recover. Whether the security is current as to principal and interest payments. The significance of the decline in value. The time period during which there has been a significant decline in value. Current and future business prospects and trends of earnings. The valuation of the security underlying collateral. Relevant industry conditions and trends relative to their historical cycles. Market conditions. Rating agency actions. Bid and offering prices and the level of trading activity. Adverse changes in estimated cash flows for securitized investments. Any other key measures for the related security. Our review procedures include, but are not limited to, monthly meetings of certain members of our senior management personnel to review reports on the entire portfolio, identifying investments with changes in market value of five percent or more, investments with changes in rating either by external rating agencies or internal analysts, investments segmented by issuer, industry, and foreign exposure levels, and any other relevant investment information to help identify our exposure to possible credit losses. Based on this review of the entire investment portfolio, individual investments may be added to or removed from our watch list, which is a list of securities subject to enhanced monitoring and a more intensive review. We also determine if our investment portfolio is overexposed to an issuer that is showing warning signs of deterioration and, if so, we make no further purchases of that issuer securities and may seek opportunities to sell securities we hold from that issuer to reduce our exposure. We monitor below-investment-grade securities as to individual exposures and in comparison to the entire portfolio as an additional credit risk management strategy, looking specifically at our exposure to individual securities currently classified as below-investment-grade. In determining current and future business prospects and cash availability, we consider the parental support of an issuer in its analysis but do not rely heavily on this support. If we determine that the decline in value of an investment is other than temporary, the investment is written down to fair value, and an impairment loss is recognized in the current period to the extent of the decline in value. If the decline is considered temporary, the security continues to be carefully monitored. These controls have been established to identify our exposure to possible credit losses and are intended to give us the ability to respond rapidly. We have no held-to-maturity fixed maturity securities. All fixed maturity securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value. Fair values are based on quoted market prices, where available. Private placement fixed maturity securities had a fair value of approximately $3.8 billion, or 10.9 percent of total fixed maturity securities, at December 31, 2006. Private placement fixed maturity securities do not have readily determinable market prices. For these securities, we use internally prepared valuations combining matrix pricing with vendor purchased software programs, including valuations based on estimates of future profitability, to estimate the fair value. Additionally, we obtain prices from independent third-party brokers to establish valuations for certain of these securities. Our ability to liquidate our positions in some of these securities could be impacted to a significant degree by the lack of an actively traded market, and we may not be able to dispose of these investments in a timely manner. Although we believe our estimates reasonably reflect the fair value of those securities, the key assumptions about the risk-free interest rates, risk premiums, performance of underlying collateral (if any), and other 50 Table of Contents factors involve significant assumptions and may not reflect those of an active market. We believe that generally these private placement securities carry an average credit quality comparable to companies rated Baa or BBB by major credit rating organizations. As of December 31, 2006, the key assumptions used to estimate the fair value of private placement fixed maturity securities included the following: Risk free interest rates of 4.69 percent for five-year maturities to 4.81 percent for 30-year maturities were derived from the current yield curve for U.S. Treasury Bonds with similar maturities. Current Baa corporate bond spreads ranging from 0.59 percent to 1.66 percent plus an additional 20 basis points were added to the risk free rate to reflect the lack of liquidity. An additional five basis points were added to the risk free rates for foreign investments. Additional basis points were added as deemed appropriate for certain industries and for individual securities in certain industries that are considered to be of greater risk. Increasing the 20 basis points added to the risk free rate for lack of liquidity by 1.5 basis points, increasing the five basis points added to the risk free rates for foreign investments by one basis point, and increasing the additional basis points added to each industry considered to be of greater risk by one basis point would have decreased the December 31, 2006 net unrealized gain in the fixed maturity securities portfolio by approximately $1.4 million. Historically, our realized gains or losses on dispositions of private placement fixed maturity securities have not varied significantly from amounts estimated under the valuation methodology described above. Changes in the fair value of fixed maturity securities, other than declines that are determined to be other than temporary, are reported as a component of other comprehensive income in stockholders equity. If we subsequently determine that any of these securities are other than temporarily impaired, the impairment loss is reported as a realized investment loss in our consolidated statements of operations. The recognition of the impairment loss does not affect total stockholders equity to the extent that the decline in value had been previously reflected in other comprehensive income. There are a number of significant risks inherent in the process of monitoring our fixed maturity securities for impairments and determining when and if an impairment is other than temporary. These risks and uncertainties include the following possibilities: The assessment of a borrower ability to meet its contractual obligations will change. The economic outlook, either domestic or foreign, may be less favorable or may have a more significant impact on the borrower than anticipated, and as such, the security may not recover in value. New information may become available concerning the security, such as disclosure of accounting irregularities, fraud, or corporate governance issues. Significant changes in credit spreads may occur in the related industry. Significant increases in interest rates may occur and may not return to levels similar to when securities were initially purchased. Adverse rating agency actions may occur. Income Taxes We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Our valuation allowance relates primarily to assets for foreign net operating loss carryforwards and assets for our basis in certain of our foreign subsidiaries that are not likely to be realized in the future based on our expectations using currently available evidence. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, we have considered all available positive and negative evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event we determine that we most likely would not be able to realize all or part of our deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. 51 Table of Contents The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws in a multitude of jurisdictions, both domestic and foreign. The amount of income taxes we pay is subject to ongoing audits in various jurisdictions, and a material assessment by a governing tax authority could affect profitability. We record tax liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues in the U.S. and other tax jurisdictions based on our estimate of whether, and to the extent which, additional taxes will probably be due. However, due to the complexity of the tax laws and uncertainties in their interpretation, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from the current estimate of the probable tax liabilities. If the estimate of the tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, an additional charge to expense would result. If payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be less than the recorded amounts, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer probable. We believe that adequate accruals have been provided for all years presented. Effective January 1, 2007, we will adopt FIN 48, which uses an asset-based approach to deal with uncertainty in income tax positions by regulating when the benefits of these positions may be recognized in financial statements. After we adopt FIN 48, we will record assets for tax positions taken in the U.S. and other tax jurisdictions based on our assessment of whether a position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based solely on its technical merits. Our estimates may differ from the ultimate outcome if the taxing authorities disagree with the technical merits of our position or if the asset we initially recognized in our financial statements is more or less than the benefit we ultimately realize through negotiation or litigation with taxing authorities. Consolidated Operating Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Revenue Premium Income $ 7,948.2 1.7 % $ 7,815.6 (0.3 )% $ 7,839.6 Net Investment Income 2,320.6 6.0 2,188.3 1.4 2,158.7 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 2.2 132.8 (6.7 ) (122.9 ) 29.2 Other Income 264.3 0.8 262.1 0.7 260.3 Total 10,535.3 2.7 10,259.3 (0.3 ) 10,287.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 7,577.2 7.0 7,083.2 (2.3 ) 7,248.4 Commissions 819.0 1.8 804.7 (4.5 ) 842.3 Interest and Debt Expense 191.8 (7.8 ) 208.0 0.4 207.1 Cost Related to Early Retirement of Debt 25.8 N.M. Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (528.2 ) 1.7 (519.4 ) (6.8 ) (557.3 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 478.6 3.2 463.7 6.2 436.7 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 8.0 (47.0 ) 15.1 (4.4 ) 15.8 Impairment of Intangible Assets N.M. 856.4 Compensation Expense 680.5 3.3 659.0 2.8 641.2 Other Operating Expenses 817.2 (4.0 ) 851.1 (2.5 ) 872.9 Total 10,069.9 5.3 9,565.4 (9.4 ) 10,563.5 Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations Before Income Tax 465.4 (32.9 ) 693.9 N.M. (275.7 ) Income Tax (Benefit) 61.8 (67.5 ) 189.9 N.M. (74.3 ) Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations 403.6 (19.9 ) 504.0 N.M. (201.4 ) Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations 7.4 (22.9 ) 9.6 118.6 (51.6 ) Net Income (Loss) $ 411.0 (20.0 ) $ 513.6 N.M. $ (253.0 ) N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 52 Table of Contents The following chart lists charges affecting the comparability of our financial results. In describing our results, we may at times note these items and exclude the impact on financial ratios and metrics to enhance the understanding and comparability of our Company performance and the underlying fundamentals in our operations, but this exclusion is not an indication that similar items may not recur. ($ in millions) Year Ended December 31 2006 2005 2004 Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits Regulatory Claim Reassessment Charges $ 396.4 $ 52.7 $ 84.5 Restructuring of Individual Income Protection Closed Block 110.6 Impairment of Intangible Assets 856.4 Other Operating Expenses Regulatory Claim Reassessment Charges 15.0 22.3 42.5 Broker Compensation Settlements 18.5 Total Charges, Before Tax $ 429.9 $ 75.0 $ 1,094.0 Total Charges, After Tax $ 280.1 $ 51.6 $ 788.8 Consolidated premium income increased slightly in 2006 relative to the prior year, with increases reported for Unum UK, Colonial, and Unum US supplemental and voluntary lines of business. Premium income decreased in our Unum US group income protection and group life and accidental death and dismemberment lines of business. This decrease was consistent with our expectations due to our continued pricing discipline for our group business. Premium income in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment increased in 2006 relative to the prior year due to the recapture of a ceded block of business in the third quarter of 2005. The decline in premium income in 2005 relative to 2004 was generally in line with our expectations as premium income declined in our Unum US group income protection and group life and accidental death and dismemberment lines of business due to our pricing strategy for our group business. The Unum UK segment, Colonial segment, and remaining Unum US segment lines of business reported growth in premium income. In addition, premium income in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment increased due to the previously mentioned recapture of a ceded block of business in the third quarter of 2005. Net investment income for 2006 was higher than in 2005 due primarily to the growth in invested assets and an increase in bond call premiums, offset by a lower yield due to the investment of new cash at lower rates than that of our overall portfolio yield and a decline in the level of prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities. In addition, 2006 also includes a full year of net investment income on the bonds transferred to us in conjunction with the third quarter of 2005 recapture of a ceded closed block of individual income protection business. We expect that our portfolio yield will continue to gradually decline until the market rates on new purchases increase above the level of the overall yield. Investment income is expected to increase, however, due to the continued growth in invested assets. Net investment income increased slightly in 2005 relative to 2004 due to a partial year of net investment income related to the bonds transferred to us in conjunction with the 2005 third quarter reinsurance recapture, the growth in invested assets, and higher bond call premiums, largely offset by the investment of new cash at lower rates and a decline in the level of prepayments on mortgage-backed securities relative to 2004. 53 Table of Contents Our net realized investment gain from sales and write-downs was $7.5 million in 2006, compared to a net realized gain of $1.2 million in 2005 and a net realized loss of $59.4 million in 2004. Changes in the fair value of the embedded derivatives in certain reinsurance contracts resulted in a net realized loss of $5.3 million in 2006 and $7.9 million in 2005 compared to a net realized gain of $88.6 million in 2004. We actively manage our credit risk and expect our gains and losses for 2007 to be relatively consistent with the levels of 2006 and 2005. See Investments contained herein in Item 7 for further discussion. The reported ratio of benefits and change in reserves for future benefits to premium income was 95.3 percent for 2006 compared to 90.6 percent for 2005 and 92.5 percent for 2004. As noted above, our reported benefits and change in reserves for future benefits include various charges pertaining to the multistate market conduct examination settlement agreements, the settlement agreement with the California DOI, and/or the restructuring of the individual income protection closed block business. Excluding these charges, the ratio of benefits and change in reserves for future benefits to premium income was 90.3 percent for 2006 compared to 90.0 percent for 2005 and 2004. See Segment Operating Results as follows for discussions of line of business risk results and claims management performance in each of our segments. Cost related to early retirement of debt includes costs associated with our $732.0 million debt repurchases during 2006. See Debt contained herein in Item 7 for additional information. Excluding amounts related to claim reassessment and broker compensation settlements, our expense ratio improved in 2006 relative to 2005 and 2004. We intend to aggressively manage our expenses while continuing to increase the effectiveness of our operating processes. As previously discussed, income tax for 2006 includes tax benefits of $91.9 million as a result of the reversal of tax liabilities related primarily to group relief benefits recognized from the use of net operating losses in a foreign jurisdiction in which our businesses operate. In addition, we recorded a net tax benefit of $1.3 million related to interest and tax refunds on prior year tax items in excess of what was previously provided. Income tax for 2005 includes tax benefits of $42.8 million related to the reduction of income tax liabilities in the first and third quarters of 2005 and a net tax benefit of $3.3 million recorded in connection with the repatriation of unremitted foreign earnings from our U.K. subsidiaries under the Homeland Investment Act of 2004. 54 Table of Contents Consolidated Sales Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Unum US Segment Fully Insured Products Group Long-term Income Protection $ 208.5 15.6 % $ 180.4 % $ 180.4 Group Short-term Income Protection 74.1 (0.9 ) 74.8 (5.9 ) 79.5 Group Life 149.8 (5.1 ) 157.8 (5.2 ) 166.5 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 13.7 (6.8 ) 14.7 14.8 12.8 Individual Income Protection Recently Issued 55.4 3.0 53.8 (12.7 ) 61.6 Group Long-term Care 25.1 19.0 21.1 12.8 18.7 Individual Long-term Care 11.0 (15.4 ) 13.0 (33.3 ) 19.5 Voluntary Workplace Benefits 134.2 3.1 130.2 14.1 114.1 Total Fully Insured Products 671.8 4.0 645.8 (1.1 ) 653.1 Administrative Services Only (ASO) Products Group Long-term Income Protection 3.7 105.6 1.8 63.6 1.1 Group Short-term Income Protection 10.0 72.4 5.8 (20.5 ) 7.3 Total ASO Products 13.7 80.3 7.6 (9.5 ) 8.4 Unum US Segment 685.5 4.9 653.4 (1.2 ) 661.5 Unum UK Segment Group Long-term Income Protection 79.1 (13.3 ) 91.2 (11.7 ) 103.3 Group Life 16.5 (50.0 ) 33.0 (51.5 ) 68.1 Individual Income Protection 5.5 (32.1 ) 8.1 (27.0 ) 11.1 Unum UK Segment 101.1 (23.6 ) 132.3 (27.5 ) 182.5 Colonial Segment Income Protection 194.4 10.0 176.8 2.5 172.5 Life 66.6 9.9 60.6 3.4 58.6 Cancer and Critical Illness 54.1 10.4 49.0 3.4 47.4 Colonial Segment 315.1 10.0 286.4 2.8 278.5 Individual Income Protection Closed Block Segment 4.4 (32.3 ) 6.5 (16.7 ) 7.8 Total Sales from Continuing Operations 1,106.1 2.5 1,078.6 (4.6 ) 1,130.3 Sales from Discontinued Operations N.M. 10.1 Total $ 1,106.1 2.5 $ 1,078.6 (5.4 ) $ 1,140.4 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Sales results shown in the preceding chart generally represent the annualized premium or annualized fee income on new sales which we expect to receive and report as premium income or fee income during the next 12 months following or beginning in the initial quarter in which the sale is reported, depending on the effective date of the new sale. Sales do not correspond to premium income or fee income reported as revenue in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). This is because new annualized sales premiums reflect current sales performance and what we expect to recognize as premium or fee income over a 12 month period, while premium income and fee income reported in our financial statements are reported on an as earned basis rather than 55 Table of Contents an annualized basis and also include renewals and persistency of in force policies written in prior years as well as current new sales. Premiums for fully insured products are reported as premium income. Fees for ASO products (those where the risk and responsibility for funding claim payments remain with the customer and we only provide services) are included in other income. Sales, persistency of the existing block of business, and the effectiveness of the renewal program are indicators of growth in our premium and fee income. Trends in new sales, as well as existing market share, also indicate our potential for growth in our respective markets and the level of market acceptance of price changes and new product offerings. Sales results may fluctuate significantly due to case size and timing of sales submissions. We intend to continue with our disciplined approach to pricing and also with our strategy of developing a more balanced business mix. This strategy is expected to result in a lower persistency or market share, particularly in the large case Unum US market, but historically the profitability of business that terminates has generally been lower than the profitability of retained business. See Segment Operating Results as follows for discussions of sales by segment. Segment Operating Results Our reporting segments are comprised of the following: Unum US, Unum UK, Colonial, Individual Income Protection Closed Block, Other, and Corporate. The results of GENEX, which were previously included in the Other segment, are now reported as discontinued operations and excluded from segment results for all periods. In the following segment financial data and discussions of segment operating results, operating revenue excludes net realized investment gains and losses. Operating income or operating loss excludes net realized investment gains and losses and income tax. These are considered non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures of operating revenue and operating income or operating loss differ from revenue and income (loss) from continuing operations before income tax as presented in our consolidated operating results and in income statements prepared in accordance with GAAP due to the exclusion of before tax realized investment gains and losses. We measure segment performance for purposes of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information , excluding realized investment gains and losses because we believe that this performance measure is a better indicator of the ongoing businesses and the underlying trends in the businesses. Our investment focus is on investment income to support our insurance liabilities as opposed to the generation of realized investment gains and losses, and a long-term focus is necessary to maintain profitability over the life of the business. Realized investment gains and losses depend on market conditions and do not necessarily relate to decisions regarding the underlying business of our segments. However, income or loss excluding realized investment gains and losses does not replace net income or net loss as a measure of overall profitability. We may experience realized investment losses, which will affect future earnings levels since our underlying business is long-term in nature and we need to earn the assumed interest rates in our liabilities. 56 Table of Contents A reconciliation of total operating revenue by segment to total consolidated revenue and total operating income (loss) by segment to consolidated net income (loss) is as follows. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2006 2005 2004 Operating Revenue by Segment $ 10,533.1 $ 10,266.0 $ 10,258.6 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 2.2 (6.7 ) 29.2 Revenue $ 10,535.3 $ 10,259.3 $ 10,287.8 Operating Income (Loss) by Segment $ 463.2 $ 700.6 $ (304.9 ) Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 2.2 (6.7 ) 29.2 Income Tax (Benefit) 61.8 189.9 (74.3 ) Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations 7.4 9.6 (51.6 ) Net Income (Loss) $ 411.0 $ 513.6 $ (253.0 ) As previously noted, included in before-tax Operating Income (Loss) by Segment shown above are before-tax charges of $429.9 million related to our revised claim reassessment estimates and the broker compensation settlements in 2006; $75.0 million related to the settlement of the market conduct examination with the California DOI and related matters in 2005; $127.0 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination in 2004; and $967.0 million related to the first quarter of 2004 restructuring of the individual income protection closed block of business. Unum US Segment Operating Results The Unum US segment includes group long-term and short-term income protection insurance, group life and accidental death and dismemberment products, and supplemental and voluntary lines of business. The supplemental and voluntary lines of business are comprised of recently issued individual income protection insurance, group and individual long-term care insurance, and voluntary workplace benefits products. Shown below are financial results for the Unum US segment. In the sections following, financial results and key ratios are also presented for the major lines of business within the segment. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 5,196.0 (0.6 )% $ 5,229.0 (3.6 )% $ 5,421.6 Net Investment Income 1,063.1 6.5 998.2 3.4 965.8 Other Income 108.5 (0.1 ) 108.6 20.9 89.8 Total 6,367.6 0.5 6,335.8 (2.2 ) 6,477.2 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 4,752.1 7.5 4,419.3 (4.2 ) 4,614.4 Commissions 505.2 0.7 501.6 (6.8 ) 538.3 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (306.2 ) (1.8 ) (311.9 ) (9.9 ) (346.0 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 302.2 (1.5 ) 306.9 7.2 286.3 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 0.3 0.3 50.0 0.2 Operating Expenses 1,018.3 (1.3 ) 1,031.9 (1.6 ) 1,048.5 Total 6,271.9 5.4 5,948.1 (3.2 ) 6,141.7 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 95.7 (75.3 ) $ 387.7 15.6 $ 335.5 57 Table of Contents Segment Sales Year Ended December 31, 2006 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2005 Sales for Unum US increased slightly compared to the prior year, but we are adhering to our strategy of disciplined pricing and a balanced mix of business through diversification. We had a sales mix of approximately 52 percent core market and 48 percent large case in our group products and sales growth in the supplemental and voluntary product lines where we are targeting growth. Group long-term income protection sales, on a fully insured basis, increased in 2006 compared to the prior year, with an increase in the large case market driven by additional new sales to existing group policyholders. Group long-term income protection case coverages in the core market grew relative to the prior year, but because of a lower case size, core market sales, when measured in dollars of annualized premium income, declined relative to the prior year. Group short-term income protection sales, on a fully insured basis, decreased in 2006 compared to the prior year due to a decrease in the small and mid-employer core market segment partially offset by an increase in the large case market segment. Total group life sales decreased relative to the prior year. On a by market segment basis, core market segment sales for group life increased in 2006 relative to the prior year, while sales in the large case market segment decreased in 2006 compared to 2005. Accidental death and dismemberment sales decreased in 2006 compared to the prior year. Our focus for our 2007 renewal program is aimed primarily at improving the profitability of our large case group business, and we expect sales and persistency for this market segment to decline during 2007. We continue to focus on the multi-life individual income protection business, with approximately 90 percent of total 2006 sales for this line of business occurring in the multi-life market. Long-term care sales were generally in line with our strategy for this product line, with growth in the group product and a decline in sales for individual long-term care. Voluntary workplace benefits sales increased in 2006 in comparison to the prior year as we continue to focus on the voluntary product lines for future growth. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Sales for Unum US during 2005 were generally consistent with our expectations. We anticipated relatively weaker sales for the first half of 2005 relative to the comparable period of 2004 for both group and individual income protection products primarily as a result of the competitive pricing environment. We began to restore sales momentum during the latter half of the year, particularly in the small and mid-employer core markets, while maintaining our commitment to a disciplined pricing approach for new business. Sales in 2005 for fully insured group long-term and short-term income protection and group life in the small and mid-employer core markets increased approximately 11.6 percent in these three product lines, offset by a decline in sales in the more competitive large case market. Individual income protection recently issued sales attributable to multi-life business were approximately 85 percent of this product line new sales in 2005 compared to 81 percent in 2004. Voluntary workplace benefits sales increased in comparison to 2004 due to both growth in existing products along with the introduction of new products. 58 Table of Contents Segment Persistency and Renewal of Existing Business Year Ended December 31, 2006 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2005 We monitor persistency of our existing business and reflect adverse changes in persistency in the current period amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. Persistency for each of the product lines during 2006 was generally higher than or consistent with 2005 and was consistent with our expectations. A continuing part of our strategy for Unum US group business involves executing our renewal programs and managing persistency in our existing blocks of business. Our renewal programs have generally been successful in retaining business that is relatively more profitable than business that terminated. While we expect that the additional premium and related profits associated with renewal activity will continue to emerge, we intend to balance the renewal program with the need to maximize persistency and retain broker relationships. As previously discussed, we expect persistency for the large case group market segment to decline during 2007 because of our 2007 strategy for this market. As previously discussed, we will adopt the provisions of SOP 05-1 effective January 1, 2007. SOP 05-1 provides guidance on accounting for deferred acquisition costs on internal replacements and effectively shortens the amortization period for deferred policy acquisition costs for many of our group products. The definition of an internal replacement is such that many of our group products which go through our normal renewal process are now considered to be internal replacements even though the relationship with the group policyholder has not been severed. We estimate that the amount of the cumulative effect adjustment, which will equal the difference between the amount of deferred policy acquisition cost asset in our balance sheet at December 31, 2006, prior to the application of SOP 05-1, and the asset remaining as a result of applying these provisions, will decrease the deferred policy acquisition cost asset for Unum US in the range of approximately $540.0 million to $600.0 million. We do not expect that SOP 05-1 will have a material effect on amortization expense for Unum US subsequent to adoption. During the second quarter of 2006, trade associations representing companies that provide disability income protection insurance in California reached an agreement with the California DOI concerning certain provisions within disability insurance policies. This agreement confirms the direction the California DOI set last year when we entered into the settlement agreement with the California DOI in the third quarter of 2005. We believe the trade association agreement is a major step in a process that should eventually result in consistency across our industry in California. The agreement, which is unique to California, required individual insurance companies to submit revised policies to the California DOI within 60 days from the date the agreement was signed for review and approval. Our products, as written, had already been revised and are fully compliant. The revisions we previously made in our group income protection product requirements for policies issued in California have not materially impacted sales, renewals, or persistency for our Unum US segment. In January of 2006, we began a process of filing a request with various state insurance departments for rate adjustments on one older series of individual long-term care policies and have through mid-January of 2007 received approvals in 40 states. The rate adjustment will bring the rates for this policy series closer to today market, better reflecting current interest rates, higher expected future claims, persistency, experience, and other factors related to pricing individual long-term care coverage. Overall, the average increase will be in the 20 to 30 percent range and may affect up to 130,000 policyholders, or less than 16 percent of our total long-term care block of business. Increases are subject to state review and approval and will be effective on the policy anniversary following the state approval and only after the proper state-specific notification requirements have been satisfied. In states for which a rate increase is submitted and approved, customers will also be given options for coverage changes or other approaches that might fit their current financial and insurance needs. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Persistency during 2005 for the overall block of fully-insured group long-term income protection, on average, was level with 2004, but was higher than expected. Persistency for fully insured group short-term income protection, on average, declined marginally during 2005 compared to the prior year and was slightly less than expected. Included in the 2005 policy terminations was a group policyholder who did not terminate the relationship with us, but transferred from fully insured short-term income protection to ASO. Adjusting persistency for this policyholder 59 Table of Contents transfer, persistency for fully insured group short-term income protection was slightly higher than expected for 2005. It was anticipated that persistency in the group income protection business would decline in 2005 due to our more disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection. Since the group life and accidental death and dismemberment products are generally sold in conjunction with group income protection, the more focused renewal effort in group income protection reduced persistency in these lines, though the reduction in persistency was less than anticipated. The persistency for the supplemental and voluntary product lines generally continued to be within expected levels. Unum US Group Income Protection Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group income protection. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Income Protection $ 1,953.3 (0.4 )% $ 1,961.6 (3.3 )% $ 2,028.6 Group Short-term Income Protection 530.2 (6.4 ) 566.3 (8.1 ) 616.1 Total Premium Income 2,483.5 (1.8 ) 2,527.9 (4.4 ) 2,644.7 Net Investment Income 621.9 2.7 605.7 1.7 595.8 Other Income 82.3 2.5 80.3 15.4 69.6 Total 3,187.7 (0.8 ) 3,213.9 (2.9 ) 3,310.1 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 2,702.5 12.7 2,397.7 (5.3 ) 2,533.1 Commissions 175.8 0.4 175.1 (12.0 ) 199.0 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (64.5 ) (0.2 ) (64.6 ) (16.2 ) (77.1 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 86.4 (6.3 ) 92.2 (1.4 ) 93.5 Operating Expenses 588.6 1.0 582.5 (6.0 ) 619.6 Total 3,488.8 9.6 3,182.9 (5.5 ) 3,368.1 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ (301.1 ) N.M. $ 31.0 153.4 $ (58.0 ) Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) (1) 108.8 % 94.8 % 95.8 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) (2) 23.7 % 23.0 % 23.4 % Before-tax Operating Income (Loss) Ratio (% of Premium Income) (3) (12.1 )% 1.2 % (2.2 )% Persistency Group Long-term Income Protection 87.8 % 84.8 % 84.8 % Persistency Group Short-term Income Protection 85.6 % 79.6 % 80.6 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage (1) Included in these ratios are the 2006 before-tax claim reassessment charges totaling $349.2 million; the 2005 before-tax charge of $27.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters; and the 2004 before-tax charge of $80.2 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the benefit ratios for 2006, 2005, and 2004 would have been 94.8%, 93.8%, and 92.7%, respectively. 60 Table of Contents (2) Included in these ratios are the 2006 before-tax charge of $15.0 million related to the claim reassessment charge; the 2005 before-tax charge of $10.1 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters; and the 2004 before-tax charge of $36.5 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the operating expense ratios for 2006, 2005, and 2004 would have been 23.1%, 22.6%, and 22.0%, respectively. (3) Included in these ratios are the 2006 before-tax claim reassessment charges of $364.2 million; the 2005 before-tax charge of $37.4 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters; and the 2004 before-tax charge of $116.7 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income ratio for 2006, 2005, and 2004 would have been 2.5%, 2.7%, and 2.2%, respectively. Year Ended December 31, 2006 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2005 Premium income for group income protection decreased in 2006 relative to the prior year, as expected, due to our more disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection. Net investment income increased slightly in comparison to the prior year due to the growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business and an increase in bond call premiums partially offset by the impact of the lower yield resulting from the lower interest rate environment. Other income includes ASO fees of $60.9 million for 2006 and $59.0 million for 2005. The reported benefit ratios include the 2006 revised claim reassessment reserve estimates and the 2005 reserve charge related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI. Excluding these charges, the 2006 benefit ratio of 94.8 percent was higher than the prior year ratio of 93.8 percent due primarily to higher paid claims in both group long-term and short-term income protection, partially offset by a higher rate of claim recoveries and a decrease in the claim incidence rate for group long-term income protection relative to the prior year. While we made progress during 2005 and in 2006 in improving claim operational effectiveness, claims management results have not yet improved to the level we expect to achieve over the long term. We have made a number of major organizational and process changes which should improve our claim operational effectiveness over the long term. Operational effectiveness has improved throughout 2006, and we believe performance will continue to improve as a result of our organizational and process changes. While improving performance in claim operational effectiveness is expected to occur into 2007, the operational improvement we have projected may occur at a slower rate, and we may incur additional costs in our claim operations. Operating expenses for 2006 and 2005 include charges related to our 2006 revision to our claim reassessment expense and the 2005 settlement agreement with the California DOI. Excluding these charges, the operating expense ratio increased in 2006 compared to the prior year due to the implementation of additional resources and process changes and also due to the decrease in premium income. We continue to aggressively manage expenses against the expected decline in premium income. As discussed under Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements, and in Risk Factors contained herein in Item 1A, certain risks and uncertainties are inherent in our group income protection business. Components of claims experience, including, but not limited to, incidence and recovery rates, may be worse than we expect. Both economic and societal factors can affect claim incidence. Adjustments to reserve amounts may be required if there are changes in assumptions regarding the incidence of claims or the rate of recovery, as well as persistency, mortality, and interest rates used in calculating the reserve amounts. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Operating revenue for group income protection decreased in 2005 relative to the prior year due to the expected decline in premium income. Net investment income increased due to the growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business, offsetting the impact of the declining yield which results from investing new cash in the lower interest rate environment. Other income, which increased in 2005 relative to the prior year, includes ASO fees of $59.0 million and $56.1 million for 2005 and 2004, respectively. 61 Table of Contents The benefit ratio for group long-term income protection increased in 2005 relative to the prior year, excluding the charges taken in 2005 and 2004 related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and the settlement agreements related to the multistate market conduct examination, due primarily to claims management performance, particularly reduced operational effectiveness in the timing of claim decisions and claim recoveries. For group short-term income protection, the 2005 benefit ratio was lower than 2004 due primarily to increased premiums per insured life and a decrease in the paid claim incidence rate. Commissions and the deferral of policy acquisition costs were below the prior year due primarily to lower sales. Operating expenses for 2005 include charges related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and for 2004 include charges related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding those charges, expenses were lower than the prior year and the adjusted operating expense ratio increased slightly relative to the prior year. Unum US Group Life and Accidental Death and Dismemberment Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US group life and accidental death and dismemberment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Life $ 1,248.1 (4.5 )% $ 1,306.8 (9.3 )% $ 1,441.0 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 151.6 (3.1 ) 156.4 (14.3 ) 182.4 Total Premium Income 1,399.7 (4.3 ) 1,463.2 (9.9 ) 1,623.4 Net Investment Income 141.3 (7.0 ) 151.9 2.7 147.9 Other Income (Loss) N.M. 2.0 N.M. (0.6 ) Total 1,541.0 (4.7 ) 1,617.1 (8.7 ) 1,770.7 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,067.3 (4.0 ) 1,111.9 (10.6 ) 1,244.3 Commissions 90.1 (7.9 ) 97.8 (7.9 ) 106.2 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (37.7 ) (11.7 ) (42.7 ) (9.1 ) (47.0 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 65.0 (11.0 ) 73.0 9.0 67.0 Operating Expenses 178.3 (5.3 ) 188.3 0.8 186.8 Total 1,363.0 (4.6 ) 1,428.3 (8.3 ) 1,557.3 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 178.0 (5.7 ) $ 188.8 (11.5 ) $ 213.4 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 76.3 % 76.0 % 76.6 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 12.7 % 12.9 % 11.5 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 12.7 % 12.9 % 13.1 % Persistency Group Life 81.2 % 78.3 % 84.0 % Persistency Accidental Death & Dismemberment 82.8 % 76.9 % 80.3 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 62 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, 2006 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2005 As expected and consistent with group income protection, premium income in group life decreased in 2006 relative to the prior year due to our more disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection. The decrease in net investment income relative to the prior year resulted primarily from a decline in the level of assets supporting these lines of business. The group life line reported a slightly increased benefit ratio in 2006 due primarily to an increased average claim size and a decrease in the waiver recovery rate, offset partially by a lower submitted and paid claim incidence rate. The accidental death and dismemberment line of business reported a decreased benefit ratio for 2006 compared to the prior year due primarily to a decrease in the paid claim incidence rate for certain of the product lines. Commissions and the deferral of policy acquisition costs decreased in 2006 in comparison to the prior year due primarily to the decrease in sales in comparison to the prior year and a buy-out of a block of business from a commissioned sales agency in 2005. Operating expenses decreased in 2006 relative to the prior year, enabling the operating expense ratio to remain stable against the decline in premium income. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Premium income decreased in 2005 relative to the prior year due to decreased sales growth and lower persistency levels. The increase in net investment income relative to the prior year is due to an increase in the yield on floating rate investments that support certain products within the group life line of business offset somewhat by a decline in the level of assets supporting this business. The group life line of business reported a decrease in the benefit ratio for 2005 relative to the prior year. Submitted claim incidence was slightly lower in 2005 relative to the prior year, but the average paid claim size and submitted waiver incidence increased relative to the prior year. The accidental death and dismemberment line of business reported a slightly increased benefit ratio for 2005 compared to the prior year due to slightly higher levels of paid claim incidence offset partially by a decreased average paid claim size. Commissions and the deferral of policy acquisition costs decreased in 2005 compared to the prior year due primarily to the decrease in sales in comparison to the prior year, partially offset by a 2005 buy-out of a block of business from a commissioned sales agency. Operating expenses remained relatively stable in 2005 relative to the prior year, but the operating expense ratio increased due to the decline in premium income. 63 Table of Contents Unum US Supplemental and Voluntary Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for Unum US supplemental and voluntary product lines. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Operating Revenue Premium Income Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued $ 438.5 3.2 % $ 425.1 2.3 % $ 415.6 Long-term Care 492.4 4.1 473.2 6.5 444.5 Voluntary Workplace Benefits 381.9 12.5 339.6 15.7 293.4 Total Premium Income 1,312.8 6.1 1,237.9 7.3 1,153.5 Net Investment Income 299.9 24.6 240.6 8.3 222.1 Other Income 26.2 (0.4 ) 26.3 26.4 20.8 Total 1,638.9 8.9 1,504.8 7.8 1,396.4 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 982.3 8.0 909.7 8.7 837.0 Commissions 239.3 4.6 228.7 (1.9 ) 233.1 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (204.0 ) (0.3 ) (204.6 ) (7.8 ) (221.9 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 150.8 6.4 141.7 12.6 125.8 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 0.3 0.3 50.0 0.2 Operating Expenses 251.4 (3.7 ) 261.1 7.8 242.1 Total 1,420.1 6.2 1,336.9 9.9 1,216.3 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 218.8 30.3 $ 167.9 (6.8 ) $ 180.1 Benefit Ratios (% of Premium Income) Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued (1) 58.0 % 57.5 % 57.7 % Long-term Care 99.2 % 93.0 % 88.8 % Voluntary Workplace Benefits 62.7 % 66.3 % 69.0 % Interest Adjusted Loss Ratios Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued 43.5 % 44.4 % 46.1 % Long-term Care 73.1 % 70.9 % 70.8 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) (2) 19.1 % 21.1 % 21.0 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) (3) 16.7 % 13.6 % 15.6 % Persistency - Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued 90.5 % 89.6 % 90.7 % Persistency - Long-term Care 95.3 % 95.8 % 95.5 % Persistency - Voluntary Workplace Benefits 80.9 % 81.1 % 81.0 % 64 Table of Contents (1) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $2.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $0.6 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the benefit ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 57.0% and 57.6%, respectively. (2) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $1.0 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $1.1 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the operating expense ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 21.0% and 20.9%, respectively. (3) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $3.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $1.7 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income ratios for 2005 and 2004 would have been 13.8% and 15.8%, respectively. Year Ended December 31, 2006 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2005 The increase in premium income for 2006 relative to the prior year is due to sales growth and stable persistency. Net investment income increased relative to the prior year primarily from growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business and due to higher investment yields resulting from a greater portion of the investment portfolio being invested in longer-term investments than in the previous year. The interest adjusted loss ratio for the individual income protection recently issued business decreased slightly in 2006 relative to the prior year, excluding the 2005 reserve charge, due primarily to an increase in the claim recovery rate, offset partially by an increase in the claim reopen rate. The interest adjusted loss ratio for long-term care was higher in 2006 than in the prior year due primarily to the aging of the block of business. The benefit ratio for voluntary workplace benefits decreased in comparison to 2005 due to favorable mortality and paid incidence. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was higher for 2006 due primarily to the growth of the deferred asset for the multi-life individual income protection and voluntary workplace benefits product lines relative to the other supplemental product lines. The amortization period for multi-life individual income protection and voluntary workplace benefits products is generally shorter than that of the other supplemental products. The decrease in operating expenses in 2006 in comparison to the prior year is driven primarily by the individual income protection recently issued line of business and is due mainly to relatively flat sales for 2006 and the restructuring of the distribution model for this line of business that was implemented in mid-2005. These expense declines are partially offset by an increase in operating expenses related to the voluntary workplace benefits lines of business driven primarily by growth in those lines of business. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 The increase in premium income for 2005 relative to 2004 for the individual income protection recently issued business and individual long-term care is due to sales growth in prior periods and stable persistency. The increase in premium income in the group long-term care and voluntary workplace benefits lines of business is attributable to sales growth in 2005 as well as sales growth in previous periods and stable persistency. Net investment income increased relative to 2004 due primarily to growth in the level of assets supporting these lines of business, partially offset by the inclusion in 2004 of a portion of the investment income attributable to the bonds retained from the sale of the Canadian branch that were subsequently redeployed to other lines of business and also due to a decline in the yield on the portfolio from investing new cash in the lower interest rate environment. The benefit ratio for the individual income protection recently issued business decreased slightly in 2005 relative to 2004, excluding the reserve charges as discussed above, driven primarily by lower incidence and a release of active life reserves on two large multi-life cases which terminated during 2005. Multi-life business, which constitutes approximately 60 percent of the individual income protection recently issued block of business, has consistently had lower claim incidence rates than the non multi-life business. The benefit ratio for long-term care 65 Table of Contents was higher in 2005 than in 2004 due primarily to the aging of the block of business and a lower net claim resolution rate. The benefit ratio for the voluntary workplace benefits products was lower in comparison to 2004 due primarily to a lower rate of insureds in claim payout status in the voluntary income protection line of business and improved mortality experience in the voluntary life line of business. The deferral of policy acquisition costs decreased during 2005 relative to 2004 due primarily to the lower level of sales in the individual income protection recently issued and long-term care lines of business, offset somewhat by higher levels of deferral for the voluntary workplace benefits product lines due to increased sales. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs was higher for 2005 due to the termination during 2005 of two large multi-life cases which resulted in the write-off of associated unamortized acquisition costs. This increased amortization was offset by the release of active life reserves, as previously mentioned. Operating expenses increased in comparison to 2004 due to growth in these lines of business; however, the operating expense ratio remained consistent with that of 2004. Segment Outlook Our primary focus in 2007 will be continued improvement of our claims management performance in our group income protection line of business. We expect our overall benefit ratio for group income protection to gradually improve to the 90 to 92 percent range by the end of 2007. We will also focus on improved profitability in certain of our supplemental products and the maintenance of current performance levels in our other lines. We intend to continue to invest in technology and new product solutions to meet the changing needs and opportunities in our markets. We will also continue to shift our mix of business to the small and mid-employer core markets and the supplemental and voluntary product lines. We will maintain our disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection, with a continued effort to balance growth and profitability. Although this strategy is expected to cause a lower persistency or market share, particularly in the large case market, historically the profitability of business that terminates has generally been less than the profitability of retained business. 66 Table of Contents Unum UK Segment Operating Results Unum UK includes insurance for group long-term income protection, group life, and individual income protection products sold primarily in the United Kingdom through field sales personnel and independent brokers and consultants. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Unum UK segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Income Protection $ 638.9 9.6 % $ 582.9 16.2 % $ 501.8 Group Life 171.0 4.2 164.1 39.2 117.9 Individual Income Protection 32.9 (14.1 ) 38.3 (2.8 ) 39.4 Total Premium Income 842.8 7.3 785.3 19.1 659.1 Net Investment Income 174.6 13.2 154.2 10.5 139.6 Other Income 0.1 (98.4 ) 6.1 96.8 3.1 Total 1,017.5 7.6 945.6 17.9 801.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 553.5 1.4 545.8 17.5 464.5 Commissions 49.7 (11.9 ) 56.4 15.3 48.9 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (34.4 ) 0.9 (34.1 ) (9.5 ) (37.7 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 32.0 48.1 21.6 12.5 19.2 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 6.6 (53.5 ) 14.2 (1.4 ) 14.4 Operating Expenses 152.3 (1.1 ) 154.0 9.1 141.2 Total 759.7 0.2 757.9 16.5 650.5 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 257.8 37.3 $ 187.7 24.1 $ 151.3 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 65.7 % 69.5 % 70.5 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 18.1 % 19.6 % 21.4 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 30.6 % 23.9 % 23.0 % Persistency - Group Long-term Income Protection 90.4 % 94.2 % 92.1 % Persistency - Group Life 69.1 % 86.3 % 83.0 % Persistency - Individual Income Protection 88.2 % 88.4 % 86.7 % (in millions of pounds, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Sales 54.1 (25.6 ) 72.7 (26.9 ) 99.5 Total Premium Income 456.5 5.8 431.6 20.1 359.5 Net Investment Income 94.5 11.4 84.8 11.3 76.2 Other Income (100.0 ) 3.3 94.1 1.7 Total Revenue 551.0 6.0 519.7 18.8 437.4 Total Benefits and Expenses 411.7 (1.2 ) 416.5 17.4 354.9 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses 139.3 35.0 103.2 25.1 82.5 Weighted Average Pound/Dollar Exchange Rate 1.851 1.819 1.834 67 Table of Contents Foreign Currency Translation The functional currency of Unum UK is the British pound. Unum UK premiums, net investment income, claims, and expenses are received or paid in pounds, and we hold pound denominated assets to support Unum UK pound denominated policy reserves and liabilities. We translate Unum UK pound-denominated financial statement items into dollars for our consolidated financial reporting. We translate income statement items using an average exchange rate for the reporting period, and we translate balance sheet items using the exchange rate at the end of the period. We report unrealized foreign currency translation gains and losses in accumulated other comprehensive income in our consolidated balance sheets. Fluctuations in the pound to dollar exchange rate have an effect on Unum UK reported financial results and our consolidated financial results. In periods when the pound weakens, translating pounds into dollars decreases current year results relative to the prior year. In periods when the pound strengthens, translating into dollars increases current year results in relation to the prior year. Segment Sales Sales in Unum UK, while declining for full year 2006 relative to 2005, improved in the second half of 2006 relative to the first half of the year. Sales in this market were negatively impacted during 2006 by lower employee benefits purchase decisions caused by distraction in the U.K. employee benefits market due to changes in pension legislation. However, U.K. legislative changes that remove discrimination by employers on the basis of age, therefore encouraging the extension of insurance coverage, became effective in October 2006. We anticipate that the sales momentum of the last half of 2006 will continue into 2007. Sales decreased in 2005 relative to 2004 due in part to higher sales in 2004 related to the exit of a major insurer from the U.K. market during 2004. Sales for group life products were also unfavorably impacted in 2005 relative to 2004 due to the competitive environment in the U.K. for group life products and our decision to maintain pricing discipline. Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2006 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2005 Premium income increased 5.8 percent in 2006 relative to the prior year due to prior period sales in the group long-term income protection and group life lines of business, partially offset by a decline in persistency levels, particularly in the group life line of business. Net investment income increased in 2006 relative to the prior year due to continued growth in the business and the assets supporting the lines of business and also due to the positive performance of the investment portfolio index-linked bonds. Other income for 2005 includes a before tax gain of 3.1 million related to the disposal of Unum UK Netherlands branch. The lower benefit ratio in 2006 in comparison to the prior year was attributable to favorable claim experience in all lines of business. Group long-term income protection continued to have favorable claim incidence and claim resolution experience, although to a lesser extent than in recent periods because of a lower level of claim resolutions on an acquired block of group long-term income protection business. Group life reported favorable paid claim experience. Individual income protection had favorable claim resolution experience during 2006. Commissions decreased in 2006 due to the ongoing increase in the proportion of business sold on a no-commission-basis and lower individual income protection commissions following the sale of the Netherlands branch in 2006. Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs increased in 2006 due to accelerated amortization attributable to the run-off of a small in-force block of individual income protection business. Amortization of value of business acquired (VOBA) decreased in 2006 due to the VOBA on a previously acquired group long-term income protection claims block becoming fully amortized in 2005. The operating expense ratio also decreased in 2006 compared to the prior year due to our continued focus on expense management. 68 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Premium income increased in comparison to 2004 due primarily to growth in the group long-term income protection line of business resulting from block acquisitions, the related growth in prior year sales, and favorable persistency. The premium income increase in the group life line of business was due to prior period sales growth and favorable persistency. Net investment income increased in 2005 relative to 2004 due to continued growth in the business and the assets supporting the product lines, offset partially by a slight decrease in portfolio yields relative to 2004. Other income for 2005 includes 3.1 million related to the disposal of the Netherlands branch during 2005. While underlying claims experience was favorable, the benefit ratio for the group long-term income protection line of business increased in comparison to 2004 due to the inclusion in 2004 of extremely favorable claim resolution experience on an acquired block of group long-term income protection business. The benefit ratio for the group life line of business decreased in comparison to 2004 due to favorable claim experience in 2005 and recent renewal activity which resulted in terminations during 2005 of less profitable business. Operating expenses increased in 2005 compared to 2004 due to growth of the lines of business, but the operating expense ratios decreased due to an increase in premium income, economies of scale, and our focus on expense management. Segment Outlook During 2007, we intend to focus on continuing to restore profitable sales growth and maintaining our strong leadership position in the U.K. We anticipate that high levels of profitability will continue, but with margins likely to return to below 30 percent in the medium term. We also expect slower growth in operating income as the acquisition related growth of the last several years subsides. We also plan to explore additional market opportunities to expand our growth in both the group and individual markets through new distribution channels and new product offerings. We believe that there is significant opportunity to expand the U.K. market for the products and services we offer. During 2007, we also intend to invest in process solutions to meet our customers needs and increase our operating efficiency. As previously discussed, we will adopt the provisions of SOP 05-1 effective January 1, 2007. We estimate that the amount of the cumulative effect adjustment will decrease the deferred policy acquisition cost asset for Unum UK in the range of approximately $85.0 million to $90.0 million and that the amortization expense will be higher, in the near-term, relative to historical trends because of the shorter amortization period for the group products. 69 Table of Contents Colonial Segment Operating Results The Colonial segment includes insurance for income protection products, life products, and cancer and critical illness products issued by Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company and marketed to employees at the workplace through an agency sales force and brokers. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Colonial segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Operating Revenue Premium Income Income Protection $ 533.3 4.8 % $ 508.9 4.7 % $ 486.2 Life 130.5 14.5 114.0 6.6 106.9 Cancer and Critical Illness 178.3 8.7 164.1 11.0 147.9 Total Premium Income 842.1 7.0 787.0 6.2 741.0 Net Investment Income 93.6 (2.5 ) 96.0 1.6 94.5 Other Income 1.1 (75.0 ) 4.4 91.3 2.3 Total 936.8 5.6 887.4 5.9 837.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 441.4 1.9 433.2 6.1 408.3 Commissions 184.9 8.3 170.7 (1.8 ) 173.9 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (187.6 ) 8.2 (173.4 ) (0.2 ) (173.7 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 144.4 7.2 134.7 2.7 131.2 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 1.1 83.3 0.6 (50.0 ) 1.2 Operating Expenses 153.9 0.3 153.5 8.6 141.3 Total 738.1 2.6 719.3 5.4 682.2 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 198.7 18.2 $ 168.1 8.0 $ 155.6 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 52.4 % 55.0 % 55.1 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 18.3 % 19.5 % 19.1 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 23.6 % 21.4 % 21.0 % Persistency Income Protection 74.9 % 75.3 % 75.6 % Persistency Life 84.2 % 84.1 % 84.1 % Persistency Cancer and Critical Illness 82.3 % 83.2 % 82.6 % 70 Table of Contents Segment Sales Sales increased in 2006 compared to 2005 primarily due to sales growth in the core markets (employee groups with less than 2,000 lives). Sales also increased in 2006 in the large case market (employee groups with 2,000 lives or greater). In addition, the 2005 hurricanes in the United States gulf coast region resulted in lower sales in the second half of 2005. Sales in 2005 increased for all lines of business as compared to 2004 driven primarily by growth in the core markets, partially offset by a decline in sales in the large case market and by the lower sales that were the result of the 2005 hurricanes. Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2006 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2005 Growth in premium income was attributable primarily to current and prior period sales growth and stable persistency, partially offset by the lapsing of policies during the first quarter of 2006 for policyholders in hurricane-impacted areas. Net investment income decreased in 2006 in comparison to the prior year due primarily to the receipt of interest during 2005 on a bond previously in default. The benefit ratio for this segment decreased in 2006 in comparison to the prior year due primarily to favorable risk experience in the income protection line of business. The improvement resulted from underwriting actions taken in 2004 and 2005 as well as the introduction of several new products in 2004. Sales of these new products increased significantly during 2006. Also favorably impacting year-over-year comparisons was the first quarter of 2006 release of reserves related to the lapsed policies in the hurricane-impacted areas and a $3.5 million reserve charge in 2005 related to cancer litigation. In addition, individual short-term income protection claim incidence and average claim duration decreased in 2006 compared to 2005, while the average indemnity on claims was higher in 2006 relative to 2005. For accident, which is included in the income protection line of business, the claim incidence rate decreased in 2006 relative to 2005, but the average claim payment increased over that reported for 2005. These positive trends for the income protection line were slightly offset by the 2006 increase in the claim incidence rate as well as the average claim payment for hospital income. For cancer, the incidence increased in 2006 relative to 2005, but the incurred loss ratio decreased due to the introduction of a new cancer product. The life line of business reported a slight increase in the number of paid claims in 2006 relative to 2005 and an increase in the average claim payment. The operating expense ratio for 2006 decreased in comparison to the prior year due primarily to our expense management focus and the increase in premium income. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Growth in premium income during 2005 was attributable to sales growth and stable persistency. The benefit ratio for 2005 was consistent with 2004, with decreases in the income protection and life lines of business offset by an increase in the cancer and critical illness line of business. Individual short-term income protection claim incidence decreased in 2005 compared to 2004, while the average claim duration for closed claims as well as the average indemnity was higher in 2005 relative to 2004. For accident and sickness products, which are included in the income protection line of business, the claim incidence rate decreased in 2005 relative to 2004, but the average claim payment increased over that reported for 2004. The life line of business reported an increase in the number of paid claims in 2005 relative to 2004 and a decrease in the average claim payment. The cancer and critical illness line of business was unfavorably impacted by $3.5 million in benefit charges related to litigation. Commissions in 2005 declined relative to 2004, and operating expenses increased. These changes were due primarily to the restructuring of the agency field sales force wherein we moved certain functions from a commissioned sales agency status to salaried employees. Before-tax operating income for 2005 includes approximately $4.8 million in charges related to cancer litigation. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income ratio for 2005 was 22.0 percent. 71 Table of Contents Segment Outlook During 2007, we intend to maintain our current sales momentum by investing in various growth initiatives, including the development of additional product offerings. For 2007, this may result in slower growth in segment operating income relative to our premium growth, but we believe this growth strategy will consistently produce a higher level of premium and operating income growth over the long term. Our 2007 initiatives also include continued development of improved business tools through the effective use of technology. We intend to further grow and develop our sales organization and increase our sales activity through expansion into markets and territories where we have less market share. We believe that the changes we have made and continue to make in our sales organization through recruiting, development, and training will continue to drive accelerated growth in 2007 through improved productivity. Individual Income Protection Closed Block Segment Operating Results The Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment generally consists of those individual income protection policies in force before the substantial changes in product offerings, pricing, distribution, and underwriting, which generally occurred during the period 1994 through 1998. A small amount of new business continued to be sold after these changes, but we stopped selling new policies in this segment at the beginning of 2004 other than update features contractually allowable on existing policies. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 1,062.8 5.1 % $ 1,011.7 2.5 % $ 986.6 Net Investment Income 828.7 7.6 770.0 (3.6 ) 799.1 Other Income 105.1 10.4 95.2 (5.1 ) 100.3 Total 1,996.6 6.4 1,876.9 (0.5 ) 1,886.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,709.7 9.4 1,562.7 (3.5 ) 1,618.9 Commissions 76.2 1.7 74.9 (1.8 ) 76.3 Impairment of Intangible Assets N.M. 856.4 Operating Expenses 139.4 (12.5 ) 159.4 1.4 157.2 Total 1,925.3 7.1 1,797.0 (33.7 ) 2,708.8 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 71.3 (10.8 ) $ 79.9 109.7 $ (822.8 ) Interest Adjusted Loss Ratio (1) 97.3 % 89.3 % 93.4 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) (2) 13.1 % 15.8 % 15.9 % Before-tax Operating Income (Loss) Ratio (% of Premium Income) (3) 6.7 % 7.9 % (83.4 )% Persistency 94.0 % 94.5 % 94.5 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 72 Table of Contents (1) Included in these ratios are the 2006 before-tax claim reassessment charges totaling $47.2 million; the 2005 before-tax charge of $23.1 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters; the 2004 before-tax charge of $3.7 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination; and the 2004 before-tax reserve strengthening of $110.6 million. Excluding these charges, the interest adjusted loss ratio for 2006, 2005, and 2004 would have been 92.9%, 87.3%, and 87.5%, respectively. (2) Included in these ratios are the 2005 before-tax charge of $11.2 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters and the 2004 before-tax charge of $4.9 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding these charges, the operating expense ratio for 2005 and 2004 would have been 14.6% and 15.4%, respectively. (3) Included in these ratios are the 2006 before-tax claim reassessment charges totaling $47.2 million; the 2005 before-tax charge of $34.3 million related to the settlement agreement with the California DOI and related matters; the 2004 before-tax charge of $8.6 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination; and the 2004 before-tax reserve strengthening and restructuring charges of $967.0 million. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income ratio for 2006, 2005, and 2004 would have been 11.1%, 11.3%, and 15.5%, respectively. During the third quarter of 2005, we recaptured a closed block of individual income protection business with approximately $1.6 billion in invested assets and $185.0 million of annual premium. Before the recapture, the underlying operating results of the reinsurance contract were reflected in other income. The recapture did not have a material effect on operating results for this segment. Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2006 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2005 The increase in premium income for 2006 relative to the prior year is due to the recapture of the ceded block of business, which increased reported premium income for 2006 by approximately $114.7 million relative to what was reported as premium income for the recaptured block of business in the prior year. Net investment income is higher in 2006 compared to last year because of the investment income related to the bonds transferred to one of our insurance subsidiaries in conjunction with the reinsurance recapture and due to an increase in bond call premiums. This increase was partially offset by a decline in the overall portfolio yield rate and a decline in prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities. Other income includes the underlying results of certain blocks of reinsured business, including the results of the recaptured block of business before the recapture date. Excluding the reserve charges noted previously, the 2006 interest adjusted loss ratio of 92.9 percent was higher than the prior year ratio of 87.3 percent due primarily to higher submitted claim incidence and a lower rate of claim recoveries. Operating expenses, excluding charges related to the settlement agreements, decreased in 2006 in comparison to the prior year due to a 2005 payment of a judgment in a lawsuit and also to our ongoing expense management. Year Ended December 31, 2005 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2004 Premium income increased in 2005 compared to 2004 due to the third quarter of 2005 recapture of a ceded block of business, which added approximately $70.0 million of premium income to this segment in 2005. Other than premiums on the recaptured block of business, premium income declined in 2005 relative to 2004, as expected in this closed block of business. Net investment income decreased in 2005 relative to 2004 due to a decline in the portfolio yield rate and a decrease in income from prepayments on mortgage-backed securities. These declines were offset somewhat by approximately $35.0 million of investment income related to the bonds transferred to us in conjunction with the reinsurance recapture. Other income includes the underlying results of certain blocks of reinsured business, including the results of the aforementioned block of business prior to the recapture date. 73 Table of Contents The interest adjusted loss ratio for 2005 was stable in comparison to 2004, excluding the reserve charges noted in the preceding financial metrics. Claim recovery rates were lower in 2005 relative to 2004, while claim incidence rates improved. Excluding the charges related to the settlement agreements, operating expenses were lower in 2005 compared to 2004 due primarily to our overall expense management initiatives. Segment Outlook We continue to examine strategies to improve the capital efficiency of our closed block of individual income protection business. Because we cannot reprice this closed block of business, our focus has been on continuing to manage this large block of business consistently while at the same time exploring opportunities for improving capital management. Our three major operating segments, which at December 31, 2006 were supported by approximately $6.5 billion of allocated capital, produce a return on equity that is generally consistent with our current plan and on target to attain our long-term goal for return on equity. This closed block of individual income protection business is supported by approximately $2.6 billion of allocated capital, and our return on equity for this business generally is in the low single digits. With the successful completion of the securitization of a small block of our group long-term income protection claim reserves in 2006, we are cautiously optimistic that we can complete a similar transaction for our closed block of individual income protection claim reserves, although any such transaction is subject to regulatory, market, and other conditions. We believe that a transaction of this nature would allow us to divert some of the capital currently supporting this block of business to support other initiatives and therefore increase our total consolidated return on equity. We believe that the interest adjusted loss ratio for this block of business will be relatively flat over the long term, but the segment may experience quarterly volatility. Claim resolution rates are very sensitive to operational and environmental changes and can be volatile over short periods of time. We consider the recent variability in our claim resolution rate experience to be primarily the result of a temporary reduction in the operating effectiveness of our claims management performance. It is possible that this variability could continue into 2007, but we believe that the actual rates in 2007 will more align with our expected rates. Our claim resolution rate assumption used in determining reserves is our expectation of the resolution rate we will experience over the life of the block of business and will vary from actual experience in any one period. It is possible, however, that continued variability in our reserve assumptions could result in a material impact on our reserve levels. 74 Table of Contents Other Segment Operating Results The Other operating segment includes results from Unum US insured products not actively marketed (with the exception of certain individual income protection products), including individual life and corporate-owned life insurance, reinsurance pools and management operations, group pension, health insurance, and individual annuities. We expect operating revenue and income resulting from the products that are not actively marketed to decline over time as these business lines wind down, and we expect to reinvest the capital supporting these lines of business in the future growth of our Unum US, Unum UK, and Colonial segments. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 4.5 73.1 % $ 2.6 (91.7 )% $ 31.3 Net Investment Income 113.2 (6.1 ) 120.5 (5.3 ) 127.3 Other Income 33.8 (6.1 ) 36.0 15.4 31.2 Total 151.5 (4.8 ) 159.1 (16.2 ) 189.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 120.5 (1.4 ) 122.2 (14.1 ) 142.3 Commissions 3.0 172.7 1.1 (77.6 ) 4.9 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs N.M. 0.1 Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs N.M. 0.5 N.M. Operating Expenses 3.6 (32.1 ) 5.3 (60.2 ) 13.3 Total 127.1 (1.5 ) 129.1 (19.6 ) 160.6 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 24.4 (18.7 ) $ 30.0 2.7 $ 29.2 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Reinsurance Pools and Management Our reinsurance operations include the reinsurance management operations of Duncanson & Holt, Inc. (D&H) and the risk assumption, which includes reinsurance pool participation; direct reinsurance, which includes accident and health (A&H), long-term care (LTC), and long-term disability coverages; and Lloyd of London (Lloyd s) syndicate participations. During the years 1999 through 2001, we exited our reinsurance pools and management operations through a combination of a sale, reinsurance, and/or placement of certain components in run-off. During 2006, this line of business reported an operating loss of $6.7 million compared to operating losses of $11.0 million and $7.5 million in 2005 and 2004, respectively. Individual Life and Corporate-Owned Life During 2000, we reinsured substantially all of the individual life and corporate-owned life insurance blocks of business and ceded approximately $3.3 billion of reserves to the reinsurer. The $388.2 million before-tax gain on these transactions was deferred and is being amortized into income based upon expected future premium income on the traditional insurance policies ceded and estimated future gross profits on the interest-sensitive insurance policies ceded. Total operating revenue for individual life and corporate-owned life insurance was $37.8 million, $41.0 million, and $40.0 million in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. Operating income for the same periods was $33.0 million, $38.8 million, and $38.2 million. 75 Table of Contents Other Group pension, health insurance, individual annuities, and other closed lines of business had combined operating revenue of $103.6 million, $110.4 million, and $144.6 million in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively, and combined operating income (losses) of $(1.9) million, $2.2 million, and $(1.5) million. Decreases in operating revenue and income are expected to continue as these lines of business wind down. Corporate Segment Operating Results The Corporate segment includes investment income on corporate assets not specifically allocated to a line of business, corporate interest expense, and certain corporate income and expense not allocated to a line of business. Operating revenue in the Corporate segment was $60.5 million in 2006 compared to $61.2 million in 2005 and $66.0 million in 2004. Included in operating revenue is interest on tax refunds of $2.6 million in 2006 and $14.0 million in 2004. Also included in operating revenue is a $9.4 million curtailment gain recognized in 2004 related to changes in our retiree medical plan. The Corporate segment reported operating losses of $184.7 million, $152.8 million, and $153.7 million in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. Included in the corporate segment operating results for 2006 are broker compensation settlement expenses of $18.5 million and $25.8 million of costs related to the early retirement of debt. Interest and debt expense, excluding the costs related to early retirement of debt, was $191.8 million in 2006 compared to $208.0 million in 2005 and $207.1 million in 2004. See Debt contained herein in Item 7 for further discussion. Discontinued Operations In January 2007, we entered into a definitive agreement for the sale of GENEX. We expect to close the transaction during the first quarter of 2007, subject to customary closing conditions. Operating revenue of $177.9 million in 2005 and $177.1 million in 2004 and operating income of $15.7 million in 2005 and $16.2 million in 2004 were previously reported in the Other segment. GENEX income, net of tax, of $7.4 million, $9.6 million, and $9.2 million in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively, is now reported as discontinued operations. During 2004, we closed the sale of our Canadian branch and reported a loss on sale and write-downs of $113.6 million before tax and $71.3 million after tax. We also reported income excluding the loss on sale and write-downs of $10.5 million in 2004. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of our discontinued operations. Investments Overview Investment activities are an integral part of our business, and profitability is significantly affected by investment results. We segment our invested assets into portfolios that support our various product lines. Generally, our investment strategy for our portfolios is to match the effective asset cash flows and durations with related expected liability cash flows and durations to consistently meet the liability funding requirements of our businesses. We try to maximize investment income and assume credit risk in a prudent and selective manner, subject to constraints of quality, liquidity, diversification, and regulatory considerations. Our overall investment philosophy is to invest in a portfolio of high quality assets that provide investment returns consistent with those assumed in the pricing of our insurance products. Assets are invested predominately in fixed maturity securities, and the portfolio is matched with liabilities so as to eliminate as much as possible our exposure to changes in the overall level of interest rates. Changes in interest rates may affect the amount and timing of cash flows. 76 Table of Contents We actively manage our asset and liability cash flow match, as well as our asset and liability duration match to minimize interest rate risk. We may redistribute investments within our different lines of business, when necessary, to adjust the cash flow and/or duration of the asset portfolios to better match the cash flow and duration of the liability portfolios. Asset and liability portfolio modeling is updated on a quarterly basis and is used as part of the overall interest rate risk management strategy. Cash flows from the inforce asset and liability portfolios are projected at current interest rate levels and also at levels reflecting an increase and a decrease in interest rates to obtain a range of projected cash flows under the different interest rate scenarios. These results enable us to assess the impact of projected changes in cash flows and duration resulting from potential changes in interest rates. Testing the asset and liability portfolios under various interest rate scenarios enables us to choose the most appropriate investment strategy as well as to minimize the risk of disadvantageous outcomes. This analysis is a precursor to our activities in derivative financial instruments, which are used to hedge interest rate risk and to manage duration match. At December 31, 2006, the weighted average duration of our policyholder liability portfolio was approximately 7.97 years, and the weighted average duration of our investment portfolio supporting those policyholder liabilities was approximately 7.66 years. Below is a summary of our formal investment policy, including the overall quality and diversification objectives. The majority of investments are in high quality publicly traded securities to ensure the desired liquidity and preserve the capital value of our portfolios. The long-term nature of our insurance liabilities also allows us to invest in less liquid investments to obtain superior returns. A maximum of 10 percent of the total investment portfolio may be invested in below-investment-grade securities, 2 percent in equity type instruments, up to 35 percent in private placements, and 5 percent in commercial mortgage loans. The remaining assets can be held in publicly traded investment-grade corporate securities, mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities, and U.S. government agencies and municipal securities. We intend to manage the risk of losses due to changes in interest rates by matching asset duration with liabilities, in the aggregate, to within a range of +/- ten percent of the liability duration. The weighted average credit quality rating of the portfolio should be BBB or higher. The maximum investment per issuer group is limited based on internal limits established by our board of directors and is more restrictive than the five percent limit generally allowed by the state insurance departments which regulate the type of investments our insurance subsidiaries are allowed to own. These internal limits are as follows: Rating Internal Limit ($ in millions) AAA/A $150 BBB+ 125 BBB 100 BBB- 75 BB+ 60 BB/BB- 50 B 20 The portfolio is to be diversified across industry classification and geographic lines. Derivative instruments may be used to hedge interest rate risk and foreign currency risk and match liability duration and cash flows consistent with the plan approved by the board of directors. Asset mix guidelines and limits are established by us and approved by the board of directors. The allocation of assets and the selection and timing of the acquisition and disposition of investments are subject to ratification by the investment subcommittee of the board of directors on a weekly basis. These actions are also reviewed and approved by the board of directors on a quarterly basis. These investment policies and guidelines are reviewed and appropriately adjusted by the board of directors annually, or more frequently if deemed necessary. 77 Table of Contents Investment Results Net investment income was $2,320.6 million in 2006, an increase of 6.0 percent relative to the prior year. The increase was due primarily to growth in invested assets and an increase in bond call premiums, offset by a lower yield due to the investment of new cash at lower rates than that of our overall portfolio yield and a decline in the level of prepayment income on mortgage-backed securities. Net investment income is also higher in 2006 compared to last year because of the investment income related to the bonds transferred to one of our insurance subsidiaries in conjunction with the 2005 recapture of a ceded closed block of individual income protection business. The overall yield in our investment portfolio was 6.73 percent as of December 31, 2006, and the weighted average credit rating was A2. This compares to an overall yield in the portfolio of 6.85 percent as of December 31, 2005 and a weighted average credit rating of A2. We expect the portfolio yield to continue to gradually decline until the market rates on new purchases equal or exceed the level of the overall yield. We recognize impairment losses when we determine that the value of certain fixed maturity securities has other than temporarily declined during the applicable reporting period, as well as when there are further declines in the values of fixed maturity securities that were initially written down in a prior period. See Critical Accounting Estimates contained herein in Item 7 for a complete discussion of the valuation of fixed maturity securities. We also report changes in the fair values of certain embedded derivatives as realized investment gains and losses, as required under the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133 Implementation Issue B36 (DIG Issue B36), Embedded Derivatives: Modified Coinsurance Arrangements and Debt Instruments That Incorporate Credit Risk Exposure That Are Unrelated or Only Partially Related to the Creditworthiness of the Obligor Under Those Instruments . Fair value changes in 2005 include an embedded derivative that was terminated when the associated reinsurance contract was recaptured in 2005. Under our remaining reinsurance contracts for which DIG Issue B36 is applicable, we believe that fair value changes will be minimal. Realized investment gains and losses, before tax, are as follows: (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2006 2005 2004 Gross Realized Investment Gain from Sales $ 82.0 $ 110.8 $ 93.4 Gross Realized Investment Loss Write-downs 17.2 19.4 88.0 Sales 57.3 90.2 64.8 Total 74.5 109.6 152.8 Change in Fair Value of DIG Issue B36 Derivatives (5.3 ) (7.9 ) 88.6 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) $ 2.2 $ (6.7 ) $ 29.2 Realized Investment Losses $10.0 Million or Greater from Other than Temporary Impairments We had no individual realized investment losses $10.0 million or greater from other than temporary impairments during 2006. During 2005 and 2004, we recognized other than temporary impairment losses of $10.0 million or greater on securities from three different issuers. Discussed as follows are the circumstances surrounding those impairment losses. 78 Table of Contents During 2005, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $10.3 million on certificates issued by a trust backed by leases to a U.S. based airline. Although the airline had filed for bankruptcy in the third quarter of 2004, the bonds were secured by aircraft owned by the trust and had remained current on all interest payments to date. However, due to the lack of clarity regarding the value of aircraft collateralizing these securities and the length of time these securities have been in an unrealized loss position, we determined that an other than temporary impairment had occurred. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2000. At the time of the impairment, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. During 2004, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $20.5 million on securities issued by a large domestic based airline. The company continued to be plagued by a high cost structure and faced liquidity problems if costs were not substantially reduced in the short-term. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2001. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. Also during 2004, we recognized an other than temporary impairment loss of $12.0 million on senior notes issued by a United Kingdom based engineering and manufacturing company engaged in the bus and automotive industry. The company experienced a rapid deterioration in business prospects at its main operating unit in late 2003 and early 2004, followed by the discovery of bookkeeping fraud at one of its business units. Both of these issues were discovered and disclosed to the company banks and note holders by outside financial consultants during the first quarter of 2004. The company filed for U.K. administration on March 31, 2004. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2003. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 180 days but less than 270 days. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. Realized Investment Losses $10.0 Million or Greater from Sale of Fixed Maturity Securities During 2006, we recognized a loss of $13.1 million on the sale of securities issued by a U.S. based automotive parts supplier. This company had experienced lower sales due to declining auto production and higher expenses due to increasing steel prices. In an October 2005 press release, this company confirmed that due to accounting errors it would restate its previously released 2004 and first and second quarter 2005 earnings and delay third and fourth quarter 2005 earnings releases. In a first quarter of 2006 press release, the company reported third quarter 2005 results which were significantly below expectations and also withdrew guidance of positive free cash flow for its fiscal year 2005. Trade creditors put into place more stringent credit terms in response to the weaker financial results, which forced the company into bankruptcy in the first quarter of 2006. A portion of these securities had an investment-grade rating at the time of purchase, and a portion was purchased after the securities had been downgraded to below-investment-grade in the second quarter of 2001. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. During 2005, we recognized a loss of $14.6 million on the sale of securities issued by a major U.S. based automotive parts supplier. The company had experienced declining sales and production levels, along with higher steel prices and growing employee health care and retirement costs. The company filed for bankruptcy in the third quarter of 2005. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2005. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 90 days but less than 180 days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. 79 Table of Contents Also during 2005, we recognized a loss of $12.6 million on the sale on securities issued by a major U.S. based automotive manufacturer. The company had experienced declining sales due to competition and the increase in gasoline prices, along with higher raw material costs and growing employee health care and retirement costs. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2005. At the time of sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of less than 90 days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. During 2004, we had no individual realized investment loss of $10.0 million or greater from sale of fixed maturity securities. Asset Distribution The following table provides the distribution of invested assets for the periods indicated. Ceded policy loans of $3.2 billion as of December 31, 2006 and $3.0 billion as of December 31, 2005, which are reported on a gross basis in the consolidated balance sheets contained herein in Item 8, are excluded from the table below. The investment income on these ceded policy loans is not included in income. Distribution of Invested Assets December 31 2006 2005 Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities 89.0 % 89.9 % Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities 5.8 6.0 Mortgage Loans and Real Estate 2.6 2.1 Short-Term Investments 1.8 1.2 Other Invested Assets 0.8 0.8 Total 100.0 % 100.0 % 80 Table of Contents Fixed Maturity Securities Fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2006, included $34.6 billion, or 98.7 percent, of bonds and derivative instruments and $445.1 million, or 1.3 percent, of redeemable preferred stocks. The following table shows the fair value composition by internal industry classification of the fixed maturity bond portfolio and the associated unrealized gains and losses. Fixed Maturity Bonds By Industry Classification As of December 31, 2006 (in millions of dollars) Classification Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain (Loss) Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Gain Gross Unrealized Gain Basic Industry $ 2,360.9 $ 88.8 $ 833.9 $ 32.9 $ 1,527.0 $ 121.7 Canadian 268.9 57.2 268.9 57.2 Capital Goods 2,605.4 173.8 662.6 24.2 1,942.8 198.0 Communications 2,615.0 136.2 861.6 49.9 1,753.4 186.1 Consumer Cyclical 1,463.4 33.8 627.0 31.7 836.4 65.5 Consumer Non-Cyclical 4,043.3 135.4 1,751.8 68.6 2,291.5 204.0 Derivatives Hedging Available-for-Sale (42.5 ) (46.0 ) (165.8 ) 165.8 123.3 119.8 Energy (Oil & Gas) 2,274.7 229.2 366.6 12.8 1,908.1 242.0 Financial Institutions 3,628.0 28.5 2,154.9 71.7 1,473.1 100.2 Mortgage/Asset-Backed 3,973.8 208.2 737.0 13.8 3,236.8 222.0 Sovereigns 864.3 36.4 478.3 13.1 386.0 49.5 Technology 477.5 19.5 130.0 7.0 347.5 26.5 Transportation 993.8 98.8 130.8 2.8 863.0 101.6 U.S. Government Agencies and Municipalities 2,620.5 59.7 1,368.6 67.0 1,251.9 126.7 Utilities 6,420.9 308.6 2,267.3 89.5 4,153.6 398.1 Total $ 34,567.9 $ 1,568.1 $ 12,204.6 $ 650.8 $ 22,363.3 $ 2,218.9 The above chart excludes DIG Issue B36 embedded derivatives, which at December 31, 2006 had a fair value of $(11.5) million. 81 Table of Contents The following table is a distribution of the maturity dates for fixed maturity bonds in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2006. Fixed Maturity Bonds By Maturity As of December 31, 2006 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Due in 1 year or less $ 33.6 $ 0.1 Due after 1 year up to 5 years 1,031.0 11.5 Due after 5 years up to 10 years 3,326.5 289.9 Due after 10 years 7,076.5 335.5 Subtotal 11,467.6 637.0 Mortgage/Asset-Backed Securities 737.0 13.8 Total $ 12,204.6 $ 650.8 Of the $650.8 million in gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2006, $590.2 million, or 90.7 percent, are related to investment-grade fixed maturity bonds. The following table shows the length of time the investment-grade fixed maturity bonds had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2006. Unrealized Loss on Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Bonds Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position As of December 31, 2006 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss <= 90 days $ 1,583.4 $ 14.4 > 90 <= 180 days 268.7 4.2 > 180 <= 270 days 624.6 9.6 > 270 <= 1 year 3,936.2 149.5 > 1 year <= 2 years 3,697.3 147.7 > 2 years <= 3 years 111.0 127.9 > 3 years 1,262.5 136.9 Total $ 11,483.7 $ 590.2 82 Table of Contents The following table shows the length of time the below-investment-grade fixed maturity bonds had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2006. The relationships of the current fair value to amortized cost, which were all at or above 70 percent on December 31, 2006, are not necessarily indicative of the fair value to amortized cost relationships for the securities throughout the entire time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position nor are they necessarily indicative of the relationships after December 31, 2006. Unrealized Loss on Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Bonds Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position As of December 31, 2006 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss <= 90 days $ 51.0 $ 1.6 > 90 <= 180 days 7.2 0.2 > 180 <= 270 days 69.2 2.5 > 270 <=1 year 90.1 5.3 > 1 year <= 2 years 351.1 37.1 > 2 years <= 3 years 47.6 6.0 > 3 years 104.7 7.9 Total $ 720.9 $ 60.6 As of December 31, 2006, we held three securities, all investment-grade, with a gross unrealized loss of $10.0 million or greater, as shown in the chart below. Gross Unrealized Losses on Fixed Maturity Bonds $10.0 Million or Greater As of December 31, 2006 (in millions of dollars) Fixed Maturity Bonds Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss Length of Time in a Loss Position U.S. Government Sponsored Mortgage Funding Company $ 456.8 $ 15.5 > 270 days <= 1 year U.S. Government Sponsored Mortgage Funding Company 725.1 45.9 > 3 years Principal Protected Equity Linked Note 50.9 23.8 > 3 years Total $ 1,232.8 $ 85.2 Unrealized losses on investment-grade fixed maturity securities principally relate to changes in interest rates or changes in market or sector credit spreads which occurred after the acquisition of the securities. These changes are generally temporary and are not recognized as realized investment losses unless the securities are sold, it becomes unlikely that we will hold the securities until recovery based on relevant facts and circumstances, or the securities become other than temporarily impaired. Generally, below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities are more likely to develop credit concerns. In determining whether a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, we utilize a formal, well-defined, and disciplined process to monitor and evaluate our fixed income investment portfolio. The process results in a thorough evaluation of problem investments and the recording of realized losses on a timely basis for investments determined to have an other than temporary impairment. 83 Table of Contents For those fixed maturity securities with an unrealized loss and on which we have not recorded an impairment loss, we believe that the decline in fair value below amortized cost is temporary. We have the ability and intent to hold our securities to the earlier of recovery or maturity. If information becomes available that changes our assessment as to whether we will receive contractual payments related to a fixed maturity security and the security is also not projected to recover in value, the related security is generally sold. We may also in certain circumstances sell a security in an unrealized loss position because of changes in tax laws, when a merger or the disposition of a segment or product line results in positions outside of our investment guidelines, due to changes in regulatory or capital requirements, due to unexpected changes in liquidity needs, to better match portfolio cash flows, or to take advantage of relative value opportunities or tender offers that recover up to or beyond the cost of the investment. For those securities with a gross unrealized loss of $10.0 million or greater, further discussed as follows are (a) the factors which we believe resulted in the impairment and (b) the information we considered, both positive and negative, in reaching the conclusion that the impairments were not other than temporary. The first fixed maturity bond of the U.S. government sponsored mortgage funding company was issued by the Federal Home Loan Bank. The bond was rated AAA by Standard & Poor Corporation (S&P) as of December 31, 2006, with no negative outlook by rating agencies or in analysts reports. The change in the market value of this security relates to changes in interest rates after the purchase of the bond. We believe that the decline in fair value of this security is temporary. The market value of this security will increase if interest rates decline to levels similar to when the bonds were purchased. We believe this is likely to occur over the life of the security. We have the ability to hold this security to the earlier of recovery or maturity. The second fixed maturity bond of the U.S. government sponsored mortgage funding company was issued by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. The bond was rated AAA by S&P as of December 31, 2006, with no negative outlook by rating agencies or in analysts reports. The change in the market value of this security relates to changes in interest rates after the purchase of the bond. We believe that the decline in fair value of this security is temporary. The market value of this security will increase if interest rates decline to levels similar to when the bonds were purchased. We believe this is likely to occur over the life of the security. We have the ability to hold this security to the earlier of recovery or maturity. The principal protected equity linked note is a zero coupon bond, issued by a large, well capitalized Fortune 500 financial services company, the return of which is linked to a Vanguard S&P 500 index mutual fund. This bond matures on August 24, 2020 and carried the AA rating of the issuer, as determined by S&P as of December 31, 2006. This note has an embedded derivative contract and substitutes highly rated bonds in place of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund to provide principal protection if there is a significant decline in the equities market. The note derives its value from the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund. The reduction in the market value of this note was the result of the decline in the S&P 500 index after the purchase date of the note. Based on historical long-term returns of the S&P 500 index, we believe that the value of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund will equate to or exceed the par value of the security at maturity. We believe that the decline in fair value of the note is temporary. We have the ability to hold this security to the earlier of recovery or maturity. Our investment in mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities was approximately $3.8 billion and $4.2 billion on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. At December 31, 2006, the mortgage-backed securities had an average life of 7.8 years and effective duration of 6.3 years. The mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities are valued on a monthly basis using valuations supplied by the brokerage firms that are dealers in these securities. The primary risk involved in investing in mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities is the uncertainty of the timing of cash flows from the underlying loans due to prepayment of principal with the possibility of reinvesting the funds in a lower interest rate environment. We use models which incorporate economic variables and possible future interest rate scenarios to predict future prepayment rates. We have not invested in mortgage-backed derivatives, such as interest-only, principal-only, or residuals, where market values can be highly volatile relative to changes in interest rates. 84 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2006, our exposure to below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities was $2,134.0 million, approximately 5.8 percent of the fair value of invested assets excluding ceded policy loans, compared to 6.0 percent at the end of 2005. Below-investment-grade bonds are inherently more risky than investment-grade bonds since the risk of default by the issuer, by definition and as exhibited by bond rating, is higher. Also, the secondary market for certain below-investment-grade issues can be highly illiquid. Additional downgrades may occur, but we do not anticipate any liquidity problem caused by our investments in below-investment-grade securities, nor do we expect these investments to adversely affect our ability to hold our other investments to maturity. We have a significant interest in, but are not the primary beneficiary of, a special purpose entity which is a collateralized bond obligation asset trust in which we hold interests in several of the tranches and for which we act as investment manager of the underlying securities. Our investment in this entity is reported at fair value with fixed maturity securities in the consolidated balance sheets. The fair value of this investment was derived from the fair value of the underlying assets. The fair value and amortized cost of this investment were $18.8 million and $18.4 million, respectively, at December 31, 2006, and $21.5 million and $21.0 million, respectively, at December 31, 2005. Mortgage Loans and Real Estate Our mortgage loan portfolio was $944.0 million and $739.4 million on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. We expect that we will continue to add investments in this category either through the secondary market or through loan originations. We believe our mortgage loan portfolio is well diversified geographically and among property types. The incidence of problem mortgage loans and foreclosure activity remains low, and we expect the level of delinquencies and problem loans to remain low in the future. At December 31, 2006, impaired mortgage loans totaled $2.8 million. We had no impaired mortgage loans at December 31, 2005. Real estate was $17.9 million and $18.2 million at December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Investment real estate is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation. Real estate acquired through foreclosure is valued at fair value at the date of foreclosure and may be classified as investment real estate if it meets our investment criteria. If investment real estate is determined to be permanently impaired, the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to fair value. Occasionally, investment real estate is reclassified to real estate held for sale when it no longer meets our investment criteria. Real estate held for sale, which is valued net of a valuation allowance that reduces the carrying value to the lower of cost or fair value less estimated cost to sell, was $6.5 million at December 31, 2006 and $6.7 million at December 31, 2005. We use a comprehensive rating system to evaluate the investment and credit risk of each mortgage loan and to identify specific properties for inspection and reevaluation. We establish an investment valuation allowance for mortgage loans based on a review of individual loans and the overall loan portfolio, considering the value of the underlying collateral. Investment valuation allowances for real estate held for sale are established based on a review of specific assets. If a decline in value of a mortgage loan or real estate investment is considered to be other than temporary or if the asset is deemed permanently impaired, the investment is reduced to estimated net realizable value, and the reduction is recognized as a realized investment loss. We monitor the risk associated with these invested asset portfolios and regularly review and adjust the investment valuation allowance. At December 31, 2006, the balance in the valuation allowance for mortgage loans was $0.5 million. We had no valuation allowance for mortgage loans at December 31, 2005. At December 31, 2006 and 2005, the balance in the valuation allowances for real estate was $7.6 million. Derivatives We use derivative financial instruments to manage reinvestment risk, duration, and currency risk. Historically, we have utilized interest rate futures contracts, current and forward interest rate swaps and options on forward interest rate swaps, current and forward currency swaps, interest rate forward contracts, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, and forward contracts on specific fixed income securities. All of these freestanding derivative transactions are hedging in nature and not speculative. Positions under our hedging programs for derivative activity that were open during 2006 involved current and forward interest rate swaps, current and forward currency swaps, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, and options on forward interest rate swaps. 85 Table of Contents Almost all hedging transactions are associated with the individual and group long-term care and the individual and group income protection products. All other product portfolios are periodically reviewed to determine if hedging strategies would be appropriate for risk management purposes. During 2006, we completed a program to reset the interest rates of several receive fixed, pay variable forward starting interest rate swaps by terminating various existing swaps and adding new swaps at current market interest rates and identical cash flow dates. This allowed us to increase our utilization of cash flows as well as reduce our credit exposure to our counterparties. Under this program, we added and terminated swaps with a notional amount of $1,515.0 million each, resulting in a gain of $136.4 million which we reported in other comprehensive income (loss). The anticipated cash flows hedged by these derivatives are still probable, and the gains from the terminated swaps along with the replacement swaps continue to be highly effective cash flow hedges. These terminations and the associated gain are included in the hedging activity discussed in the following two paragraphs. During the years ended December 31, 2006, 2005, and 2004, we recognized net gains of $183.6 million, $120.7 million, and $29.1 million, respectively, on the termination of cash flow hedges and reported $183.6 million, $121.0 million, and $29.2 million, respectively, in other comprehensive income (loss). During the years ended December 31, 2005, and 2004, we reported net losses of $0.3 million and $0.1 million, respectively, as a component of realized investment gains and losses. We amortized $30.0 million, $21.8 million, and $20.7 million of net deferred gains into net investment income in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. Our current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position, was $19.9 million at December 31, 2006. Additions and terminations, in notional amounts, to our hedging programs during 2006 were $2,139.8 million and $2,972.2 million, respectively, and in 2005 were $1,269.4 million and $1,458.8 million, respectively. Additions and terminations include roll activity, which is the closing out of an old contract and initiation of a new one when a contract is about to mature but the need for it still exists. Additions and terminations also include those resulting from swap interest rate reset programs, such as that previously described for 2006. The notional amount of derivatives outstanding under the hedge programs was $3,774.1 million at December 31, 2006 and $4,606.5 million at December 31, 2005. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had $2,125.0 million and $2,700.0 million, respectively, notional amount of forward starting interest rate swaps outstanding to lock in the reinvestment rates on future anticipated cash flows through the year 2013 for certain of our long-term production portfolios. During 2005, we initiated a derivatives strategy to hedge the foreign currency risk associated with the U.S. dollar denominated debt issued by one of our U.K. subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had $367.8 million and $400.0 million, respectively, notional amount of currency swaps and $216.3 million notional amount of forward currency contracts outstanding under this program. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had $658.4 million and $684.5 million, respectively, notional amount of open current and forward foreign currency swaps to hedge fixed income Canadian dollar denominated securities. As of December 31, 2006 and 2005, we had $170.0 million and $348.0 million, respectively, notional amount of open options on forward interest rate swaps under the hedging program used to lock in a reinvestment rate floor for the reinvestment of cash flows from renewals on policies with a one to two year minimum premium rate guarantee. We have invested in certain structured fixed maturity securities that contain embedded derivatives with a notional amount of $176.6 million as of December 31, 2006 and 2005. These embedded derivatives represent forward contracts and are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The purpose of these forward contracts is to hedge the risk of changes in cash flows related to the anticipated purchase of certain equity securities in the years 2020 through 2022. We have entered into an interest rate swap with a notional amount of $60.0 million as of December 31, 2006 and 2005 whereby we receive a fixed rate of interest and pay a variable rate of interest. The purpose of this swap is to hedge the variable cash flows associated with a floating rate security we own. The variable rate we pay on the swap is offset by the amount we receive on the variable rate security. 86 Table of Contents We also have embedded derivatives in modified coinsurance contracts recognized under DIG Issue B36. The derivatives recognized under DIG Issue B36 are not designated as hedging instruments, and the change in fair value is reported as a realized investment gain or loss during the period of change. Due to the change in fair value of these embedded derivatives, we recognized $(5.3) million, $(7.9) million and $88.6 million of net realized investment gains (losses) during 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. Non-current Investments Our exposure to non-current investments, on a fair value basis, totaled $12.5 million at December 31, 2006, compared to $29.5 million at December 31, 2005. Non-current investments are those investments for which principal and/or interest payments are more than 30 days past due. At December 31, 2006 these investments, which are subject to the same review and monitoring procedures in place for other investments in determining when a decline in fair value is other than temporary, consisted of fixed maturity securities for which before-tax impairment losses of approximately $76.5 million had been recorded life-to-date. The amortized cost of these investments, subsequent to the write-downs for impairments, was $4.7 million. Approximately $9.7 million of the fixed maturity securities, on a fair value basis, had principal and/or interest payments past due for a period greater than one year as of December 31, 2006. Other We have an investment program where we simultaneously enter into repurchase agreement transactions and reverse repurchase agreement transactions with the same party. We net the related receivables and payables in the consolidated balance sheets since these transactions meet the requirements for the right of offset. As of December 31, 2006, we had $645.9 million face value of these agreements in an open position that were offset. We also use the repurchase agreement market as a source of short-term financing, but had no contracts for this purpose outstanding at December 31, 2006. Liquidity and Capital Resources Our liquidity requirements are met primarily by cash flows provided from operations, principally in our insurance subsidiaries. Premium and investment income, as well as maturities and sales of invested assets, provide the primary sources of cash. Debt and/or securities offerings provide an additional source of liquidity. Cash is applied to the payment of policy benefits, costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions), operating expenses, and taxes, as well as purchases of new investments. We have established an investment strategy that we believe will provide for adequate cash flows from operations. Our policy benefits are primarily in the form of claim payments, and we have minimal exposure to the policy withdrawal risk associated with deposit products such as individual life policies or annuities. A decrease in demand for our insurance products or an increase in the incidence of new claims or the duration of existing claims could negatively impact our cash flows from operations. Deterioration in the credit market, which could delay our ability to sell our positions in certain of our fixed maturity securities in a timely manner, could also negatively impact our cash flows. We believe our cash resources are sufficient to meet our liquidity requirements for the next 12 months. Our cash flows from discontinued operations are combined with cash flows from continuing operations within each cash flow statement category in our consolidated statements of cash flows for the applicable periods. The absence of cash flows from discontinued operations has not, nor is it expected to, materially affect liquidity and capital resources. Consolidated Cash Flows Operating Cash Flows Net cash provided by operating activities was $1,431.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2006, compared to $1,503.6 million and $747.0 million for the comparable periods of 2005 and 2004. Included in the operating cash flows for 2004 is a cash disbursement of $707.4 million made in conjunction with the reinsurance of our individual income protection closed block of business. 87 Table of Contents Operating cash flows are primarily attributable to the receipt of premium and investment income, offset by payments of claims, commissions, expenses, and income taxes. Premium income growth is dependent not only on new sales, but on renewals of existing business, renewal price increases, and stable persistency. Investment income growth is dependent on the growth in the underlying assets supporting our insurance reserves and on the level of portfolio yield rates. Increases in commissions and operating expenses are attributable primarily to new sales growth and the first year acquisition expenses associated with new business. The level of paid claims is due partially to the growth and aging of the block of business and also to the general economy, as previously discussed in the operating results by segment. The income tax adjustment to reconcile net income (loss) to net cash provided by operating activities decreased $157.6 million in 2006 relative to 2005 and increased $231.3 million in 2005 compared to 2004. These variances year over year were due primarily from the utilization of net operating loss carryforwards during 2005. Included in 2006 is a tax benefit resulting from the reversal of tax liabilities related primarily to group relief benefits recognized from the use of net operating losses in a foreign jurisdiction. Included in 2004 is a tax benefit related to the restructuring charges associated with our individual income protection closed block business. Investing Cash Flows Investing cash inflows consist primarily of the proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments. Investing cash outflows consist primarily of payments for purchases of investments. Net cash used by investing activities was $1,222.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to $1,635.6 million and $919.7 million for the comparable periods of 2005 and 2004, respectively. We issued debt in the fourth quarter of 2005 and invested the proceeds in short-term investments and floating-rate bonds to provide liquidity needed for our participation in the remarketing of our adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in the first quarter of 2006. We therefore reported higher proceeds from sales of bonds and short-term investments in 2006 compared to 2005. We had higher proceeds from maturities of investments in 2006 than in 2005, primarily due to an increase in fixed maturity security principal proceeds from bond calls and scheduled maturities, offset somewhat by a decrease in principal prepayments on mortgage-backed securities. We generated $575.1 million less in proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale securities in 2005 than in 2004, primarily due to a decrease in principal prepayments on mortgage-backed securities and bond calls. We utilized short-term investments during 2004 in anticipation of the cash to be transferred in conjunction with the reinsurance transaction related to the individual income protection closed block restructuring. During 2005, we had cash inflows of $8.8 million related to the sale of Unum UK Netherlands branch and cash outflows of $3.5 million related to the GENEX acquisition of Independent Review Services, Inc. During 2004, we had cash inflows of $18.8 million in conjunction with the sale of our Japanese operations. In conjunction with the 2004 disposition of the Canadian branch, we transferred fixed maturity securities with a fair value and book value of approximately $1,099.4 million and $957.7 million, respectively, and cash of $31.7 million. While no cash was exchanged in the previously discussed 2004 Swiss Life transaction, Unum UK assumed reserves of approximately $279.6 million and received fixed maturity securities of approximately $259.0 million and other miscellaneous assets of approximately $5.2 million, for a net purchase price of $15.4 million. In 2004, we had cash outflows of $0.7 million for the GENEX acquisition of Integrated Benefits Management. Financing Cash Flows Financing cash flows consist primarily of borrowings and repayments of debt, issuance or repurchase of common stock, and dividends paid to stockholders. Net cash used by financing activities was $157.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2006 compared to net cash provided of $71.0 million and $181.9 million for the comparable periods of 2005 and 2004, respectively. During 2006, we received proceeds of approximately $130.0 million, less debt issuance costs of $4.1 million, from the issuance of $130.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior, secured notes by Tailwind Holdings through a private offering. Also during 2006, we received proceeds of approximately $575.0 million and issued 43.3 million shares of common stock upon the settlement of the common stock purchase contract element of our units issued in May 2003. We repurchased $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of the remarketed senior note element of the units, which were subsequently retired. We also repurchased $332.0 million aggregate principal amount of additional outstanding debt during 2006, for an aggregate cash outflow of $349.9 million including debt repurchase costs of $17.9 million. 88 Table of Contents During 2005, we repaid $227.0 million of maturing debt. Also in 2005, we received proceeds of $399.6 million from the issuance of $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.85% senior debentures less underwriting discounts of $4.0 million. During 2004, we received proceeds of $300.0 million from the issuance of adjustable conversion-rate equity security units. See Debt as follows for further information. Cash Available from Subsidiaries Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries and/or finance subsidiaries depend on payments from subsidiaries to pay dividends to stockholders, to pay debt obligations, and/or to pay expenses. These payments by our insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries may take the form of interest payments on loans from the parent to a subsidiary, operating and investment management fees, and/or dividends. At December 31, 2006, Unum Group had outstanding from one of its insurance subsidiaries a $100.0 million 8.25% surplus debenture due in 2027. Semi-annual interest payments are conditional upon the approval by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. During 2006, Unum Group received $150.0 million from one of its insurance subsidiaries for the repayment of a surplus debenture issued to Unum Group in December 1996 with a maturity date of December 2006. Restrictions under applicable state insurance laws limit the amount of ordinary dividends that can be paid to a parent company from its insurance subsidiaries in any 12-month period without prior approval by regulatory authorities. For life insurance companies domiciled in the United States, that limitation generally equals, depending on the state of domicile, either ten percent of an insurer statutory surplus with respect to policyholders as of the preceding year end or the statutory net gain from operations, excluding realized investment gains and losses, of the preceding year. The payment of ordinary dividends to a parent company from its insurance subsidiaries is generally further limited to the amount of statutory surplus as it relates to policyholders. Based on the restrictions under current law, during 2007, $506.2 million is available for the payment of ordinary dividends to Unum Group from its U.S. insurance subsidiaries, excluding Tailwind Re. Unum Group and/or certain of its finance subsidiaries may also receive dividends from its United Kingdom-based affiliate, Unum Limited, subject to applicable insurance company regulations and capital guidance in the United Kingdom. During 2006, the FSA completed its review of Unum Limited capitalization and determined that Unum Limited current capitalization is in excess of the amount considered to be sufficient capitalization. Approximately $200.2 million is available for the payment of dividends from Unum Limited during 2007. The amount available during 2006 for the payment of ordinary dividends from Unum Group U.S. insurance subsidiaries was $621.4 million, of which $339.1 million was utilized. The amount available during 2006 from Unum Limited was $240.3 million, of which $95.7 million was utilized. Tailwind Holdings ability to meet its debt payment obligations will be dependent upon its receipt of dividends from Tailwind Re. The ability of Tailwind Re to pay dividends to Tailwind Holdings will depend on Tailwind Re satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of its reinsured business. In the fourth quarter of 2006, Tailwind Re received regulatory approval from the insurance department of its state of domicile to pay a dividend of $25.0 million to Tailwind Holdings. The ability of Unum Group and certain of its intermediate holding company subsidiaries and/or finance subsidiaries to continue to receive dividends from their insurance subsidiaries without regulatory approval generally depends on the level of earnings of those insurance subsidiaries as calculated under law. In addition to regulatory restrictions, the amount of dividends that may be paid by insurance subsidiaries will depend on additional factors, such as RBC ratios, funding growth objectives at an affiliate level, and maintaining appropriate capital adequacy ratios to support desired ratings. Insurance regulatory restrictions do not limit the amount of dividends available for distribution from non-insurance subsidiaries except where the non-insurance subsidiaries are held directly or indirectly by an insurance subsidiary and only indirectly by Unum Group. Unum Group RBC ratio for its U.S. insurance subsidiaries, excluding Tailwind Re and calculated on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was approximately 300 percent at the end of 2006, with the individual RBC ratios for Unum Group principal U.S. insurance subsidiaries ranging from 260 percent to 444 percent. The individual RBC ratio for each insurance subsidiary is above the range that would require state regulatory action. The RBC ratio for Tailwind Re, 89 Table of Contents calculated using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was approximately 200 percent at the end of 2006, in line with the target level which was established for this special purpose financial captive insurance company. Debt At December 31, 2006, we had long-term debt, including adjustable conversion-rate equity security units, senior secured notes, and junior subordinated debt securities, totaling $2,659.6 million. At December 31, 2006, the debt to total capital ratio was 27.6 percent compared to 35.0 percent at December 31, 2005. The debt to total capital ratio, when calculated excluding the debt and associated equity of Tailwind Holdings and allowing 50 percent equity credit for the adjustable conversion-rate equity security units, was 25.1 percent at December 31, 2006, compared to 30.3 percent at December 31, 2005. As previously discussed, on November 1, 2006, Tailwind Holdings issued $130.0 million of senior, secured notes in a private offering. Recourse for the payment of principal, interest, and other amounts due on the notes will be limited to the assets of Tailwind Holdings, consisting primarily of the stock of its sole subsidiary Tailwind Re, a South Carolina special purpose financial captive insurance company. Tailwind Holdings ability to meet its payment obligations under the notes will be dependent principally upon its receipt of dividends from Tailwind Re. The ability of Tailwind Re to pay dividends to Tailwind Holdings will depend on its satisfaction of applicable regulatory requirements and on the performance of the reinsured claims of Unum America reinsured by Tailwind Re. None of Unum Group, Unum America, Tailwind Re or any other affiliate of Tailwind Holdings is an obligor or guarantor on the notes. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 for additional information. In the second quarter of 2006, pursuant to a cash tender offer, we purchased $50.0 million of our outstanding 7.405% junior subordinated debt securities due 2038 and $250.0 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 7.625% notes due 2011. In the fourth quarter of 2006, in open market transactions, we purchased $32.0 million of our outstanding 6.85% notes due 2015. In February 2006, the scheduled remarketing of the senior note element of the 2003 adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) occurred, as stipulated by the terms of the original offering, and we reset the interest rate on $575.0 million of senior notes due May 15, 2008 to 5.997%. We purchased $400.0 million of the senior notes in the remarketing which were subsequently retired. In May 2006, we settled the purchase contract element of the units by issuing 43.3 million shares of common stock. We received proceeds of approximately $575.0 million from the transaction. During the fourth quarter of 2005, Unum Group repatriated $454.8 million in unremitted foreign earnings from its U.K. subsidiaries, and as part of its repatriation plan, issued $400.0 million of 6.85% senior debentures due November 15, 2015 in a private offering. In May 2004, Unum Group issued 12.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a private offering for $300.0 million. Unum Group subsequently registered the privately placed securities for resale by the private investors. Each unit has a stated amount of $25 and will initially consist of (a) a contract pursuant to which the holder agrees to purchase, for $25, shares of Unum Group common stock on May 15, 2007 and which entitles the holder to contract adjustment payments at the annual rate of 3.165 percent, payable quarterly, and (b) a 1/40 or 2.5 percent ownership interest in a senior note issued by Unum Group due May 15, 2009 with a principal amount of $1,000, on which Unum Group will pay interest at the initial annual rate of 5.085%, payable quarterly. Upon settlement of the common stock purchase contract and successful remarketing of the senior note element of the units, Unum Group will receive proceeds of approximately $300.0 million and will issue between 17.7 million and 20.4 million shares of common stock. The scheduled remarketing of the senior note element of these units occurred in February 2007, as stipulated by the terms of the original offering, and we reset the interest rate on $300.0 million of senior notes due May 15, 2009 to 5.859%. We purchased $150.0 million of the senior notes in the remarketing which were subsequently retired. In 2001, Unum Group issued $575.0 million of 7.625% senior notes due March 1, 2011. In 2002, Unum Group completed two long-term offerings, issuing $250.0 million of 7.375% senior debentures due June 15, 2032 and $150.0 million of 7.250% public income notes due June 15, 2032. The public income notes are redeemable at Unum 90 Table of Contents Group option, in whole or in part, on or after June 25, 2007. In 1998, Unum Group completed public offerings of $200.0 million of 7.25% senior notes due March 15, 2028, $200.0 million of 7.0% senior notes due July 15, 2018, and $250.0 million of 6.75% senior notes due December 15, 2028. In 1998, Provident Financing Trust I issued $300.0 million of 7.405% capital securities in a public offering. These capital securities, which mature on March 15, 2038, are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Unum Group, have a liquidation value of $1,000 per capital security, and have a mandatory redemption feature under certain circumstances. Unum Group issued $300.0 million of 7.405% junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, which mature on March 15, 2038, to Provident Financing Trust I in connection with the capital securities offering. The sole assets of Provident Financing Trust I are the junior subordinated debt securities. Unum Group has a shelf registration, which became effective in 2005, with the Securities and Exchange Commission to issue various types of securities, including common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depository shares, stock purchase contracts, units and warrants, or preferred securities of wholly-owned finance trusts up to an aggregate of $1.0 billion. If utilized, the shelf registration will enable us to raise funds from the offering of any individual security covered by the shelf registration as well as any combination thereof, subject to market conditions and our capital needs. Commitments The following table summarizes contractual obligations by period as of December 31, 2006 (in millions of dollars). Payments Due Total In 1 Year or Less After 1 Year up to 3 Years After 3 Years up to 5 Years After 5 Years Long-term Debt $ 5,594.1 $ 181.2 $ 814.1 $ 623.5 $ 3,975.3 Policyholder Liabilities 30,778.6 4,157.5 5,830.0 4,326.0 16,465.1 Operating Leases 106.8 32.1 39.2 17.0 18.5 Purchase Obligations 96.1 95.2 0.9 Total $ 36,575.6 $ 4,466.0 $ 6,684.2 $ 4,966.5 $ 20,458.9 Long-term debt includes contractual principal and interest payments and therefore exceeds the amount shown in the consolidated balance sheet. See Note 9 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 for additional information. Policyholder liability maturities, which are presented net of reinsurance ceded, represent the projected payout of the current inforce policyholder liabilities and therefore incorporate uncertainties as to the timing and amount of claim payments. We utilize extensive liability modeling to project future cash flows from the inforce business. The primary assumptions used to project future cash flows are claim incidence rates for mortality and morbidity, claim resolution rates, persistency rates, and interest rates. These cash flows are discounted to determine the current value of the projected claim payments. The timing and amount of payments on policyholder liabilities may vary significantly from the projections above. See our previous discussion of asset/liability management under Investments contained herein in Item 7. Operating leases include noncancelable obligations on certain office space and equipment. Purchase obligations include capital commitments of $13.2 million to fund certain private placement fixed maturity securities and $66.6 million for commercial mortgage loan originations. These are shown in the table above based on the expiration date of the commitment. The funds will be due upon satisfaction of contractual notice from the trustee or issuer of the private placement securities or at closing of the mortgage loans. The amounts may or may not be funded. Also included are noncancelable obligations with outside parties for computer data processing 91 Table of Contents services and related functions and software maintenance agreements. The aggregate obligation remaining under these agreements was $16.3 million at December 31, 2006. Ratings A.M. Best Company (AM Best), Fitch Ratings (Fitch), Moody Investors Service (Moody s), and Standard & Poor Corporation (S&P) are among the third parties that rate our senior debt and the financial strength of our principal U.S. insurance subsidiaries. Financial strength ratings are based primarily on U.S. statutory financial information for the individual U.S. domiciled insurance companies. These ratings reflect each rating agency view of the overall financial strength (capital levels, earnings, growth, investments, business mix, operating performance, and market position) of the insuring entity and its ability to meet its obligations to policyholders. Debt ratings represent the opinions of the rating agencies specific to an issuer ability to repay its debt and are based primarily on consolidated financial information prepared using GAAP. Both financial strength ratings and debt ratings incorporate both quantitative and qualitative analyses by rating agencies and are routinely evaluated and updated on an ongoing basis. We compete based in part on the financial strength ratings provided by rating agencies. A downgrade of our financial strength ratings can be expected to adversely affect us. A downgrade of the financial strength ratings could, among other things, adversely affect our relationships with distributors of our products and services and retention of our sales force, negatively impact persistency and new sales, particularly large case group sales and individual sales, and generally adversely affect our ability to compete. Downgrades in our debt ratings can be expected to adversely affect our cost of capital or our ability to raise additional capital. The table below reflects our senior debt ratings and the financial strength ratings for our U.S. domiciled insurance company subsidiaries as of the date of this filing. AM Best Fitch Moody S&P Senior Debt Ratings bbb- (Good) BBB- (Good) Ba1 (Speculative) BB+ (Speculative) Financial Strength Ratings Provident Life & Accident A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Provident Life & Casualty A- (Excellent) Not Rated Not Rated Not Rated Unum Life of America A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) First Unum Life A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Colonial Life & Accident A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Paul Revere Life A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Paul Revere Variable A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) We maintain an ongoing dialogue with these rating agencies to inform them of progress we are making regarding our strategic objectives and financial plans, as well as other pertinent issues. We hold regular meetings, including an annual review meeting. We held our annual review with each of the rating agencies during the second quarter of 2006. Subsequent to each of our meetings, each agency issued a statement on our earnings and outlook. On May 23, 2006, Moody reaffirmed our credit ratings and financial strength ratings, and changed the outlook on the ratings from negative to stable. On June 7, 2006, AM Best reaffirmed our debt ratings and financial strength ratings and maintained the outlook on the ratings at negative. On August 31, 2006, S&P reaffirmed our counterparty credit rating and affirmed the counterparty credit and financial strength ratings on our various operating subsidiaries. S&P also revised its outlook on our holding company ratings from stable to positive and maintained the outlook of our subsidiaries at stable. On August 22, 2006, Fitch affirmed the ratings of our subsidiaries and on our debt and maintained the outlook as stable. 92 Table of Contents Subsequent to our third quarter of 2006 revision to our claim reassessment reserve estimate, our ratings were reevaluated by all four rating agencies, with each agency issuing a public comment in early November 2006. On November 1, 2006, Fitch affirmed its ratings for our companies and maintained its outlook at stable. Also on November 1, 2006, S&P affirmed its counterparty credit and financial strength ratings for our companies and maintained its outlook. On November 2, 2006, Moody reaffirmed our credit ratings and financial strength ratings for our companies but changed its outlook from stable to negative, citing our revision to our estimate of the reassessment cost for the claims requiring remediation. On the positive side, Moody noted that our Company had shown improvement in recent years in several of its key financial metrics, including lower financial leverage, stronger cash flow interest coverage and earnings interest coverage ratios, and a stronger combined RBC ratio. On November 7, 2006, AM Best reaffirmed our debt ratings and financial strength ratings and maintained the outlook on the ratings at negative. We cannot assure you that further changes by these or other rating agencies will or will not occur. Furthermore, ratings are not directed toward the holders of our securities and are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold our securities. Each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. See Ratings in Part 1, Item 1 and Risk Factors Debt and Financial Strength Ratings in Part 1, Item 1A, contained herein for further discussion. Other Information Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans We sponsor several defined benefit pension and postretirement plans for our employees, including non-qualified pension plans. The U.S. pension plans comprise the majority of our total benefit obligation and pension expense. The value of the benefit obligations is determined based on a set of economic and demographic assumptions that represent our best estimate of future expected experience. These assumptions are reviewed annually. Two of the economic assumptions, the discount rate and the long-term rate of return, are adjusted accordingly based on key external indices. We follow Statements of Financial Accounting Standards No. 87 (SFAS 87), Employers Accounting for Pensions , No. 106 (SFAS 106), Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions , No. 132 (SFAS 132), Employers Disclosures about Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits , and No. 158 (SFAS 158), Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R) in our financial reporting and accounting for our pension and postretirement benefit plans. U.S. Pension and PostRetirement Benefit Plans The assumptions chosen for U.S. pension plans and the U.S. postretirement plan use consistent methodology but reflect the differences in the plan obligations. We use a December 31 measurement date for each plan. The discount rate is an interest assumption used to convert the benefit payment stream to a present value. We set the discount rate assumption at the measurement date for each of our retirement related benefit plans to reflect the yield of a portfolio of high quality fixed income debt instruments matched against the timing and amounts of projected future benefits. The discount rate used for the net periodic benefit costs for 2007 and 2006 for our U.S. pension plans was 6.10 percent and 5.80 percent, respectively. Using a similar methodology applied to the postretirement plan cash flows, the discount rate used in the net periodic benefit cost for 2007 and 2006 was 5.90 percent and 5.50 percent, respectively. Lowering the discount rate by 50 basis points would have increased the 2006 pension expense for our U.S. pension plans by $10.7 million and would be expected to result in an $11.2 million increase in our 2007 pension expense. The long-term rate of return assumption is the best estimate of the average annual assumed return that will be produced from the pension trust assets until current benefits are paid. We use a compound interest method in computing the rate of return on pension plan assets. The long-term rate of return on assets used in the net periodic pension costs for our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan for 2007 and 2006 was 8.00 percent. Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on the plan assets by 50 basis points would have increased our 2006 pension 93 Table of Contents expense by approximately $2.6 million. For 2007, lowering the assumption by 50 basis points would be expected to increase pension expense by approximately $3.5 million. The market related value equals the fair value of assets, determined as of the measurement date. The assets are not smoothed for purposes of SFAS 87. The expected return on assets, therefore, fully recognizes all asset gains and losses through the measurement date. Our U.S. pension plans have an unrecognized net actuarial loss and an unrecognized prior service credit which represent the cumulative liability and asset gains and losses and the portion of prior service credits that have not been recognized in pension expense. As of December 31, 2006, the unrecognized net loss for these two items combined was approximately $290.0 million compared to $352.5 million at December 31, 2005. The decrease is due to the decline in the net actuarial loss resulting from an increase in the year end discount rate from 5.80 percent at 2005 to 6.10 percent at 2006 as well as actual asset returns in excess of the 8.0 percent assumed rate of return. Prior to the adoption of SFAS 158, unrecognized actuarial gains or losses and prior service costs or credits were amortized as a component of pension expense but were not reported in companies balance sheets. SFAS 158 requires that actuarial gains or losses and prior service costs or credits that have not yet been included in net periodic benefit cost as of the adoption date of SFAS 158 be recognized as components of accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax. The unrecognized gains or losses will be amortized out of accumulated other comprehensive income and included as a component of the net benefit cost, as they were prior to the adoption of SFAS 158. Our 2006, 2005, and 2004 pension expense includes $19.3 million, $16.4 million, and $13.2 million, respectively, of amortization of the unrecognized net actuarial loss and prior service credit. We reported U.S. pension expense of $59.6 million, $54.8 million, and $43.6 million in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. The fair value of plan assets in our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan was $658.5 million at December 31, 2006, compared to $515.4 million at year end 2005. In recent years, the moderate increase in assets, coupled with the liability increase due to declining discount rates, has reduced the year end funding level in the plan such that it has a deficit of $151.6 million as of December 31, 2006, compared to $246.1 million as of December 31, 2005. We had no regulatory contribution requirements for 2006 and 2005; however, we elected to make voluntary contributions of $92.0 million and $23.0 million, respectively, to our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan. We expect to make a voluntary contribution of approximately $110.0 million in 2007, based on current tax law. Non-U.S. Pension Plans Our U.K. operation maintains a separate defined benefit plan for eligible employees. The U.K. defined benefit pension plan (Scheme) was closed to new entrants on December 31, 2002. The long-term rate of return on asset assumption used in the net periodic pension costs for 2007 and 2006 was 6.8 percent and 6.7 percent, respectively. We elected to set the discount rate assumption at the measurement date for the Scheme to reflect the yield of a portfolio of high quality fixed income debt instruments matched against the timing and amounts of projected future benefits. The discount rate assumptions were 5.10 percent and 4.80 percent as of December 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Pension expense was $7.8 million, $11.7 million, and $11.6 million in 2006, 2005, and 2004, respectively. The fair value of plan assets in the Scheme was $168.9 million at December 31, 2006, compared to $92.1 million at year end 2005. The Scheme has a deficit of $9.6 million at December 31, 2006, compared to $45.2 million at December 31, 2005. We contribute to the Scheme in accordance with a schedule of contributions which requires that we contribute to the Scheme at the rate of at least 18.20 percent of eligible salaries, sufficient to meet the minimum funding requirement under U.K. legislation. During 2006, we made a voluntary contribution of $44.2 million to reduce the deficit and required contributions of $9.1 million. We anticipate that we will make contributions during 2007 of approximately $9.5 million. We previously maintained separate defined benefit plans for the employees of our Canadian branch operation. As a result of the sale of the Canadian branch, we froze the Canadian defined benefit pension plans during 2004 and recorded a curtailment loss of $0.7 million. We are currently in the process of terminating the Canadian plans. 94 Table of Contents 
