CIK: 5513
Company Name: UNUMPROVIDENT CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-03-14


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following management assessment of the Company financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained herein in Item 8. Executive Summary The Company is the largest provider of group and individual income protection insurance products and a leading provider of life, accident, and long-term care products in the United States and the United Kingdom. The Company believes that its product line, its commitment to high quality service, and its claims management approach position the organization well to compete in this highly competitive business. In addition to competition, portions of the Company business are sensitive to economic and financial market factors, including consumer confidence, employment levels, and the level of interest rates. Total segment operating revenue was $10.4 billion in 2004, compared to $10.2 billion in 2003. Segment operating performance improved during 2004 relative to the prior year for the U.K. operation, the Colonial segment, and many of the U.S. brokerage lines of business. Although the U.S. group income protection business performance in 2004 was below the Company long-term expectations, the Company believes that this business continues to show improvement due to the actions taken over the past several quarters to increase the profitability in this business, as evidenced by the decline in the benefit ratio during 2004 relative to the prior year. The Company continues to focus on a balanced mix of profitable business and a disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection to improve the profitability of this business. The Company also believes that improvements in the economic environment, such as a higher interest rate environment, greater consumer confidence, and an increase in new jobs, will ultimately contribute to enhanced operating results. The Company also reported strong statutory results in 2004. The Company U.S. insurance subsidiaries statutory combined net gain from operations was $662.1 million in 2004 compared to $214.8 million in 2003 and $220.7 million in 2002, and statutory combined net income, which includes realized net investment gains and losses, was $607.6 million in 2004, compared to $22.7 million for 2003 and a loss of $209.7 million for 2002. Described below are the significant challenges which the Company faced during 2004. Challenges during 2004 Improving the profitability of the U.S. group income protection business; Pressure on new sales and persistency due to the competitive pricing environment and concerns regarding the Company financial strength; Stabilizing or improving the Company existing debt and financial strength ratings and improving external perception surrounding the strength of the Company balance sheet and the adequacy of the capitalization of the Company; Examinations and investigations, including the investigations into broker compensation, the multistate market conduct examination and other claim related investigations, and the multidistrict litigation; The current low level of interest rates and the potential impact on the Company reserve discount rate on new claims; and The performance and potential risk associated with the closed block of individual income protection business, specifically concerns regarding reserves, deferred policy acquisition costs, and overall profitability. 25 Table of Contents Progress in 2004 In its U.S. group income protection business, the Company implemented targeted rate increases to specific cases and market segments which were not meeting profit expectations, adjusted its business plan to improve the balance in its sales mix by case size, and increased the focus on the profitability of new sales. Regarding sales, the Company believes that while lower than desired for the long-term, the results for 2004 were appropriate in the short-term given the Company disciplined approach to pricing in the current competitive environment and due to the Company continued shift to focus on the small and mid-employer market to restore a more balanced mix of business. Also, the Company believes that while negatively impacting the Colonial segment sales during 2004, the changes it implemented during 2004 will strengthen future sales for that segment. The Company proactively met with customers, brokers, and the rating agencies during 2004 to discuss rating agency actions and the Company improved financial position and performance. Additionally, during 2004 and 2003 the Company improved its consolidated risk-based capital position for its U.S. insurance subsidiaries and believes it has met or exceeded financial measures provided by its primary rating agency for maintenance of the Company ratings. See Ratings contained herein in Item 7 for discussion of ratings and financial measures used by the rating agencies. During 2004, the Company improved its overall balance sheet strength through the combined 2004 and 2003 equity and equity-related securities offerings of $1.450 billion, the strengthening of existing claim reserves for its group income protection business, the reduction in the Company holdings in below-investment-grade securities, and the sale or reinsurance of several non-core businesses and product lines. The Company also completed comprehensive scenario testing of its deferred policy acquisition costs during 2004 and believes the asset to be fully recoverable. During 2004, the Company entered into settlement agreements with state insurance regulators of 48 states upon conclusion of a multistate market conduct examination. Discussions continue with the California Department of Insurance, which did not join the multistate settlement agreements. Throughout 2004, the Company continued to cooperate and provide information in response to other regulatory investigations, as discussed more fully herein and in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8. The current interest rate environment continues to be a challenge for the Company, with low interest rates and a limited supply of investments which meet the Company quality, yield, and duration requirements. The Company intends to maintain its interest margins in its reserves and will lower the discount rate on new income protection claims if necessary to do so. The Company has hedging strategies in place wherein, with the current interest rate environment, it expects that approximately 50 percent of its 2005 operating cash flows and cash flows from maturities of investments are hedged at rates that meet or exceed the desired margins. The Company restructured its individual income protection closed block of business during 2004, as discussed more fully herein. The Company believes that this restructuring strengthened its balance sheet and minimized the Company exposure to potential future adverse morbidity from this block of business. Key Areas for Focus in 2005 Continued improvement in U.S. group income protection profitability; Successful implementation of the changes required by the multistate market conduct regulatory settlement agreements and restoration of more consistent claim management performance; Rebuilding U.S. Brokerage profitable sales momentum in the marketplace and effectively managing persistency of the existing block of business; Focusing on operational excellence, continuous improvement, and process innovation while aggressively managing expenses; Responding to the industry-wide focus on broker compensation and related matters, changes in the interest rate environment, and possible fluctuations in the dollar relative to foreign currencies and its impact on reported results for the Company foreign operations; Producing improvements in financial and operating performance which meet or exceed the expectations of the rating agencies, thereby increasing the opportunity for improved debt and financial strength ratings over time; and Reducing the Company leverage by paying maturing debt of $227.0 million. 26 Table of Contents 2004 Significant Transactions and Events Settlement of Multistate Market Conduct Examination During 2004, certain of the Company insurance subsidiaries entered into settlement agreements with state insurance regulators upon conclusion of a multistate market conduct examination led by Maine, Massachusetts, and Tennessee relating to disability claims handling practices. A total of 48 states and the District of Columbia are parties to the settlement agreements. In addition, the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL), which had been conducting an inquiry relating to certain ERISA plans, is a party to the settlement agreements, and the Office of the New York Attorney General, which had engaged in its own investigation of the Company claims handling practices, notified the Company that it was in support of the settlement and was, therefore, closing its investigation on this issue. The examination report did not make any findings of violations of law or market conduct regulations. However, the examination report did identify areas of concern. These became the focus of specific changes and enhancements to the Company disability claims handling operations which are designed to assure each claim decision is made in a consistently high quality manner. The primary components of the settlement agreements include: enhancements to the Company claims handling procedures; a reassessment process for claimants of certain previously denied or closed claims who elect to participate; additional corporate and board governance to support the oversight of the reassessment process and general claims handling practices; and payment of a fine in the amount of $15.0 million to be allocated among the states and jurisdictions that joined the agreements and a potential fine of $145.0 million in the future if certain standards are not met in examinations at the end of approximately two years. In the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company recorded a charge of $127.0 million, before tax, or $87.8 million, after tax, comprised of four elements: $27.5 million of incremental direct operating expenses to conduct the two-year reassessment process; $44.0 million for benefit costs and reserves from claims reopened from the reassessment; $40.5 million for additional benefit costs and reserves for claims already incurred and currently in inventory that are anticipated as a result of the claim process changes being implemented; and the $15.0 million fine. The charge decreased before-tax operating results for group income protection, individual income protection recently issued, and individual income protection closed block $116.7 million, $1.7 million, and $8.6 million, respectively. The ongoing costs of changes in the claims handling process and governance improvements will be included in the Company operating expenses as incurred going forward. These ongoing costs are not anticipated to materially affect the Company results of operations. The insurance commissioners of Maine, Massachusetts, and Tennessee, the states in which the Company three principal insurance subsidiaries are domiciled, began the multistate targeted market conduct examination in September 2003 and, as the lead state regulators, directed the course of the exam. The Company also has an insurance subsidiary domiciled in New York, but New York had been proceeding separately with its market conduct examination prior to commencement of the multistate examination. It became a participating state and also entered into a substantially identical settlement agreement covering the subsidiary domiciled in New York. The purpose of the examination was to determine whether the long-term disability claims handling practices of the Company insurance subsidiaries reflected unfair claim settlement practices. Examiners working under the direction of the three lead state regulators reviewed policy forms, manuals, and administration and organization charts, but primarily focused on reviewing individual or group long-term claim files closed, appealed, or open during two time periods from 2002 to early 2004. The claim file review led to discussions with the Company that resulted in the settlement agreements. A principal feature of the settlement agreements is a reassessment process. Under the agreements, the Company is offering to reassess any individual or group long-term disability claim that was denied or closed since January 1, 2000, except for specific categories of closures such as settlement, death, or payment of maximum benefits. The potential pool of claims decided over the nearly five year period that are eligible for reassessment if the claimant elects to participate is approximately 215,000 claims. However, almost half of these claims are subject to a preliminary determination as to whether the claimant seeking reassessment returned to work under the policy, in which case the claim is not eligible for further reassessment. The Company will also accept requests for 27 Table of Contents reassessment from other individuals whose claims were closed after January 1, 1997, and through December 31, 1999, subject to the same closure exceptions as the group receiving notice, and from claimants who dispute the category for closure if it affects their eligibility for reassessment. There will be ongoing oversight by the Company and lead state regulators of the reassessment process. The DOL may also participate in this monitoring of the reassessment process. The Company has also agreed to enhance certain aspects of its claim operations, including making changes to its organization and procedures to improve the consistency of and the support for each claim decision and create an easier process for claimants. First, the Company is increasing the number of experienced claims professionals involved in making claim decisions, as well as more heavily involving higher levels of management in signing off on adverse claim decisions. Doing so will not only put more experienced people into closer contact with claim decisions, but it should also improve turnaround times and clarify accountability for claims decisions. Second, to improve the support for the initial claim decisions, the Company is modifying its policies regarding medical information, including guidelines for the use of independent medical evaluations and the process for handling claimants with multiple medical conditions. Third, to make it easier for a claimant to understand and proceed through the claim process, the Company is adding a number of service components, including referring certain claims to field personnel who will meet with the claimant in an effort to make the process less burdensome. Also, there will be an additional telephone hotline available to claimants who seek additional assistance. Finally, to further assure consistency in the initial claim decision, the Company is adding a position of quality compliance consultant to assess the totality of the claim decision and to focus on issues of compliance and documentation. The final principal part of the settlement agreements addresses aspects of corporate governance which are intended to reflect today greater emphasis in this area and to help establish best practices for the industry. A regulatory compliance unit, reporting directly to a newly formed regulatory compliance committee of the board of directors, was created to monitor the reassessment process, compliance with market conduct regulations and ERISA requirements, as well as general claims handling compliance. The committee will be composed of five independent directors, including two directors with significant insurance industry or insurance regulatory experience. The agreements will remain in place until the later of January 1, 2007, or the completion of an examination of claims handling practices and an examination of the reassessment process, both of which will be conducted by the lead state regulators. In addition to the fine of $15.0 million, the insurance subsidiaries that are parties to the settlement agreements are subject as a group to potential fines for non-compliance with the settlement agreements, including contingent fines of $100,000 per day if certain implementation deadlines are not met and a contingent fine of $145.0 million for failure to satisfactorily meet the performance standards in the settlement agreements relating to the examinations referred to above, which will be conducted in approximately two years. This latter contingent fine relating to examination of the claims handling practices or the reassessment process is limited to a maximum of $145.0 million for both examinations should the performance standards not be met. The performance standard is based on compliance with a maximum tolerance standard for claims procedures based on review of a statistically credible random sample of individual or group claims. The Company believes that the changes it has made and will be making to its claims operations and to enhance its oversight functions will substantially reduce the likelihood that the Company would fail to meet the performance standards in the agreements when these examinations are concluded. Arizona, California, Minnesota, and New Mexico participated in the multistate examination; however, while the multistate examination was in progress those states chose to continue pursuing their own market conduct examinations and investigations, each of which had begun prior to the beginning of the multistate examination. The Company reached agreement with the Minnesota Department of Commerce covering three exam periods dating from 1995 and involving three of the Company insurance subsidiaries, which have agreed to pay a penalty totaling $250,000 relating to various matters outside the general scope of the multistate examination. Minnesota joined the multistate settlement agreements. California has conducted an examination with two phases and an investigation relating to claims handling. California chose not to join the multistate settlement agreements, and discussions with the California Department of Insurance have been ongoing relating to various issues, some of which are within the general scope of the multistate examination and others that are outside its scope and relate to California specific issues. Arizona and New Mexico consented to join the multistate settlement agreements. The Company understands that Arizona is in the process of concluding its examination that will focus on non-claim related matters, and New Mexico may, or may not, continue to pursue its own examination which was begun prior to the multistate examination. 28 Table of Contents Restructuring of Individual Income Protection Closed Block Business In the first quarter of 2004, the Company restructured its individual income protection closed block business wherein three of its insurance subsidiaries entered into reinsurance agreements to reinsure approximately 66.7 percent of potential future losses that occur above a specified retention limit. The individual income protection closed block reserves in these three subsidiaries comprise approximately 90 percent of the Company overall retained risk in the closed block of individual income protection. The reinsurance agreements effectively provide approximately 60 percent reinsurance coverage for the Company overall consolidated risk above the retention limit, which equals approximately $8.0 billion in existing statutory reserves. The maximum risk limit for the reinsurer is approximately $783.0 million initially and grows to approximately $2.6 billion over time, after which any further losses will revert to the Company. These reinsurance transactions were effective as of April 1, 2004. The Company transferred cash equal to $521.6 million of reserves ceded in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment plus an additional $185.8 million in cash for a before-tax prepaid cost of insurance which was deferred and will be amortized into earnings over the expected claim payment period covered under the Company retention limit. The Company retained the higher yielding investments historically associated with these reserves and redeployed these investments to other lines of business. In conjunction with the restructuring of the individual income protection closed block business, effective January 1, 2004, the Company modified its reporting segments to include a separate segment for this business. The reporting, monitoring, and management of the closed block of individual income protection business as a discrete segment is consistent with the Company financial restructuring and separation of this business from the lines of business which actively market new products. In the past, this business had been reported in the Income Protection segment. Prior to 2004, detailed separate financial metrics and models were unavailable to appropriately manage this block of business separately from the recently issued individual income protection block of business. The change in the Company reporting segments required the Company to perform, separately for the individual income protection closed block business and individual income protection recently issued business, impairment testing for goodwill and loss recognition testing for the recoverability of deferred policy acquisition costs and value of business acquired. As required under GAAP, prior to the change in reporting segments, these tests were performed for the individual income protection line of business on a combined basis. The testing indicated impairment of the individual income protection closed block deferred policy acquisition costs, value of business acquired, and goodwill balances of $282.2 million, $367.1 million, and $207.1 million, respectively. These impairment charges, $856.4 million before tax and $629.1 million after tax, are included in the results reported for 2004. Also as part of the restructuring, the Company analyzed the reserve assumptions related to its individual income protection closed block reserves as a stand-alone segment. Previously these reserves were analyzed for the individual income protection line of business on a combined basis. Included in the analysis was a review of morbidity assumptions, primarily claim resolution rates, and claim reserve discount rate assumptions. Based upon this analysis, the Company lowered the claim reserve discount rate to reflect the segmentation of assets between the individual income protection recently issued business and the individual income protection closed block business, the change in the Company investment portfolio yield rates during the first quarter of 2004, the Company expectation of future investment portfolio yield rates, and the Company desire to maintain the relationship between the claim reserve discount rate and the investment portfolio yield rate for the individual income protection closed block at the Company long-term objective. The segmentation of the investment portfolio was necessary to ensure appropriate matching of the duration of the assets and the related policy liabilities. Based on this analysis, in the first quarter of 2004 the Company increased its individual income protection closed block claim reserves by $110.6 million before tax, or $71.9 million after tax, to reflect its current estimate of future benefit obligations. The first quarter 2004 change represented a 1.2 percent increase in total net individual income protection closed block reserves as of March 31, 2004, which for continuing operations equaled $9.530 billion prior to this increase. Financing In May 2004, the Company issued 12.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a private offering for $300.0 million. The Company subsequently registered the privately placed securities for resale by the private investors. Each unit has a stated amount of $25 and will initially consist of (a) a contract pursuant to which the holder agrees to purchase, for $25, shares of the Company common stock on May 15, 2007 and which 29 Table of Contents entitles the holder to contract adjustment payments at the annual rate of 3.165 percent, payable quarterly, and (b) a 1/40 or 2.5 percent ownership interest in a senior note issued by the Company due May 15, 2009 with a principal amount of $1,000, on which the Company will pay interest at the initial annual rate of 5.085 percent, payable quarterly. Upon settlement of the common stock purchase contract and successful remarketing of the senior note element of the units, the Company will receive proceeds of approximately $300.0 million and will issue between 17.7 million and 20.4 million shares of common stock. Prior to settlement of the common stock purchase contract in May 2007, the purchase contract element of these units will have a dilutive effect on the Company net income per common share, assuming dilution, when the average market price of the Company common stock during the period exceeds the threshold appreciation price of $16.95 per share. After settlement of the common stock purchase contract in 2007, the weighted average common shares outstanding for computing net income per common share, both basic and assuming dilution, will increase by the actual number of shares issued. Proceeds from the offering were used to restore the Company insurance subsidiaries risk-based capital to the approximate overall level that existed prior to the individual income protection closed block reinsurance transaction and to provide additional liquidity at the holding company level. Acquisitions and Dispositions In the first quarter of 2004, Unum Limited became responsible for the ongoing administration and management of the United Kingdom portion of the group income protection claims portfolio of Swiss Life (UK) plc (Swiss Life), and Swiss Life reinsured this portfolio to Unum Limited. Unum Limited also became a multi-national pooling partner for Swiss Life Insurance & Pension Company with respect to business written in the United Kingdom. With the goal of focusing on its core operations, in the first quarter of 2004, the Company sold its Japanese operation, Unum Japan Accident Insurance Co., Ltd. The Company also entered into an agreement with the buyer to reinsure certain existing income protection business and intends to have a continuing presence in these operations for at least one year. The Company wrote down the book value of the Japan operations to the estimated fair value less cost to sell during the fourth quarter of 2003 and at that time recognized an impairment loss of $1.2 million before tax and $0.8 million after tax. The Company also recognized a tax benefit of $6.8 million, for a net after-tax gain of $6.0 million in 2003. During the second quarter of 2004, the Company completed the sale of its Canadian branch and reported a loss of $70.9 million after tax on the sale. On a statutory basis of reporting, Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company, the Company insurance subsidiary which included the Canadian branch business, reported a 2004 gain of $250.6 million after tax on the sale of the branch. Additionally, the transaction resulted in an approximate 158 point improvement in the statutory risk-based capital (RBC) ratio of Provident Life and Accident Insurance Company and an approximate 29 point improvement in the Company RBC ratio for its U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis. Assets transferred to the buyer included available-for-sale fixed maturity securities with a fair value of $1,099.4 million (book value of $957.7 million) and cash of $31.7 million. Liabilities transferred included reserves of $1,254.8 million. The Company retained a portion of the Canadian branch fixed maturity bond portfolio according to the terms of the transaction. At the close of the transaction, the bonds retained had a fair value of $732.9 million and a yield of 7.14 percent, which added approximately four basis points to the investment portfolio yield rate in the Company continuing operations. These investments were subsequently redeployed to the Company other lines of business. Financial results for the Canadian branch are reported as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements. Accordingly, the discussion of results by segment as follows does not include amounts related to those operations. See Discontinued Operations contained herein in Item 7 and Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of the Company discontinued operations. In the second quarter of 2004, the Company acquired Integrated Benefits Management, a provider of case management services, at a price of $0.7 million. This acquisition will further broaden the relationship and distribution partnerships of the Company wholly-owned subsidiary, GENEX Services, Inc. 30 Table of Contents In conjunction with the restructuring of its Argentinean operation, the Company reduced its ownership position in this operation to 40 percent during the fourth quarter of 2004 and reported a before-tax loss of $4.7 million. The Company also recognized from this transaction a tax benefit of $7.4 million, for a net after-tax gain of $2.7 million on the 2004 transaction. The Company wrote down the book value of the Argentinean operation to the estimated fair value less cost to sell during the fourth quarter of 2003 and at that time recognized an impairment loss of $13.5 million before tax and $11.3 million after tax. Other Income Tax Under the Life Insurance Company Tax Act of 1959, stock life insurance companies were required to maintain a policyholders surplus account containing the accumulated portion of income which had not been subjected to income tax in the year earned. The Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 required that no future amounts be added after 1983 to the policyholders surplus account and that any future distributions to shareholders from the account would become subject to federal income tax at the general corporate federal income tax rate then in effect. During 2004, the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (AJCA) was enacted. The AJCA provides, in part, that distributions from policyholders surplus accounts during 2005 and 2006 will not be taxed. The amount of the policyholders surplus accounts of the Company life insurance subsidiaries at December 31, 2004, was approximately $228.8 million. Under the AJCA, distributions made during 2005 and 2006 by these life insurance subsidiaries, including dividend distributions, are deemed to occur first from the policyholders surplus accounts. As a result, the Company life insurance subsidiaries expect to distribute the entire balance of their policyholders surplus accounts to the holding company during 2005 and 2006. This will result in the elimination of a future potential tax of approximately $80.1 million. This will also allow the Company to engage in transactions in the future without concern of triggering a tax liability related to distributions from the policyholders surplus accounts. No current or deferred federal income taxes have currently been provided on the amounts in the policyholders surplus accounts because management considers the conditions under which such taxes would be paid to be remote. Therefore, this provision of the AJCA does not affect the consolidated financial position or results of operations of the Company. The AJCA also provides for a deduction of 85 percent of certain foreign earnings that are repatriated during 2005, up to $500.0 million. The Company is currently reviewing its ability to take advantage of this provision and has not yet completed its evaluation. The Company expects to complete this evaluation during the first half of 2005. If the Company determines it is feasible to repatriate any amount of foreign earnings under this provision, the repatriation would be expected to positively impact the financial results of the Company in 2005 through reduced tax expense. During 2004, the Company recognized tax benefits as a result of settlements with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) of certain tax issues (primarily related to insurance tax reserves and investment losses) affecting the Company federal income tax liability related to its 1996 through 1998 tax years. During the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company obtained a judgment in refund litigation for federal income tax paid for tax year 1984, plus interest, and as a result will be entitled to a refund of tax plus interest for all tax years subsequent to tax year 1984 in which the IRS took inconsistent positions on the deductibility of insurance tax reserves that were the subject of the litigation and for which the Company paid tax based on the IRS inconsistent positions. Included in 2004 operating results is income of $14.0 million before tax and approximately $59.3 million after tax attributable to these prior year tax items. Disregarding any potential unusual adjustments with regard to legislative changes or IRS exams, the Company expects the effective tax rate in 2005 to approximate 35 percent. The increase in the effective tax rate is due primarily to the increased earnings in the Company U.K. operations. 31 Table of Contents Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans The Company net periodic benefit cost for its U.S. and foreign pension plans, which is calculated in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions (SFAS 87), was $56.3 million in 2004. Based on projections as of December 31, 2004, the Company estimates its net periodic benefit cost for 2005 will be in the range of $67.0 million to $70.0 million. In December 2004, as a result of lowering the discount rate used for projecting the benefit obligation, the Company increased the non-cash minimum pension liability adjustment in accumulated other comprehensive income in stockholders equity by $36.6 million, net of tax. See Pension and Postretirement Benefits Plans contained herein for further discussion. 2003 Significant Transactions and Events Reserve Strengthening In April 2003, the Company completed an analysis of its assumptions related to its group long-term income protection claim reserves. Included in the analysis was a review of active claim reserves, incurred but not reported (IBNR) reserves, and claim reopen reserves. An active claim reserve is established for future benefit payments when a claim is incurred and reported to the Company. IBNR reserves are established on claims which are estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to the Company. Claim reopen reserves are established for those claimants who have previously recovered but who are anticipated to return to disabled status under the same disability and within a specified period of time, as contractually allowed by the disability policy. The analysis was initiated based on lower claim resolution rates observed during the first quarter of 2003. The claim resolution rate is the rate of probability that a disability claimant will recover, die, or reach maximum benefit limits and no longer receive benefit payments from the Company. Generally, claim resolution rates vary by the age of the claimant at the time of disability, duration or length of time since the disability initially occurred, and claim diagnosis. The claim resolution rates for group long-term income protection during the first quarter of 2003 were below levels anticipated for reserves and were lower than those experienced in the full years 2002, 2001, and 2000. The analysis indicated not only a decrease in overall claim resolution rates, but also a change in claim resolution rates by claim duration. The analysis of emerging claim resolution rates and the reasons driving the changes resulted in a reduction in the Company long-term expectations with respect to claim resolution rates. The Company long-term expectations applied to all claims incurred regardless of the date of incurral. In addition, the Company reviewed the reserve discount rate, which is the interest rate at which future cash flows for benefits and expenses to be paid are discounted to determine the current value of those cash flows. The Company concluded at that time that a change in its discount rate assumptions was not warranted. Based on the April 2003 analysis, in the first quarter of 2003 the Company increased its group long-term income protection claim reserves by $454.0 million before tax, or $295.1 million after tax, to reflect its current estimate of future benefit obligations. The active claim reserve for claims already reported to the Company and still in open claim status was increased by $516.0 million, the IBNR reserve was decreased by $23.0 million, and the reopen reserve was decreased by $39.0 million before tax. The first quarter 2003 change represented a 6.5 percent increase in total net group long-term income protection reserves as of March 31, 2003, which for continuing operations equaled $7.017 billion prior to this increase and equaled $6.618 billion as of December 31, 2002. In January 2004, the Company completed its annual review of claim reserves to ensure that its claim reserves make adequate and reasonable provision for future benefits and expenses. Based upon this review, as of December 31, 2003, the Company increased its group long-term income protection claim reserves by $421.0 million and its group short-term income protection claim reserves by $19.0 million, for a total increase of $440.0 million before tax and $286.0 million after tax. Approximately $300.0 million of the reserve strengthening reflected implementation of a lower discount rate for the Company group income protection claim reserves. The discount rate was lowered to reflect the Company actual change in investment portfolio yield rates during 2003, the expectation of future investment portfolio yield rates, and the Company new discount rate management approach of maintaining a wider spread between its group income protection portfolio investment yield rate and its average discount rate. The Company new discount rate management approach is intended to better reflect the current investment environment and position the Company to be more responsive with discount rates on new incurred claims as changes to the investment environment emerge. Approximately $140.0 million of the reserve increase related to a strengthening of the morbidity assumptions to reflect the impact of the Company view of a continuing jobless economic recovery 32 Table of Contents on claim incidence and severity. Of this amount, approximately $64.0 million was established to reflect higher claim incidence expectations. Claim incidence in the second half of 2003 was 8.4 percent higher than the first half of the year and 5.8 percent above the second half of 2002. The Company January 2004 review indicated that claim incidence is expected to continue at an elevated level for several quarters as the Company believes that early indications of a recovering economy are not yet reflected in improved consumer confidence or job creation. Also included in the $140.0 million strengthening was approximately $76.0 million to reflect higher severity expectations driven primarily by a lengthening of claim duration expectations in those claims that have been open 36 months or longer. The $440.0 million reserve increase represented a 5.4 percent increase in total net group income protection reserves as of December 31, 2003, which totaled $8.186 billion prior to this increase. Acquisitions and Dispositions During the first quarter of 2003, Unum Limited acquired the United Kingdom group income protection business of Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada (UK) Ltd (Sun Life) together with the renewal rights to Sun Life group life business, at a price of approximately $37.2 million. Furthering its goal of divesting its non-core operations, during 2003, the Company reinsured on a 100 percent indemnity coinsurance basis for non-New York policies and a 90 percent indemnity coinsurance basis for New York policies certain of its insurance policies sold through trade associations and ceded approximately $121.0 million of reserves to the reinsurer. The annual premium on the block reinsured was approximately $40.0 million and related primarily to individual income protection closed block policies. The transaction had an effective date of April 1, 2003. Financing In order to strengthen its capital position, during 2003, the Company issued 52.9 million shares of common stock, par value $0.10 per share, in a public offering and received approximately $547.7 million in proceeds from the sale of the shares after deducting underwriting discounts. Also in 2003, the Company issued 23.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a $575.0 million public offering. Each unit has a stated amount of $25 and will initially consist of (a) a contract pursuant to which the holder agrees to purchase, for $25, shares of the Company common stock on May 15, 2006 and which entitles the holder to contract adjustment payments at the annual rate of 2.25 percent, payable quarterly, and (b) a 1/40, or 2.5 percent, ownership interest in a senior note issued by the Company due May 15, 2008 with a principal amount of $1,000, on which the Company will pay interest at the initial annual rate of 6.00 percent, payable quarterly. Upon settlement of the common stock purchase contract and successful remarketing of the senior note element of the units, the Company will receive proceeds of approximately $575.0 million and will issue between 43.3 million and 52.9 million shares of common stock. Prior to settlement of the common stock purchase contract in May 2006, the purchase contract element of these units will have a dilutive effect on the Company net income per common share, assuming dilution, when the average market price of the Company common stock during the period exceeds the threshold appreciation price of $13.27 per share. After settlement of the common stock purchase contract in 2006, the weighted average common shares outstanding for computing net income per common share, both basic and assuming dilution, will increase by the actual number of shares issued. Proceeds from the offerings were used primarily to increase the capitalization of the Company insurance subsidiaries and to repay amounts loaned to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries. Accounting Pronouncements FIN 46 Effective December 31, 2003, the Company adopted the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 46 (FIN 46), Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities, an Interpretation of Accounting Research Bulletin (ARB) No. 51 and subsequently adopted FIN 46(R) (revised December 2003) effective March 15, 2004. FIN 46 and FIN 46(R), which supersedes FIN 46, expand upon ARB No. 51, Consolidated Financial Statements , to address financial accounting and reporting for certain entities in which a controlling financial interest cannot be identified based on an evaluation of voting interests. 33 Table of Contents Transition to the provisions of FIN 46 at December 31, 2003 required the Company to consolidate four special purpose entities whose purposes are to support the Company investment objectives. Prior to December 31, 2003, these entities were accounted for as fixed maturity securities in the available-for-sale portfolio and carried at fair value which was derived from the fair value of the underlying assets. These entities are securitized asset trusts and contain specific financial instruments that do not include the Company common stock or debt. Three of these entities are trusts holding forward contracts to purchase unrelated equity securities. Each of these trusts also holds a defeasance swap contract for highly rated bonds to provide principal protection for the investments. The fair value of the underlying forward and swap contracts was $133.9 million at December 31, 2003, which was equivalent to the fair value at which they would have been reported as fixed maturity securities prior to the adoption of FIN 46. The fourth entity is a trust containing a highly rated bond for principal protection, unrelated equity securities, and several partnership equity investments. The Company contributed the bond and partnership investments into the trust at the time it was established. The purpose of this trust was to allow the Company to maintain its investment in the partnerships while at the same time protecting the principal of the investment. The fair values of the bond, equity securities, and partnerships were $61.8 million, $7.0 million, and $51.7 million, respectively, at December 31, 2003, which were equivalent to the fair values at which they would have been reported as fixed maturity securities. The adoption of FIN 46 and FIN 46(R) had no impact on the fair value of total invested assets reported in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition. Adoption of FIN 46 and FIN 46(R) also resulted in the de-consolidation of a trust that currently holds $300.0 million of junior subordinated debt securities of the Company and has issued a similar amount of mandatorily redeemable preferred securities. The impact of the de-consolidation was the elimination of the company-obligated mandatorily redeemable preferred securities of subsidiary trust holding solely junior subordinated debt securities of the company included in the consolidated statements of financial condition and an increase of $300.0 million in long-term debt. See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of FIN 46. Derivatives Implementation Group Issue B36 Effective October 1, 2003, the Company adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133 Implementation Issue B36 (DIG Issue B36), Embedded Derivatives: Modified Coinsurance Arrangements and Debt Instruments That Incorporate Credit Risk Exposure That Are Unrelated or Only Partially Related to the Creditworthiness of the Obligor Under Those Instruments. DIG Issue B36 addresses financial accounting and reporting for embedded derivatives in modified coinsurance contracts that incorporate credit risk exposure unrelated to the credit risk of the counterparty to the reinsurance contract and requires the bifurcation of any such derivative from the host reinsurance contract. The change in the fair value of the derivative is reported as a realized investment gain or loss during the period of change. The Company has two reinsurance contracts for which DIG Issue B36 is applicable. Transition to the provisions of DIG Issue B36 required the Company to value the credit risk provisions in these contracts as derivatives. The derivatives are now reported in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition at their current fair values, with the change in fair value since inception of the reinsurance contracts up to the date of adoption reported as a 2003 cumulative effect of accounting principle change. The Company includes in miscellaneous assets a deposit asset for one of the applicable reinsurance contracts. The deposit asset previously included unrealized gains or losses on the marketable securities held in the trust. Under the provisions of DIG Issue B36, any net unrealized gain is attributed to the value of the embedded derivative and is reported as such in fixed maturity securities. Any net unrealized loss will be attributed to the marketable securities held in the trust and reported as an adjustment to the deposit asset, with the related effects on claim reserves reflected in the reinsurance receivable for claim reserves. The adoption of DIG Issue B36 resulted in an increase in fixed maturity securities of $61.3 million to record the fair value of the embedded derivatives, a decrease of $116.1 million in miscellaneous assets, $18.4 million in reinsurance receivable, and $134.5 million in accumulated other comprehensive income (net unrealized gain on securities) to eliminate the previously reported adjustment to fair value of the marketable securities held in the trust and the related effects on claim reserves, and a $39.9 million cumulative effect of accounting principle change, net of $21.4 million in tax. See Item 8, Notes 1 and 5 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion. 34 Table of Contents Stock Compensation The Company has various stock-based employee compensation plans. Prior to 2003, the Company accounted for those plans under the recognition and measurement principles of Accounting Principles Board Opinion No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees , and related Interpretations. Effective January 1, 2003, the Company adopted the fair value recognition provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation , and selected the prospective method of adoption allowed under the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 148, Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation Transition and Disclosure . The adoption increased before tax operating expenses for 2003 approximately $0.9 million. Other Continued declines in the performance of equity investment markets combined with steadily increasing pension liabilities reduced the Company U.S. and foreign pension plans funding levels such that in December 2002, in accordance with the provisions of SFAS 87, the Company recorded a $145.0 million non-cash minimum pension liability adjustment, net of tax, to accumulated other comprehensive income in stockholders equity. In December 2003, as a result of improvements in the performance of the equity investment markets, the Company reduced the non-cash minimum pension liability adjustment by $19.7 million, net of tax. The Company net periodic benefit cost for its U.S. and foreign pension plans increased in 2003 due to the decline in the stock market and the general decline in overall corporate bond yields used to establish the discount rate for projecting the benefit obligation. The net periodic benefit cost for 2003 was $51.8 million compared to a $2.7 million net periodic benefit cost for 2002. 2002 Significant Transactions and Events Acquisitions During 2002, the Company acquired whereiwork, a provider of online solutions for insurance enrollment, communications, administration, and analysis, at a price of $2.8 million. This acquisition has served to strengthen and broaden the Company internet-based benefits services currently offered to brokers and employers. Financing In 2002, the Company completed two long-term offerings, issuing $250.0 million of 7.375% senior debentures due June 15, 2032 and $150.0 million of 7.250% public income notes due June 15, 2032. The public income notes are redeemable at the Company option, in whole or in part, on or after June 25, 2007. Proceeds from the offerings were used to refinance existing commercial paper borrowings. Accounting Pronouncements SFAS 142 Effective January 1, 2002, the Company adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142 (SFAS 142), Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets. SFAS 142 addresses financial accounting and reporting for acquired goodwill and other intangible assets. Under SFAS 142, goodwill is no longer amortized but is subject to annual impairment tests. Other intangible assets continue to be amortized over their useful lives. Transition to the provisions of SFAS 142 required the Company to complete, within the year of adoption, transitional impairment tests of goodwill existing at January 1, 2002, measured as of that date using a fair value approach. The Company had previously, prior to the adoption of SFAS 142, used undiscounted cash flows to determine if goodwill was recoverable. The Company completed the required tests during 2002 and determined the carrying value of its goodwill should be reduced $11.0 million. The charge, net of a $3.9 million tax benefit, was $7.1 million and is reported as a 2002 cumulative effect of accounting principle change in the consolidated statements of operations. 35 Table of Contents Other As previously discussed, in December 2002, the Company recorded a $145.0 million non-cash minimum pension liability adjustment, net of deferred federal income tax, to accumulated other comprehensive income in stockholders equity. Critical Accounting Policies Reserves for Policy and Contract Benefits The two primary categories of liabilities for policy and contract benefits are policy reserves for claims not yet incurred and claim reserves for claims that have been incurred and have future benefits to be paid. Policy reserves equal the present value of the difference between future policy benefits and expenses and future premiums, allowing a margin for profit. These reserves are applicable for the majority of the Company business, which is traditional non interest-sensitive in nature. The claim payments are estimated using assumptions established when the policy was issued. Throughout the life of the policy, the reserve is based on the original assumptions used for the policy issue year. Ordinarily, generally accepted accounting principles require that these assumptions not be subsequently modified unless the policy reserves are determined to be inadequate. A claim reserve is established when a claim is incurred or is estimated to have been incurred but not yet reported to the Company. Policy reserves for a particular policy continue to be maintained after a claim reserve has been established for as long as the policy remains in force. Claim reserves generally equal the Company estimate, at the current reporting period, of the present value of the liability for future benefits and expenses to be paid on claims incurred as of that date. A claim reserve for a specific claim is based on assumptions derived from the Company actual historical experience as to claim duration as well as the specific characteristics of the claimant such as benefits available under the policy, the covered benefit period, and the age and occupation of the claimant. Consideration is given to current and historical trends in the Company experience and to expected deviations from historical experience that result from changes in benefits available, changes in the Company risk management policies and procedures, and other economic, environmental, or societal factors. Reserves for claims that are estimated to have already been incurred but that have not yet been reported to the Company are based on factors such as historical claim reporting patterns, the average cost of claims, and the expected volumes of incurred claims. Claim reserves, unlike policy reserves, are subject to revision as current claim experience and projections of future factors affecting claim experience change. In a reporting period, actual experience may deviate from the long-term assumptions used to determine the claim reserves. The Company reviews annually, or more frequently as appropriate, emerging experience to ensure that its claim reserves make adequate and reasonable provision for future benefits and expenses. The Company reserves for group and individual income protection products include a provision for future payments, other than legal expenses, on all claim related lawsuits for which the cause of action has already occurred. This includes known lawsuits and those yet to be filed. The reserve amount is the Company estimate of the payments on all such lawsuits based on past payments and expected future payments. Claim reserves, net of ceded reinsurance, were $19.4 billion at December 31, 2004. Claim reserves, in general, are an estimate of the current value of future, otherwise unfunded, benefit commitments or liabilities. The calculation of claim reserves involves numerous assumptions. In setting these assumptions, the Company depends upon industry information and experience, Company experience and analysis, and reasoned judgment. There can be no guarantee that these assumptions individually, or collectively, will be duplicated by actual experience over time. The primary assumptions related to claim reserves are the discount rate, the claim resolution rate, and the incidence rate for IBNR claims. The discount rate is the interest rate at which future benefit cash flows are discounted to determine the current value of those cash flows. It is important since higher discount rates produce lower reserves. If the discount rate is higher than future investment returns, the Company reserves will not earn sufficient investment income to support future liabilities. In this case, the reserves will eventually be insufficient. Alternatively, if a discount rate is chosen that is too low relative to future investment results, the reserve, and thus the claim cost in the current period, will be overstated and profits will be accumulated in the reserves rather than released to current shareholders through earnings. The Company sets its discount rate assumptions in conjunction with the current and expected future investment income rate of the assets supporting the reserves. If the investment yield at which new investments are 36 Table of Contents purchased is below or above the investment yield of the existing investment portfolio, it is likely that the discount rate on new claims will be established below or above the discount rate on existing claims. It is the Company intent to use a discount rate that provides some margin for adverse movement in the investment portfolio yield rate. Since policies may receive claim payments for a number of years, it is unlikely that the chosen discount rate assumption will prove to be accurate for any one policy; rather, the discount rate is chosen to apply to many claims with various characteristics of length and severity. The Company uses its experience and analysis of its existing claims and investment performance to determine the appropriate discount rate assumption. Actual claim reserves incurred in the calendar quarter are sensitive to the choice of discount rate. For example, a 25 basis point increase or decrease in the group long-term income protection claim discount rate would have changed a quarter incurred claim cost in 2004 by approximately $5.0 million. The claim resolution rate is the rate of probability that a disability claim will close or change due to maximum benefits being paid under the policy, the recovery or death of the insured, or a change in status in any given period. It is important because it is used to estimate how long benefits will be paid for a claim. Estimated resolution rates that are set too high will result in reserves that are lower than they need to be to pay the claim benefits over time. A claim closes due to maximum benefits being paid if all of the contractual benefits under the policy have been paid. A claim also closes if the policyholder recovers from his or her disability and is no longer receiving disability benefit payments or if the policyholder dies in the period. A claim may change status during the period. For example, a policyholder receiving disability benefits may return to part time work, and the claim benefit may be reduced to reflect the change to partial disability. Establishing claim resolution assumptions is complex and involves many factors, including the cause of disability, the policyholder age, the type of contractual benefits provided, etc. Claim resolution assumptions also vary by duration of disability and time since initially becoming disabled. The Company uses its extensive claim experience and analysis to develop its claim resolution assumptions. Claim resolution experience is studied over a number of years with more weight placed on the more recent experience. Claim resolution assumptions are established to represent the Company future resolution rate expectations. Due to the individual nature of each claim, it is unlikely that the claim resolution rate will be accurate for any particular claim. The Company establishes its claim resolution assumptions to apply as an average to its large base of active claims. In this manner, the assumed rates are much more accurate over the broad base of claims. Actual claim reserves incurred in the calendar quarter are sensitive to the choice of resolution rate. For example, a one percent increase or decrease in the group long-term income protection claim resolution rate would have changed a quarter incurred claim cost in 2004 by approximately $3.0 million. The Company has liability for claims that have been incurred but not reported to the Company and must establish a liability for these claims equal to the present value of the expected benefit payments. In addition to the discount rate and claim resolution rate, the incidence rate is also a primary assumption in the IBNR reserve. The incidence rate is the rate at which new claims per thousand insured lives are submitted to the Company. The incidence rate is affected by many factors including the age of the insured, the insured occupation or industry, the benefit plan design, and certain external factors such as consumer confidence and levels of unemployment. The Company establishes the incidence assumption using a historical review of actual incidence results along with an outlook of future incidence expectations. As the actual claims are reported and claim reserves are established, the accuracy of the IBNR emerges. While the Company expects its IBNR reserve to be appropriate over the long term, it will not always equal, in a particular reporting period, the actual reserve established for a reported claim. For example, a 10 basis point deviation in the actual incidence rate from that assumed in the IBNR reserve would have resulted in an increase or decrease of approximately $10.0 million in claim reserves established during a quarter in 2004, relative to the IBNR reserve previously established to cover those claims. 37 Table of Contents Presented as follows are reserves by each major line of business within each segment with discussion regarding material changes. (in millions of dollars) December 31, 2004 December 31, 2003 IBNR (1) All Other Total (2) IBNR (1) All Other Total (2) Group Income Protection $ 913.4 $ 9,198.2 $ 10,111.6 $ 901.8 $ 8,237.1 $ 9,138.9 Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued 128.8 1,076.2 1,205.0 105.5 1,003.8 1,109.3 Long-term Care 28.4 1,589.6 1,618.0 26.8 1,252.8 1,279.6 Income Protection Segment 1,070.6 11,864.0 12,934.6 1,034.1 10,493.7 11,527.8 Life and Accident Segment 323.4 2,249.1 2,572.5 313.3 2,099.3 2,412.6 Colonial Segment 71.9 1,119.1 1,191.0 77.2 1,046.1 1,123.3 Individual Income Protection - Closed Block Segment 360.3 12,376.5 12,736.8 368.3 11,892.2 12,260.5 Other Segment 217.7 8,339.9 8,557.6 256.2 8,272.4 8,528.6 Consolidated from Continuing Operations $ 2,043.9 $ 35,948.6 $ 37,992.5 $ 2,049.1 $ 33,803.7 $ 35,852.8 (1) IBNR for income protection includes reopen reserves . These two categories of reserves are developed and maintained in aggregate based on historical monitoring that has only been on a combined basis. (2) Equals the sum of Policy and Contract Benefits , Reserves for Future Policy and Contract Benefits and Unearned Premiums , and Other Policyholders Funds as reported in the consolidated statements of financial condition. The increase in IBNR within the Income Protection and Life and Accident segments is directly related to the underlying growth in the business. The rapid premium growth within the Company operations in the United Kingdom contributed to this IBNR growth along with premium growth within the long-term care and individual income protection recently issued lines of business. Additionally, IBNR reserves for group income protection, individual income protection recently issued, and individual income protection closed block increased $39.7 million, $0.6 million, and $3.7 million, respectively, in the fourth quarter of 2004 for the reserve charge related to settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. The increase in all other reserves is driven by growth within the U.K. operations and the long-term care line of business along with the first quarter of 2004 reserve charge of $110.6 million in the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment. Additionally, all other reserves for group income protection increased $40.5 million in the fourth quarter of 2004 for the reserve charge related to settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. A portion of the reported growth in the reserves for the U.K. operations also resulted from the favorable foreign currency exchange rate in 2004 relative to 2003, which increased IBNR reserves approximately $12.2 million and all other reserves approximately $117.6 million. Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs The Company defers certain costs incurred in acquiring new business and amortizes (expenses) these costs over the life of the related policies. Deferred costs include certain commissions, other agency compensation, selection and policy issue expenses, and field expenses. Acquisition costs that do not vary with the production of new business, such as commissions on group products which are generally level throughout the life of the policy, are excluded from deferral. The Company uses its own historical experience and expectation of the future performance of its business in determining the expected life of the policies. Approximately 92 percent of the Company deferred policy acquisition costs relate to traditional non interest-sensitive products, for which the costs are amortized in proportion to the estimated premium income to be received over the life of the policies in accordance with the provisions of Statement of Financial 38 Table of Contents Accounting Standards No. 60, Accounting and Reporting by Insurance Enterprises . The estimated premium income in the early years of the amortization period is higher than in the later years due to higher anticipated policy persistency in the early years, which results in a greater proportion of the costs being amortized in the early years of the life of the policy. Amortization of deferred costs on traditional products is adjusted to reflect the actual policy persistency as compared to the anticipated experience. The Company will experience accelerated amortization if policies terminate earlier than projected. Deferred costs related to group and individual income protection products are generally amortized over a twenty-year period, with approximately 75 percent and 90 percent of the original deferred costs related to group income protection products expected to be amortized by years ten and fifteen, respectively. For individual income protection policies, approximately 55 percent and 80 percent of the original deferred costs are expected to be amortized by years ten and fifteen, respectively. Deferred costs for group and individual long-term care products are amortized over a twenty-year period, with approximately 45 percent and 70 percent of the original deferred costs expected to be amortized by years ten and fifteen, respectively. Deferred costs for group life and accidental and death and dismemberment products are amortized over a fifteen-year period, with approximately 85 percent of the cost expected to be amortized by year ten. Deferred costs for brokerage voluntary life and other products are amortized over a fifteen-year period, with approximately 90 percent of the cost expected to be amortized by year ten. Deferred costs for products issued by the Colonial segment are amortized over a seventeen-year period, on average, with approximately 80 percent and 90 percent of the original deferred costs expected to be amortized by years ten and fifteen, respectively. Due to the Company actual persistency experienced in recent years relative to what was expected when policies were issued, the Company lowered its premium persistency assumptions for costs deferred in 2002 and thereafter for certain of its products to reflect the Company current estimate of persistency. This accelerates the amortization of group income protection and group life acquisition costs deferred in those years into the early life of the policy. Valuation of Fixed Maturity Securities In determining when a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, the Company evaluates the following factors: The probability of recovering principal and interest. The Company ability and intent to retain the security for a sufficient period of time for it to recover. Whether the security is current as to principal and interest payments. The significance of the decline in value. The time period during which there has been a significant decline in value. Current and future business prospects and trends of earnings. The valuation of the security underlying collateral. Relevant industry conditions and trends relative to their historical cycles. Market conditions. Rating agency actions. Bid and offering prices and the level of trading activity. Adverse changes in estimated cash flows for securitized investments. Any other key measures for the related security. The Company review procedures include, but are not limited to, monthly meetings of certain members of the Company senior management personnel to review reports on the entire portfolio, identifying investments with changes in market value of five percent or more, investments with changes in rating either by external rating agencies or internal analysts, investments segmented by issuer, industry, and foreign exposure levels, and any other relevant investment information to help identify the Company exposure to possible credit losses. Based on this review of the entire investment portfolio, individual investments may be added to or removed from the Company watch list , which is a list of securities subject to enhanced monitoring and a more intensive review. The Company also determines if its investment portfolio is overexposed to an issuer that is showing warning signs of deterioration and, if so, the Company makes no further purchases of that issuer securities and may seek opportunities 39 Table of Contents to sell securities it holds from that issuer to reduce the Company exposure. The Company monitors below-investment-grade securities as to individual exposures and in comparison to the entire portfolio as an additional credit risk management strategy, looking specifically at the Company exposure to individual securities currently classified as below-investment-grade. In determining current and future business prospects and cash availability, the Company considers the parental support of an issuer in its analysis but does not rely heavily on this support. If the Company determines that the decline in value of an investment is other than temporary, the investment is written down to fair value, and an impairment loss is recognized in the current period to the extent of the decline in value. If the decline is considered temporary, the security continues to be carefully monitored. These controls have been established to identify the Company exposure to possible credit losses and are intended to give the Company the ability to respond rapidly. The Company has no held-to-maturity fixed maturity securities. All fixed maturity securities are classified as available-for-sale and are reported at fair value. Fair values are based on quoted market prices, where available. Private placement fixed maturity securities had a fair value of approximately $3.8 billion, or 11.6 percent of total fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2004. Private placement fixed maturity securities do not have readily determinable market prices. For these securities, the Company uses internally prepared valuations combining matrix pricing with vendor purchased software programs, including valuations based on estimates of future profitability, to estimate the fair value. Additionally, the Company obtains prices from independent third-party brokers to establish valuations for certain of these securities. The Company ability to liquidate its positions in some of these securities could be impacted to a significant degree by the lack of an actively traded market, and the Company may not be able to dispose of these investments in a timely manner. Although the Company believes its estimates reasonably reflect the fair value of those securities, the key assumptions about the risk-free interest rates, risk premiums, performance of underlying collateral (if any), and other factors involve significant assumptions and may not reflect those of an active market. The Company believes that generally these private placement securities carry a credit quality comparable to companies rated Baa or BBB by major credit rating organizations. As of December 31, 2004, the key assumptions used to estimate the fair value of private placement fixed maturity securities included the following: Risk free interest rates of 3.61 percent for five-year maturities to 4.83 percent for 30-year maturities were derived from the current yield curve for U.S. Treasury Bonds with similar maturities. Current Baa corporate bond spreads ranging from 0.62 percent to 1.35 percent plus an additional 30 basis points were added to the risk free rate to reflect the lack of liquidity. An additional five basis points were added to the risk free rates for foreign investments. Additional basis points were added as deemed appropriate for certain industries and for individual securities in certain industries that are considered to be of greater risk. Increasing the 30 basis points added to the risk free rate for lack of liquidity by 1.5 basis points, increasing the five basis points added to the risk free rates for foreign investments by one basis point, and increasing the additional basis points added to each industry considered to be of greater risk by one basis point would have decreased the December 31, 2004 net unrealized gain in the fixed maturity securities portfolio by approximately $2.3 million. Historically, the Company realized gains or losses on dispositions of its private placement fixed maturity securities have not varied significantly from amounts estimated under the valuation methodology described above. Changes in the fair value of fixed maturity securities, other than declines that are determined to be other than temporary, are reported as a component of other comprehensive income in stockholders equity. If it is subsequently determined that any of these securities are other than temporarily impaired, the impairment loss is reported as a realized investment loss in the consolidated statements of operations. The recognition of the impairment loss does not affect total stockholders equity to the extent that the decline in value had been previously reflected in other comprehensive income. 40 Table of Contents There are a number of significant risks inherent in the process of monitoring the Company fixed maturity securities for impairments and determining when and if an impairment is other than temporary. These risks and uncertainties include the following possibilities: The assessment of a borrower ability to meet its contractual obligations will change. The economic outlook, either domestic or foreign, may be less favorable or may have a more significant impact on the borrower than anticipated, and as such, the security may not recover in value. New information may become available concerning the security, such as disclosure of accounting irregularities, fraud, or corporate governance issues. Significant changes in credit spreads may occur in the related industry. Adverse rating agency actions may occur. Reinsurance Receivable Reinsurance is a contractual agreement whereby the Company reinsurance partners assume a defined portion of the risk for future benefits payable under reinsurance contracts. The reinsurance receivable reported as an asset in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition includes amounts due from the Company reinsurers on current claims and estimates of amounts that will be due on future claims. Policy reserves and claim reserves reported in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition are not reduced for reinsurance. The reinsurance receivable is generally equal to the policy reserves and claim reserves related to the risk being reinsured. The Company reduces the reinsurance receivable if recovery is not likely due to the financial position of the reinsurer or if there is disagreement between the Company and the reinsurer regarding the liability of the reinsurer. Goodwill Goodwill is the excess of the cost of an acquired entity over the net of the amounts assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but the Company reviews on an annual basis the carrying amount of goodwill for indications of impairment, with consideration given to financial performance and other relevant factors. In accordance with accounting guidance, the Company tests for impairment at either the operating segment level or one level below. In addition, certain events including, but not limited to, a significant adverse change in legal factors or the business environment, an adverse action by a regulator or rating agency, or unanticipated competition would cause the Company to review goodwill for impairment more frequently than annually. The goodwill reported as an asset in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition at December 31, 2004 is attributable primarily to the acquisition of Paul Revere Life Insurance Company (individual income protection recently issued business) and GENEX Services, Inc. (disability management services business). The impairment testing for goodwill involves estimating the fair value of the individual income protection block of recently issued business and the fair value of the disability management services business based upon the present value of future cash flows using assumptions such as future sales, morbidity experience, portfolio yield rate, and the rate of return at which the Company believes the market would price the businesses for purchase. Adverse changes in any of these factors could result in an impairment of goodwill for either or both of the blocks of business. Income Taxes The Company records a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The Company valuation allowance relates primarily to assets for foreign net operating loss carryforwards and assets for the Company basis in certain of its foreign subsidiaries that are not likely to be realized in the future based on management expectations using currently available evidence. In evaluating the ability to recover deferred tax assets, the Company has considered all available positive and negative evidence including past operating results, the existence of cumulative losses in the most recent years, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. In the event the Company determines that it most likely would not be able to realize all or part of its deferred tax assets in the future, an increase to the valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. Likewise, if it is later determined that it is more likely than not that those deferred tax assets would be realized, the previously provided valuation allowance would be reversed. 41 Table of Contents The calculation of the Company tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws in a multitude of jurisdictions, both domestic and foreign. The amount of income taxes paid by the Company is subject to ongoing audits in various jurisdictions, and a material assessment by a governing tax authority could affect profitability. The Company records tax liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues in the U.S. and other tax jurisdictions based on management estimate of whether, and to the extent which, additional taxes will probably be due. However, due to the complexity of the tax laws and uncertainties in their interpretation, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from the current estimate of the probable tax liabilities. If the estimate of the tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, an additional charge to expense would result. If payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be less than the recorded amounts, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when the Company determines the liabilities are no longer probable. Management believes that adequate accruals have been provided for all years presented. Cash outlays for income taxes are not expected to exceed income tax expense during the next three years. 42 Table of Contents Consolidated Operating Results The following table presents consolidated financial information for the years indicated. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Revenue Premium Income $ 7,839.6 2.9 % $ 7,615.7 6.5 % $ 7,151.1 Net Investment Income 2,158.7 2,158.4 6.4 2,028.9 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 29.2 116.8 (173.8 ) (43.8 ) (309.1 ) Other Income 437.4 11.8 391.3 0.8 388.2 Total 10,464.9 4.7 9,991.6 7.9 9,259.1 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 7,248.4 (7.9 ) 7,868.1 24.4 6,324.8 Commissions 842.3 (0.2 ) 844.1 2.9 820.2 Interest and Debt Expense 207.1 10.6 187.2 15.3 162.4 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (557.3 ) (16.3 ) (665.9 ) (0.8 ) (671.4 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 436.7 (4.8 ) 458.6 15.0 398.9 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 15.8 (57.9 ) 37.5 (3.8 ) 39.0 Impairment of Intangible Assets 856.4 N.M. N.M. Compensation Expense 739.6 (5.2 ) 779.8 6.5 732.2 Other Operating Expenses 935.4 2.0 917.4 6.7 859.8 Total 10,724.4 2.9 10,426.8 20.3 8,665.9 Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations Before Income Tax and Cumulative Effect of Accounting Principle Change (259.5 ) 40.4 (435.2 ) (173.4 ) 593.2 Income Tax (Benefit) (67.3 ) (60.6 ) (170.6 ) (186.9 ) 196.3 Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations Before Cumulative Effect of Accounting Principle Change (192.2 ) 27.4 (264.6 ) (166.7 ) 396.9 Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations, Net of Income Tax (60.8 ) 62.4 (161.7 ) N.M. 11.4 Cumulative Effect of Accounting Principle Change, Net of Income Tax N.M. 39.9 N.M. (7.1 ) Net Income (Loss) $ (253.0 ) 34.5 $ (386.4 ) (196.3 ) $ 401.2 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 43 Table of Contents Consolidated Sales Results (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Income Protection Segment Fully Insured Products Group Long-term Income Protection $ 283.7 (25.5 )% $ 380.6 (0.4 )% $ 382.2 Group Short-term Income Protection 79.5 (37.5 ) 127.2 (1.6 ) 129.3 Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued 105.5 (14.1 ) 122.8 (4.2 ) 128.2 Group Long-term Care 18.7 (30.7 ) 27.0 14.9 23.5 Individual Long-term Care 19.5 (55.6 ) 43.9 (31.1 ) 63.7 Total Fully Insured Products 506.9 (27.7 ) 701.5 (3.5 ) 726.9 Administrative Services Only (ASO) Products Group Long-term Income Protection 1.1 (83.1 ) 6.5 35.4 4.8 Group Short-term Income Protection 7.3 (49.3 ) 14.4 (28.7 ) 20.2 Total ASO Products 8.4 (59.8 ) 20.9 (16.4 ) 25.0 Income Protection Segment 515.3 (28.7 ) 722.4 (3.9 ) 751.9 Life and Accident Segment Group Life 234.6 (12.9 ) 269.3 (6.7 ) 288.6 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 12.8 (51.9 ) 26.6 (35.3 ) 41.1 Brokerage Voluntary Life and Other 81.3 8.0 75.3 31.0 57.5 Life and Accident Segment 328.7 (11.4 ) 371.2 (4.1 ) 387.2 Colonial Segment 278.5 (2.3 ) 285.2 10.9 257.1 Individual Income Protection - Closed Block Segment 7.8 (35.5 ) 12.1 (34.9 ) 18.6 Total Sales from Continuing Operations 1,130.3 (18.7 ) 1,390.9 (1.7 ) 1,414.8 Discontinued Operations 10.1 (72.4 ) 36.6 6.1 34.5 Total $ 1,140.4 (20.1 ) $ 1,427.5 (1.5 ) $ 1,449.3 Sales results shown in the preceding chart generally represent the annualized premium or annualized fee income on new sales expected to be received and reported as premium income or fee income during the next twelve months following or commencing in the initial quarter in which the sale is reported, depending on the effective date of the new sale. Sales do not correspond to premium income or fee income reported as revenue under GAAP because new annualized premiums measure current sales performance, while premium income and fee income are recognized when earned and reflect renewals and persistency of in force policies written in prior years as well as current new sales. Premiums for fully insured products are reported as premium income while the fees for administrative services only (ASO) products, wherein the risk and responsibility for funding claim payments remains with the customer, are included in other income. Sales, together with persistency of the existing block of business and the Company renewal program, are an indicator of growth in the Company premium and fee income. Trends in new sales, as well as existing market share, are also indicators of the Company potential for growth in its respective markets and the level of market acceptance of price changes and new product offerings. Sales may fluctuate significantly due to case size and timing of sales submissions. Negative media attention or downgrades in the financial strength ratings of the Company insurance subsidiaries may adversely affect the Company ability to grow sales and renew its 44 Table of Contents existing business. Sales growth was not expected during 2004 for the Company group income protection and its group life and accidental death and dismemberment lines of business, particularly in the large-employer market, as the Company continued with the strategy it implemented in 2003 to shift its business mix so as to increase its share of its small and mid-employer markets. The Company intends to maintain its disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection, with a focused effort on balancing growth and profitability. While managing its business mix in this disciplined manner, the Company expects to continue to be a leading provider in the large-employer market segment. The Company has field sales personnel who specialize in (1) employer-provided plans for employees and (2) supplemental benefit plans that include multi-life income protection and long-term care product offerings and products sold to groups of employees through payroll deduction at the workplace. These field sales personnel partner with Company representatives from claims, customer service, and underwriting who work in conjunction with independent brokers and consultants to present coverage solutions to potential customers and to manage existing customer accounts. The Company utilizes a distribution model for the sale of individual income protection and individual long-term care insurance products whereby independent brokers and consultants are provided direct access to a sales support center centrally located in the Company corporate offices. The Company intends to maintain its focus on workplace customers and increased integration between individual multi-life and group offerings by continuing to provide highly focused field support. The Company also utilizes an agency sales force to market the products offered by its Colonial segment. Segment Operating Results As previously discussed in Item 1 contained herein, the Company reporting segments include the following six business segments: Income Protection, Life and Accident, Colonial, Individual Income Protection Closed Block, Other, and Corporate. The segments remain unchanged from prior year reporting other than the separation of the Individual Income Protection Closed Block from the Income Protection segment. Prior year numbers have been reclassified to conform to the current segment reporting. In the following segment financial data and discussions of segment operating results, operating revenue excludes net realized investment gains and losses. Operating income or operating loss excludes net realized investment gains and losses, income tax, results of discontinued operations, and cumulative effect of accounting principle change. These are considered non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company performance, financial position, or cash flows that excludes or includes amounts that are not normally excluded or included in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). These non-GAAP financial measures of operating revenue and operating income or operating loss differ from revenue and income (loss) from continuing operations before income tax and cumulative effect of accounting principle change as presented in the Company consolidated operating results reported herein and in income statements prepared in accordance with GAAP due to the exclusion of before-tax realized investment gains and losses. The Company measures segment performance for purposes of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 131, Disclosures about Segments of an Enterprise and Related Information , excluding realized investment gains and losses because management believes that this performance measure is a better indicator of the ongoing businesses and the underlying trends in the businesses. The Company investment focus is on investment income to support its insurance liabilities as opposed to the generation of realized investment gains and losses, and a long-term focus is necessary to maintain profitability over the life of the business. Realized investment gains and losses are dependent on market conditions and not necessarily related to decisions regarding the underlying business of the Company segments. However, income or loss excluding realized investment gains and losses does not replace net income or net loss as a measure of the Company overall profitability. The Company may experience realized investment losses, which will affect future earnings levels as the underlying business is long-term in nature and requires that the Company be able to earn the assumed interest rates in its liabilities. 45 Table of Contents A reconciliation of total operating revenue by segment to total consolidated revenue and total operating income (loss) by segment to consolidated net income (loss) is as follows. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2004 2003 2002 Operating Revenue by Segment $ 10,435.7 $ 10,165.4 $ 9,568.2 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 29.2 (173.8 ) (309.1 ) Revenue $ 10,464.9 $ 9,991.6 $ 9,259.1 Operating Income (Loss) by Segment $ (288.7 ) $ (261.4 ) $ 902.3 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) 29.2 (173.8 ) (309.1 ) Income Tax (Benefit) (67.3 ) (170.6 ) 196.3 Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations, Net of Tax (60.8 ) (161.7 ) 11.4 Cumulative Effect of Accounting Principle Change, Net of Tax 39.9 (7.1 ) Net Income (Loss) $ (253.0 ) $ (386.4 ) $ 401.2 Included in the 2004 before-tax operating loss by segment of $288.7 million is a before-tax charge of $127.0 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination and a before-tax charge of $967.0 million related to the restructuring of the individual income protection-closed block business. Included in the 2003 before-tax operating loss by segment of $261.4 million is a before-tax charge of $894.0 million related to group income protection reserve strengthening. 46 Table of Contents Income Protection Segment Operating Results The Income Protection segment includes group long-term and short-term income protection insurance, recently issued individual income protection insurance, group and individual long-term care, and managed disability. Shown below are financial results for the income protection segment. In the sections following, financial results and key ratios are also presented for the major lines of business within the segment. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 4,117.3 4.6 % $ 3,937.0 10.3 % $ 3,570.7 Net Investment Income 905.7 1.9 889.0 13.5 783.1 Other Income 252.0 6.3 237.0 9.8 215.8 Total 5,275.0 4.2 5,063.0 10.8 4,569.6 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 3,572.3 (17.2 ) 4,313.9 50.6 2,864.7 Commissions 413.2 1.9 405.6 1.6 399.1 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (255.9 ) (23.2 ) (333.1 ) (7.8 ) (361.2 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 196.1 2.7 191.0 13.5 168.3 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 12.3 N.M. 3.9 77.3 2.2 Operating Expenses 1,085.6 3.5 1,048.5 9.5 957.3 Total 5,023.6 (10.8 ) 5,629.8 39.7 4,030.4 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 251.4 144.4 $ (566.8 ) N.M. $ 539.2 N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Segment Sales Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Group long-term income protection sales on a fully insured basis decreased during 2004 compared to 2003 due to declines in the Company U.S. brokerage business. The Company U.S. brokerage sales of fully insured group long-term income protection products declined 38.7 percent in 2004 relative to 2003 due to a decline in sales as a result of the Company disciplined approach to pricing and also due to the Company continued shift to focus on the small and mid-employer market to restore a more balanced mix of business between small, medium, and large-employer customers. The decrease in the U.S. sales was partially offset by growth of 26.9 percent in the Company United Kingdom operations in 2004 compared to the prior year. A portion of that reported growth also resulted from the favorable foreign currency exchange rate in 2004 relative to 2003. When measured in its local currency, the sales growth rate in the United Kingdom group long-term income protection line was approximately 13.2 percent year over year. Group short-term income protection sales on a fully insured basis also decreased in 2004 compared to the prior year due to the Company shift in its business strategy. Sales for individual income protection recently issued declined primarily due to a decrease in sales in both the U.S. operations and the Company United Kingdom operations. The portion of the individual income protection sales attributable to multi-life business in the Company U.S. operations was approximately 81 percent for 2004 sales 47 Table of Contents and 77 percent for 2003 sales, although both multi-life and non multi-life sales declined in 2004 relative to the prior year. During 2003, the Company introduced a new distribution model for the sale of individual income protection and individual long-term care insurance products which will enable the Company to maintain its focus on workplace customers and increased integration between individual multi-life and group offerings. The Company also introduced changes in the individual long-term care product offering during 2003. These actions have slowed the growth in sales of non multi-life individual income protection and individual long-term care insurance relative to historical trends. The Company anticipated relatively weaker sales comparisons throughout 2004 relative to 2003 for both group and individual income protection products, primarily as a result of the competitive pricing environment and, to a lesser extent, due to the adverse publicity surrounding the Company. The Company intends to continue to emphasize profitable premium growth through a balance of new sales, renewal programs, and persistency of the existing block of business. The Company expects sales in early 2005 to be slightly lower than 2004 results but to increase during the latter part of the year. Year Ended December 31, 2003 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2002 Group long-term income protection sales on a fully insured basis decreased during 2003 compared to 2002. The slight net decline occurred in the Company U.S. market, with a decline in the large-employer market more than offsetting growth in the small and mid-employer markets. Sales increased in the mid-employer market during 2003 as the Company began to shift its focus to this market, which is comprised of groups of 500 to 1,999 lives. The decrease in the U.S. sales was partially offset by growth of 42.9 percent in the Company United Kingdom operations. The comparative decline for 2003 versus 2002 in short-term income protection ASO sales was primarily due to a large case sold in 2002. Sales for individual income protection decreased in 2003 relative to the prior year, with declines in the Company United Kingdom operations and in the Company U.S. operations. The sales decline occurred primarily in the U.S. individual sales market rather than in the multi-life market. The portion of the individual income protection sales attributable to multi-life business in the Company U.S. operations was approximately 77 percent of 2003 sales and 73 percent of 2002 sales. Segment Persistency and Renewal of Existing Business The Company monitors persistency of its existing business and reflects adverse changes in persistency in the current period amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. One way in which the Company monitors persistency is at the overall block of business level (i.e., group long-term income protection, group short-term income protection, and group life). Persistency, at the overall block of business level, is the year-to-date rate at which existing business for all issue years in the block of business at the beginning of the period remains inforce at the end of the period. In determining whether additional amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs is required due to adverse persistency, the Company measures persistency by issue year (i.e., the rate at which existing business for that specific issue year at the beginning of the period remains inforce at the end of the period). The rate of persistency for an overall block of business may improve while individual issue years within the overall block of business may deteriorate and require additional amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs. Persistency during 2004 for the overall block of group long-term income protection on average declined from that experienced in 2003. Terminations were more heavily concentrated in the large-employer market, while persistency in the small and mid-employer market improved slightly in 2004 compared to 2003. Persistency for fully insured short-term income protection also declined during 2004, on average, over the prior year. These declines in persistency were expected due to the Company more disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection. Approximately 35 percent of the Company group business has an effective renewal date of January 1. The Company experienced a decline in persistency for group income protection business to be renewed effective January 1, 2005. The Company believes this is attributable to the competitive pricing environment and the Company continued pricing discipline and, to a lesser extent, the adverse publicity surrounding the Company. The Company expects that persistency for its overall 48 Table of Contents block of U.S. group long-term income protection business will be approximately 80 to 82 percent in 2005. Persistency for group short-term income protection is not expected to be materially different from the level of 2004. For the years 2002 and subsequent, the Company lowered its premium persistency assumptions for group income protection policy acquisition costs deferred in those years to reflect its current estimate of persistency. This accelerated the amortization of group long-term and short-term income protection acquisition costs deferred in those years into the early life of the policy by using lower premium persistency assumptions to determine the scheduled or expected amortization. Although persistency in the future may be lower than historical levels, particularly in certain issue years due to the Company increased emphasis on retaining profitable business, the acceleration of scheduled amortization may eliminate the need for additional amortization related to the decline in actual persistency relative to scheduled or expected persistency. The persistency of individual income protection and long-term care continues to be within expected levels. During the third quarter of 2004, the Company completed comprehensive scenario testing with respect to the amortization and recoverability of its group income protection and group life deferred policy acquisition costs under severe prolonged adverse persistency levels. The deferred policy acquisition costs were fully recoverable, even when tested at persistency rates deteriorating to below 70 percent and continuing at that level throughout the remainder of the life of the inforce block. The assessment was performed primarily to test the limits of recoverability. Sustained adverse persistency at the levels tested, while not resulting in a loss recognition charge, would result in lower emerging future profits due to lower overall premium levels and additional acceleration, on a prospective basis, of the amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs relative to the scheduled or expected amortization, but the Company does not anticipate prolonged persistency rates at the stress levels tested. The study was the result of normal experience testing. Persistency during 2003 for the overall block of group long-term income protection on average was higher than that experienced in 2002. Persistency for fully insured short-term income protection also improved, on average, over the prior year. During 2002, persistency for group long-term and short-term income protection was lower for certain issue years when compared to the persistency expected at the time the business was written. This resulted in additional amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs of $12.9 million in 2002 for group income protection. There was no additional amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs in 2003. As previously discussed, since the Company actual persistency experienced in recent years was lower than that expected when policies were issued, the Company lowered its premium persistency assumptions for costs deferred in 2002 and subsequent to reflect its current estimate of persistency. A critical part of the Company strategy for group income protection involves executing its 2005 renewal program and managing persistency in its existing block of business. Although the 2005 renewal program is smaller than that of 2004, the Company believes this strategy will have a positive effect on future profitability. The Company has shifted emphasis from revenue growth to profit margin expansion, raising prices and remaining more disciplined in risk selection, and restoring a more balanced mix of business between small, medium, and large-employer customers, since large-employer customers are often more price sensitive and vulnerable to weak economic conditions. The Company previous renewal programs have generally been successful in retaining group income protection business that is relatively more profitable than business that terminated. While it is expected that the additional premium and related profits associated with renewal activity will continue to emerge, the Company intends to balance the renewal program with the need to maximize persistency and retain producer relationships. 49 Table of Contents Group Income Protection Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for group income protection. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Income Protection $ 2,530.4 5.3 % $ 2,402.9 9.3 % $ 2,198.7 Group Short-term Income Protection 616.1 (2.3 ) 630.9 4.9 601.6 Total Premium Income 3,146.5 3.7 3,033.8 8.3 2,800.3 Net Investment Income 720.3 2.3 704.3 10.2 639.2 Other Income 69.7 23.6 56.4 65.9 34.0 Total 3,936.5 3.7 3,794.5 9.2 3,473.5 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 2,871.3 (22.1 ) 3,684.6 57.6 2,338.4 Commissions 234.7 3.3 227.1 (1.0 ) 229.4 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (94.5 ) (35.3 ) (146.1 ) (4.4 ) (152.9 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 104.6 (0.9 ) 105.5 8.2 97.5 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 12.1 236.1 3.6 80.0 2.0 Operating Expenses 715.8 4.2 687.0 12.9 608.7 Total 3,844.0 (15.7 ) 4,561.7 46.1 3,123.1 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 92.5 112.1 $ (767.2 ) N.M. $ 350.4 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) (1) 91.3 % 121.5 % 83.5 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) (2) 22.7 % 22.6 % 21.7 % Before-tax Operating Income (Loss) Ratio (% of Premium Income) (3) 2.9 % (25.3 )% 12.5 % Persistency - U.S. Group Long-term Income Protection 84.8 % 87.2 % 86.5 % Persistency - U.S. Group Short-term Income Protection 80.6 % 84.5 % 81.5 % (1) Included in these ratios is the 2004 before-tax reserve charge of $80.2 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination and the 2003 before-tax reserve strengthening of $894.0 million. Excluding these charges, the benefit ratios for 2004 and 2003 would have been 88.7% and 92.0%, respectively. (2) Included in the ratio for 2004 is the before-tax charge of $36.5 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. Excluding this charge, the operating expense ratio for 2004 would have been 21.6%. (3) Included in these ratios is the 2004 before-tax charge of $116.7 million related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination and the 2003 before-tax reserve strengthening of $894.0 million. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income (loss) ratios for 2004 and 2003 would have been 6.6% and 4.2%, respectively. N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 50 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 As previously discussed, during the fourth quarter of 2004 the Company recorded a charge in conjunction with the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. The charge decreased operating income for group income protection $116.7 million. Excluding that charge, group income protection would have reported operating income of $209.2 million for 2004. Operating revenue for group income protection improved primarily due to increases in premium income. Premium income for the U.S. brokerage business was fairly flat period to period. The growth in group long-term income protection premium income occurred in the Company United Kingdom business and was primarily attributable to continued strong sales growth. Premium income in the United Kingdom group long-term income protection business was $501.8 million in 2004 compared to $371.2 million in 2003. A portion of that reported growth also resulted from the favorable foreign currency exchange rate in 2004 relative to 2003. When measured in its local currency, the growth rate in premium income in the United Kingdom group long-term income protection line was approximately 20.8 percent year over year. Net investment income increased in 2004 compared with 2003 due to the growth in invested assets supporting this line of business and a retrospective adjustment of the amortization of the purchase discount on mortgage-backed securities, offset somewhat by lower investment portfolio yields due to a decline in market interest rates and less prepayment income on fixed maturity securities. Included in other income are ASO fees of $56.1 million for 2004 and $46.5 million for 2003. The settlement of the multistate market conduct examination resulted in a 2004 charge of $39.7 million for benefit costs and reserves from claims reopened from the reassessment and $40.5 million for additional benefit costs and reserves for claims already incurred and currently in inventory that are anticipated as a result of the claim process changes being implemented. Excluding those reserve charges as well as the 2003 reserve strengthening previously discussed, the benefit ratio for 2004 declined compared to 2003. Contributing to the decline in the 2004 benefit ratio relative to 2003 was a decrease in the submitted claim incidence rate for group long-term income protection. This reduced benefits and change in reserves approximately $55.0 million relative to the prior year. The Company believes the incidence levels are driven in part by economic trends, including consumer confidence. Also contributing to the decrease in the benefit ratio in 2004 relative to 2003 was an increase in premium per insured life primarily due to rate increases placed on poorer performing business through the 2004 renewal program. Partially offsetting the factors contributing to the decline in the benefit ratio was a lower claim discount rate used for new claims occurring in 2004 relative to the rate used in 2003, which resulted in the establishment of higher claim reserves in 2004 of approximately $25.0 million had the lower discount rate not been used. For group short-term income protection, the benefit ratio was lower primarily due to a decline in paid claim incidence in 2004 compared to the prior year. Costs capitalized during 2004 for group income protection were lower than in the prior year due to an updated analysis of costs associated with the acquisition of new business and due to the decrease in sales. The amortization of value of business acquired increased during 2004 due to the previously discussed United Kingdom transaction with Swiss Life. Operating expenses for 2004 include a charge of $36.5 million, related to the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination, for the incremental direct operating expenses to conduct the two-year reassessment process for group income protection and for a portion of the fine. As discussed under Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements, certain risks and uncertainties are inherent in the Company group income protection business. Components of claims experience, including, but not limited to, incidence levels and claims duration, may be worse than expected. The Company, similar to all financial institutions, has some exposure in a severe and prolonged economic recession, but many of the Company products can be re-priced, which would allow the Company to reflect in its pricing any fundamental change which might occur in the risk associated with a particular industry or company within an industry. Although approximately 25 percent of the Company overall block of group income protection business is in the manufacturing and wholesale/retail industry segments, which tend to be economically sensitive, the Company believes it has a well-diversified book of insurance exposure, with no disproportionate concentrations of risk in any one industry. 51 Table of Contents The Company expects to price new business and re-price existing business, at contract renewal dates, in an attempt to mitigate the effect of incidence levels, claims duration, and other factors, including interest rates, on new claim liabilities. Given the competitive market conditions for the Company income protection products, it is uncertain whether pricing actions can entirely mitigate the effect. Year Ended December 31, 2003 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2002 As previously discussed, in 2003 the Company strengthened its group income protection claim reserves $894.0 million. Excluding this charge, group income protection would have reported operating income of $126.8 million for 2003. Operating revenue for group income protection improved due to increases in both premium income and net investment income. The growth in premium income during 2003 compared to the prior year was due to new sales growth in 2002 and favorable renewal activity and improved persistency on the existing block of business. Also contributing to the increase in premium income was the strong sales growth in the United Kingdom group income protection business. Premium income in the Company United Kingdom group long-term income protection business increased 41.2 percent, or $108.4 million, in 2003 relative to 2002. A portion of that reported growth also resulted from the favorable foreign currency exchange rate in 2003 relative to 2002. When measured in its local currency, the growth rate in premium income in the United Kingdom group long-term income protection was approximately 30.0 percent year over year. Net investment income grew primarily due to the growth in invested assets supporting this line of business. Included in other income are ASO fees of $46.5 million for 2003 and $33.9 million for the prior year. The benefit ratio for group income protection increased in 2003 relative to 2002. Excluding the impact of the 2003 reserve strengthening for group income protection, the benefit ratio was 92.0 percent for 2003, higher than in 2002, with the increase attributable to group long-term income protection. Both submitted and paid claim incidence for group long-term income protection increased from 2002. This increased benefits and change in reserves for 2003 approximately $75.0 million relative to 2002. The Company believes this to be driven in part by economic trends, including lower consumer confidence. Claim resolution rates for group long-term income protection in 2003 were lower than 2002. The impact on benefits and change in reserves for the lower claim resolution rate was an increase of approximately $75.0 million. Also contributing to the increase in the benefit ratio for group long-term income protection was the lower claim reserve discount rate used for new claims occurring in 2003. For group short-term income protection, the 2003 benefit ratio was higher than in 2002, primarily due to an increase in paid claim incidence. There was no additional amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs related to persistency for 2003, but expected amortization, as determined when the costs were initially capitalized, continues to increase year over year due to the continued growth in the deferred policy acquisition cost asset balance related to new sales growth in the block of business and acceleration of expected amortization for costs capitalized in 2002 and subsequent years. For 2002, the additional amortization related to persistency was $12.9 million. 52 Table of Contents Individual Income Protection - Recently Issued Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for individual income protection recently issued. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 526.3 5.6 % $ 498.6 14.7 % $ 434.6 Net Investment Income 81.9 (19.1 ) 101.2 15.8 87.4 Other Income 5.4 (30.8 ) 7.8 20.0 6.5 Total 613.6 1.0 607.6 15.0 528.5 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 306.5 6.9 286.7 15.6 248.1 Commissions 113.4 7.0 106.0 12.6 94.1 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (125.8 ) (0.5 ) (126.4 ) (5.1 ) (133.2 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 69.1 12.2 61.6 28.6 47.9 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 0.2 (33.3 ) 0.3 50.0 0.2 Operating Expenses 153.0 10.3 138.7 11.3 124.6 Total 516.4 10.6 466.9 22.3 381.7 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 97.2 (30.9 ) $ 140.7 (4.2 ) $ 146.8 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 58.2 % 57.5 % 57.1 % Interest Adjusted Loss Ratio 46.5 % 44.7 % 43.4 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 29.1 % 27.8 % 28.7 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 18.5 % 28.2 % 33.8 % U.S. Persistency 90.7 % 89.6 % 89.7 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 The growth in premium income resulted from new sales and stable persistency of the existing block of business. The decline in net investment income in 2004 relative to the prior year resulted from a decline in the yield on the portfolio as well as internal redistributions of invested assets in conjunction with the Company management of asset and liability cash flows. The slight increase in the benefit ratio for 2004 relative to the prior year was primarily due to a decline in the net claim resolution rate, partially offset by a decrease in submitted claim incidence. The impact on benefits and change in reserves for the lower claim resolutions was an increase of approximately $45.0 million compared to 2003, offset by a decrease of approximately $35.0 million for the lower submitted claim incidence. Multi-life business, which 53 Table of Contents constitutes approximately 59 percent of the individual income protection recently issued block of business, has consistently had lower claim incidence rates than the non multi-life business. Year Ended December 31, 2003 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2002 Premium income grew as a result of new sales and continuing stable persistency of the existing block of business. The growth in net investment income in 2004 relative to the prior year was due to the growth in invested assets supporting this line of business. The increase in the benefit ratio for 2003 compared to 2002 was due to higher submitted incidence, offset partially by an increase in the net claim resolution rate. Long-term Care Operating Results Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for long-term care. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Long-term Care $ 143.4 15.2 % $ 124.5 20.4 % $ 103.4 Individual Long-term Care 301.1 7.5 280.1 20.5 232.4 Total Premium Income 444.5 9.9 404.6 20.5 335.8 Net Investment Income 103.5 24.0 83.5 47.8 56.5 Other Income (Loss) (0.2 ) (0.2 ) (140.0 ) 0.5 Total 547.8 12.3 487.9 24.2 392.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 394.5 15.1 342.6 23.1 278.2 Commissions 65.1 (10.2 ) 72.5 (4.1 ) 75.6 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (35.6 ) (41.3 ) (60.6 ) (19.3 ) (75.1 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 22.4 (6.3 ) 23.9 4.4 22.9 Operating Expenses 55.9 (16.6 ) 67.0 (1.6 ) 68.1 Total 502.3 12.8 445.4 20.5 369.7 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 45.5 7.1 $ 42.5 84.0 $ 23.1 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 88.8 % 84.7 % 82.8 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 12.6 % 16.6 % 20.3 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 10.2 % 10.5 % 6.9 % Persistency - U.S. Group Long-term Care 92.8 % 92.7 % 92.6 % Persistency - U.S. Individual Long-term Care 96.7 % 96.1 % 96.5 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 54 Table of Contents Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Premium income increased during 2004 compared to 2003 primarily due to new sales growth in previous periods. New annualized sales for long-term care were $38.2 million, $70.9 million, and $87.2 million for 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively. Changes in the product offering during 2003 have decreased the 2004 growth in individual long-term care sales relative to historical trends. This is expected to continue and will result in a slower rate of growth in premium income. Net investment income increased due to the continued growth in invested assets supporting this line of business. Persistency in this line of business remains high and stable. Submitted claim incidence for long-term care was higher in 2004 than in 2003. The net claim resolution rate was also higher in 2004 compared to 2003. Results for long-term care continue to be volatile due to the relatively small size of this block of business. Acquisition costs capitalized during 2004 were lower than in the prior year due to the reduction in sales. Commissions and operating expenses in 2004 also declined relative to the prior year due to lower selling expenses. Year Ended December 31, 2003 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2002 Premium income increased primarily due to new sales growth in previous periods. Net investment income continued to increase due to the growth in invested assets supporting this line of business. Submitted and paid claim incidence for individual long-term care decreased in 2003 from 2002 levels, while group long-term care experienced increased paid claim incidence and stable submitted incidence. The 2003 net claim resolution rate was lower than 2002 for individual long-term care, driven by lower claim recoveries. The net claim resolution rate increased for group long-term care in 2003 relative to 2002. Disability Management Services Operating Results Operating revenue from disability management services, which includes the Company wholly-owned subsidiaries GENEX Services, Inc. and Options and Choices, Inc., totaled $177.1 million in 2004, compared to $173.0 million in 2003 and $174.8 million in 2002. Operating income totaled $16.2 million in 2004, compared to $17.2 million in 2003 and $18.9 million in 2002. Segment Outlook The Company primary focus for 2005 for Income Protection will continue to be profitability enhancement, with an emphasis on the core markets and a balanced mix of business. In 2005, the Company expects moderate, disciplined year over year sales growth in line with overall industry growth, although growth relative to 2004 may not be experienced until mid- 2005. The Company will continue in 2005 with its disciplined approach to pricing and also with the strategy of shifting its business mix from the large-employer market to the small and mid-employer markets. The Company expects to continue to generate sales in the large-employer market, although below historical growth levels, and to be a leading provider in this market segment. The Company intends to continue its disciplined approach to pricing, renewals, and risk selection, with a more conscious effort to balance growth and profitability. Although this strategy may cause a somewhat lower persistency or market share, historically the profitability of business that terminates has generally been less than the profitability of retained business. As previously discussed, the Company expects that persistency rates in 2005 for its U.S. group long-term income protection business will be approximately 80 to 82 percent. The Company believes that its income protection product results will benefit if there is an improvement in overall economic conditions and a higher interest rate environment, although the improvement in results may lag behind the improvements in the economy and interest rate environment. Continuation of the current low interest rate environment may result in a lowering of the Company reserve discount rate on new income protection claims during 2005. 55 Table of Contents Life and Accident Segment Operating Results The Life and Accident segment includes insurance for life, accidental death and dismemberment, cancer, and critical illness marketed primarily to employers and multi-life employee groups by the Company sales force through independent brokers and consultants. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the life and accident segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Operating Revenue Premium Income Group Life $ 1,558.9 2.2 % $ 1,524.6 6.3 % $ 1,434.4 Accidental Death & Dismemberment 182.4 (8.2 ) 198.6 (0.6 ) 199.8 Brokerage Voluntary Life and Other 222.1 11.5 199.2 20.3 165.6 Total Premium Income 1,963.4 2.1 1,922.4 6.8 1,799.8 Net Investment Income 199.7 4.3 191.5 (0.6 ) 192.6 Other Income 18.0 9.1 16.5 14.6 14.4 Total 2,181.1 2.4 2,130.4 6.2 2,006.8 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,506.6 2.6 1,468.1 5.0 1,397.6 Commissions 174.0 (1.9 ) 177.3 7.5 164.9 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (127.8 ) (19.8 ) (159.3 ) 7.3 (148.4 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 109.4 1.3 108.0 24.7 86.6 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 2.3 27.8 1.8 N.M. 0.4 Operating Expenses 265.0 (1.7 ) 269.7 6.4 253.5 Total 1,929.5 3.4 1,865.6 6.3 1,754.6 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 251.6 (5.0 ) $ 264.8 5.0 $ 252.2 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 76.7 % 76.4 % 77.7 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 13.5 % 14.0 % 14.1 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 12.8 % 13.8 % 14.0 % Persistency - U.S. Group Life 84.0 % 83.2 % 83.9 % Persistency - U.S. Accidental Death & Dismemberment 80.3 % 84.2 % 82.5 % Persistency - Brokerage Voluntary Life 84.4 % 84.4 % 83.8 % Persistency - Brokerage Voluntary Other 75.0 % 77.5 % 78.4 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 56 Table of Contents Segment Sales Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Sales for group life decreased in 2004 relative to the prior year due to a 31.1 percent decrease in sales in the Company U.S. operations, partially offset by an increase in sales in the United Kingdom operations. The decline in U.S. group life sales in 2004 was primarily attributable to a more competitive market, which resulted in sales declines in all market sizes, and also due to a decrease in large-employer market sales resulting from the previously discussed business mix shift. Brokerage voluntary life and other sales improved in 2004 relative to last year and were generally in line with the Company expectations. Year Ended December 31, 2003 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2002 Sales in the Company U.S. operations declined in 2003 compared to the prior year, partially offset by an increase in sales in the United Kingdom operations. The decline in U.S. group life sales during 2003 was primarily attributable to lower sales in the large-employer market and the continuing impact of the Company strategic decision, which was fully implemented during 2002, to focus on integrated sales of life and income protection and less on stand-alone life sales. The increase in the United Kingdom sales was partially due to the inclusion of additional sales generated as a result of the 2003 Sun Life acquisition. Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Premium growth for 2004 relative to 2003 was attributable primarily to the United Kingdom operations and its acquisition of Sun Life, as previously discussed. Also contributing to the growth in premium income was sales growth in the brokerage voluntary lines. The benefit ratio increased slightly in 2004 relative to 2003. For the U.S. group life business, submitted and paid claim incidence for group life were both marginally higher in 2004 relative to 2003. The average paid claim size for group life also increased during 2004 relative to 2003. Acquisition costs capitalized during 2004 for the life and accident segment were lower than in the prior year due primarily to an updated analysis of costs associated with the acquisition of new business and due to the decrease in sales. Year Ended December 31, 2003 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2002 Premium growth in 2003 relative to 2002 was attributable to favorable renewal results, strong sales results in the United Kingdom operations, and stable persistency. Submitted and paid claim incidence for U.S. group life were both lower in 2003 relative to 2002. The average paid claim size for group life increased from 2002. The amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs for 2002 includes $9.2 million of additional amortization due to the higher level of terminations for group life products experienced during 2002 than expected at the time the policies were written. There was no additional amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs in 2003. As previously discussed in the operating results for group income protection and as also applicable to group life and accidental death and dismemberment, the Company has accelerated the amortization of costs pertaining to certain of its lines of business into the early life of the policy by using lower premium persistency assumptions in determining its scheduled or expected amortization. Although persistency in the future may be lower than historical levels, particularly in certain issue years due to the Company increased emphasis on retaining profitable business, the acceleration of scheduled amortization may eliminate the need for additional amortization related to the deterioration of actual persistency relative to scheduled or expected persistency. 57 Table of Contents Segment Outlook The Company considers the group life and accidental death and dismemberment products as being complementary to its group income protection products. In 2005, the Company expects moderate, disciplined sales growth in line with overall industry growth. The Company intends to continue its disciplined approach to risk selection and pricing and to focus on profitability and a more balanced mix of business between large, medium, and small employer markets. The Company will continue to concentrate on sales growth and increased profitability for its voluntary brokerage and other lines. Since the group life and accidental death and dismemberment products are primarily sold in conjunction with group income protection, the more focused renewal effort in group income protection may reduce persistency somewhat in the group life line as well. Persistency may also be negatively impacted by a more focused renewal effort on the stand-alone large-employer market group life business sold during 2000 through 2002 as well as the highly competitive group life marketplace. The Company expects that persistency rates in 2005 for its U.S. group life business will be approximately 74 to 76 percent. 58 Table of Contents Colonial Segment Operating Results The Colonial segment includes insurance for income protection products, life products, and cancer and critical illness products issued by the Company subsidiary Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company and marketed to employees at the workplace through an agency sales force and brokers. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Colonial segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Operating Revenue Premium Income Income Protection $ 486.2 4.6 % $ 464.9 6.2 % $ 437.8 Life 106.9 10.5 96.7 20.3 80.4 Cancer and Critical Illness 147.9 12.1 131.9 11.3 118.5 Total Premium Income 741.0 6.8 693.5 8.9 636.7 Net Investment Income 94.5 5.0 90.0 13.1 79.6 Other Income 2.3 (8.0 ) 2.5 (32.4 ) 3.7 Total 837.8 6.6 786.0 9.2 720.0 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 408.3 3.3 395.4 10.7 357.2 Commissions 173.9 5.5 164.9 14.6 143.9 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs (173.7 ) 4.6 (166.1 ) 11.9 (148.4 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs 131.2 10.9 118.3 9.8 107.7 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired 1.2 N.M. (0.9 ) N.M. 1.5 Operating Expenses 141.3 10.6 127.7 5.9 120.6 Total 682.2 6.7 639.3 9.8 582.5 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 155.6 6.1 $ 146.7 6.7 $ 137.5 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) 55.1 % 57.0 % 56.1 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 19.1 % 18.4 % 18.9 % Before-tax Operating Income Ratio (% of Premium Income) 21.0 % 21.2 % 21.6 % Persistency - Income Protection 77.4 % 74.1 % 76.6 % Persistency - Life 85.2 % 88.2 % 86.7 % Persistency - Cancer and Critical Illness 84.5 % 84.4 % 82.1 % N.M. = not a meaningful percentage Segment Sales The 2.3 percent sales decrease in 2004 relative to 2003 was attributable to a decline in sales of income protection products, partially offset by an increase in sales for the cancer and life products. The decline in sales for income protection results from the discontinuance by the Company of new sales of group long-term income protection as well as from lower sales of individual short-term income protection to employee groups of 2000 or more lives. The Company expects positive sales growth in the Colonial segment during 2005. 59 Table of Contents The sales increase in 2003 relative to 2002 was primarily attributable to a 13.1 percent growth in sales of life products and a 9.1 percent growth in income protection product sales. Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 Growth in premium income was attributable primarily to favorable persistency. The 2004 benefit ratio for this segment was lower than in 2003 due primarily to a lower benefit ratio for the income protection product line. This resulted in an improvement in benefits and change in reserves of approximately $20.1 million in 2004 relative to what would have been reported had the benefit ratio equaled that of 2003. Individual short-term income protection claim incidence decreased for 2004 compared with the prior year while the average claim duration for closed claims was higher in 2004 relative to 2003. The average indemnity for individual short-term income protection was higher in 2004 relative to 2003. For accident and sickness products, which are included in the income protection line of business, the claim incidence rate decreased in 2004 relative to the prior year, but the average claim payment increased over that reported from 2003. The life line of business reported an increase in the number of paid claims relative to 2003 and an increase in the average claim payment. Year Ended December 31, 2003 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2002 The premium income increase in 2003 relative to 2002 was attributable to new sales and overall favorable persistency. The life and income protection product lines each reported an increase in the benefit ratio compared to the prior year. The individual short-term income protection line reported a decrease in claim incidence for 2003 compared with the prior year while the average claim duration for closed claims was above the prior year. The average indemnity for individual short-term income protection was higher than 2002. For accident and sickness, the claim incidence rate increased slightly in 2003 relative to 2002. In the life product line, average paid claims decreased in 2003 compared to last year. The 2003 incidence rate for the cancer products and the critical illness products decreased from the prior year. Segment Outlook Past sales results have not grown at the rate the Company believes it can competitively and profitably achieve. In 2005, the emphasis will be on achieving consistent, profitable sales growth by focusing on the recruitment and productivity of agents, improved business tools, and enhanced marketing research and development. The Company expects growth in revenue and profitability to be driven by increasing premium income through sales growth and stable persistency while maintaining a focus on high-quality business and the management of expenses. High quality service is viewed as a differentiator for the Colonial segment in the marketplace. The two key drivers for quality service delivery are trained service professionals and effective use of technology. These key drivers will be emphasized by seeking to increase innovation, productivity, and performance through leadership development and technological advances. 60 Table of Contents Individual Income Protection - Closed Block Segment Operating Results The Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment generally consists of those individual income protection policies in force prior to the Company substantial changes in product offerings, pricing, distribution, and underwriting. These changes generally occurred during the period 1994 through 1998. A minimal amount of new business continued to be sold subsequent to these changes, but the Company ceased selling new policies in this segment at the beginning of 2004 other than update features contractually allowable on existing policies. Shown below are financial results and key performance indicators for the Individual Income Protection Closed Block segment. (in millions of dollars, except ratios) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 986.6 (4.1 )% $ 1,028.5 (7.0 )% $ 1,106.3 Net Investment Income 799.1 (3.0 ) 824.2 1.2 814.5 Other Income 100.3 4.6 95.9 11.9 85.7 Total 1,886.0 (3.2 ) 1,948.6 (2.9 ) 2,006.5 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 1,618.9 5.6 1,533.6 (0.7 ) 1,544.2 Commissions 76.3 (10.8 ) 85.5 (21.7 ) 109.2 Deferral of Policy Acquisition Costs N.M. (7.5 ) (44.0 ) (13.4 ) Amortization of Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs N.M. 41.3 14.1 36.2 Amortization of Value of Business Acquired N.M. 32.7 (6.3 ) 34.9 Impairment of Intangible Assets 856.4 N.M. Operating Expenses 157.2 (21.6 ) 200.5 (5.6 ) 212.4 Total 2,708.8 43.6 1,886.1 (1.9 ) 1,923.5 Operating Income (Loss) Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ (822.8 ) N.M. $ 62.5 (24.7 ) $ 83.0 Benefit Ratio (% of Premium Income) (1) 164.1 % 149.1 % 139.6 % Interest Adjusted Loss Ratio 87.5 % 82.7 % 78.1 % Operating Expense Ratio (% of Premium Income) 15.9 % 19.5 % 19.2 % Before-tax Operating Income (Loss) Ratio (% of Premium Income) (2) (83.4 )% 6.1 % 7.5 % Persistency 94.5 % 94.2 % 94.3 % (1) Included in this ratio is the 2004 before-tax reserve strengthening of $110.6 million. Excluding this charge, the benefit ratio for 2004 would have been 152.9%. (2) Included in this ratio is the 2004 before-tax reserve strengthening of $110.6 million and the $856.4 million before-tax impairment of intangible assets. Excluding these charges, the before-tax operating income (loss) ratio for 2004 would have been 14.6%. N.M. = not a meaningful percentage 61 Table of Contents Operating Results Year Ended December 31, 2004 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2003 As previously discussed, in the first quarter of 2004, the Company restructured its individual income protection closed block business wherein three of its insurance subsidiaries entered into reinsurance agreements that effectively provide approximately 60 percent reinsurance coverage for the Company overall consolidated risk above a specified retention limit. If losses to the reinsurer exceed a specified aggregate limit, any further losses will revert to the Company. These reinsurance transactions were effective as of April 1, 2004. The Company transferred cash equal to $521.6 million of ceded reserves plus an additional $185.8 million in cash for a before-tax prepaid cost of insurance which was deferred and will be amortized into earnings over the expected claim payment period covered under the Company retention limit. The amortization of the prepaid cost was $4.9 million for 2004 and is expected to be approximately $5.4 million in 2005. Included in the loss for 2004 were the first quarter restructuring charges of $282.2 million, $367.1 million, and $207.1 million related to the write-down of deferred policy acquisition costs, value of business acquired, and goodwill, respectively, and $110.6 million for the claim reserve charge, for a total of $967.0 million. In addition, during the fourth quarter of 2004 the Company recorded a charge in conjunction with the settlement of the multistate market conduct examination. The charge decreased operating income for this segment by $8.6 million. See 2004 Strategic Transactions and Events contained in Item 7 herein for additional details. Premium income decreased relative to the prior year due to the expected decline in this closed block of business. Net investment income declined in 2004 relative to the prior year due to a decline in the portfolio yield rate and due to lower prepayments on mortgage-backed securities, offset somewhat by a retrospective adjustment of the amortization of the purchase discount on mortgage-backed securities. Net investment income was also negatively impacted due to the cash held during the first half of 2004 in conjunction with the pending transfer of cash for the reinsurance agreements entered into as part of the restructuring of this block. Other income includes the underlying results of certain blocks of reinsured business. The increase in the benefit ratio for 2004 relative to 2003, excluding the $110.6 million claim reserve charge in the first quarter of 2004, was due to a decrease in the claim resolution rate relative to the level of 2003, offset somewhat by a decrease in claim incidence rates in 2004 relative to 2003 levels. The operating expense ratio decreased relative to 2003 due primarily to a reduction in selling and underwriting expenses. A minimal amount of new business was still being sold during 2003, primarily related to update features on existing policies. Due to the impairment of intangible assets as of January 1, 2004, no scheduled amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs or value of business acquired was included in operating results for this segment during 2004, compared to $74.0 million in 2003. Year Ended December 31, 2003 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2002 Premium income decreased in 2003 relative to the prior year due to the expected decline in this closed block of business and also due to a reinsurance transaction. As previously discussed, during 2003, the Company reinsured a block of individual income protection policies previously sold through trade associations. The transaction, with an effective date of April 1, 2003, reduced 2003 premium income in the individual income protection closed block by approximately $16.1 million. The $31.2 million before-tax loss on this transaction, of which $29.6 million related to this segment, was deferred and is being amortized into income based upon expected future premium income on the policies ceded. The increase in the benefit ratio for 2003 relative to 2002 was due to a decrease in the net claim resolution rate compared to the level of 2002. 62 Table of Contents Segment Outlook The Company believes that the restructuring of this closed block of business has strengthened the balance sheet for this segment and minimized the Company exposure to potential future adverse morbidity. The Company expects no change in the level of service provided to policyholders of this business as a result of the restructuring. Total revenue is expected to decline very slowly over time as the Company believes that persistency will remain in the mid-90 percent range. The Company believes that the interest adjusted loss ratio will be relatively flat over the long-term, but the segment may experience quarterly volatility. The expense ratio is expected to remain fairly consistent throughout 2005 with that reported for 2004. As discussed previously, future operating earnings relative to 2003 and prior will be positively impacted due to the lack of amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs and value of business acquired. Continuation of the current low interest rate environment may result in a lowering of the Company reserve discount rate on new individual income protection closed block claims in 2005. Other Segment Operating Results The Other operating segment includes results from products no longer actively marketed (with the exception of certain individual income protection products), including individual life and corporate-owned life insurance, reinsurance pools and management operations, group pension, health insurance, and individual annuities. It is expected that operating revenue and income in this segment will decline over time as these business lines wind down. Management expects to reinvest the capital supporting these lines of business in the future growth of the Income Protection, Life and Accident, and Colonial segments. The closed lines of business have been segregated for reporting and monitoring purposes. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2004 % Change 2003 % Change 2002 Operating Revenue Premium Income $ 31.3 (8.7 )% $ 34.3 (8.8 )% $ 37.6 Net Investment Income 127.3 (9.1 ) 140.1 (9.1 ) 154.2 Other Income 31.2 (0.6 ) 31.4 (20.5 ) 39.5 Total 189.8 (7.8 ) 205.8 (11.0 ) 231.3 Benefits and Expenses Benefits and Change in Reserves for Future Benefits 142.3 (9.4 ) 157.1 (2.5 ) 161.1 Other Expenses 18.3 (23.1 ) 23.8 (4.0 ) 24.8 Total 160.6 (11.2 ) 180.9 (2.7 ) 185.9 Operating Income Before Income Tax and Net Realized Investment Gains and Losses $ 29.2 17.3 $ 24.9 (45.2 ) $ 45.4 Reinsurance Pools and Management The Company reinsurance operations include the reinsurance management operations of Duncanson & Holt, Inc. (D&H) and the risk assumption, which includes reinsurance pool participation; direct reinsurance which includes accident and health (A&H), long-term care (LTC), and long-term disability coverages; and Lloyd of London (Lloyd s) syndicate participations. During the years 1999 through 2001, the Company exited its reinsurance pools and management operations through a combination of a sale, reinsurance, and/or placement of certain components in run-off. The reinsurance pools and management operations reported revenue of $5.2 million in 2004, $15.5 million in 2003, and $30.0 million in 2002. During 2004, this line of business reported an operating loss of $7.5 million compared to operating losses of $7.1 million and $3.2 million in 2003 and 2002, respectively. 63 Table of Contents Individual Life and Corporate-Owned Life During 2000, the Company reinsured substantially all of the individual life and corporate-owned life insurance blocks of business. The Company ceded approximately $3.3 billion of reserves to the reinsurer. The $388.2 million before-tax gain on these transactions was deferred and is being amortized into income based upon expected future premium income on the traditional insurance policies ceded and estimated future gross profits on the interest-sensitive insurance policies ceded. Total operating revenue for individual life and corporate-owned life insurance was $40.0 million, $39.9 million, and $42.2 million in 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively. Operating income for the same periods was $38.2 million, $33.5 million, and $41.6 million. Other Group pension, health insurance, individual annuities, and other closed lines of business had operating revenue of $144.6 million, $150.4 million, and $159.1 million in 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively, and operating income (losses) of $(1.5) million, $(1.5) million, and $7.0 million. Decreases in operating revenue and income are expected to continue as these lines of business wind down. Included in these amounts are the Company operating results for its operation in Argentina, which produced operating revenue of $27.7 million, $18.1 million, and $18.4 million in 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively, and operating income (losses) of $(6.2) million, $(13.4) million, and $0.1 million in each of those three years. As previously discussed, in conjunction with the restructuring of its Argentinean operation, the Company reduced its ownership position in this operation to 40 percent during the fourth quarter of 2004 and reported a before-tax loss of $4.7 million. During 2003, the Company recognized an impairment loss of $13.5 million related to this operation. Corporate Segment Operating Results The Corporate segment includes investment income on corporate assets not specifically allocated to a line of business, corporate interest expense, and certain corporate income and expense not allocated to a line of business. Operating revenue in the Corporate segment was $66.0 million in 2004, compared to $31.6 million in 2003 and $34.0 million in 2002. As previously discussed, during the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company obtained a judgment in refund litigation for federal income tax paid for tax year 1984, plus interest, and as such, recognized $14.0 million of operating revenue in the Corporate segment related to the interest portion of the anticipated refund. Also included in 2004 revenue is a $9.4 million curtailment gain related to changes in the Company retiree medical plan. See Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of the curtailment gain. The Corporate segment reported operating losses of $153.7 million in 2004, $193.5 million in 2003, and $155.0 million in 2002. Interest and debt expense increased from $162.4 million in 2002 to $187.2 million in 2003 and $207.1 million in 2004 due to the impact of the debt offerings, as discussed under Liquidity and Capital Resources included herein. Included in operating expenses for 2003 is approximately $15.0 million in severance and pension benefit payouts related to the change of the Company president and chief executive officer. During 2003, the Company recognized in the Corporate segment an impairment loss of $1.2 million before tax on its Japanese operation. Discontinued Operations During 2003, the Company entered into an agreement to sell its Canadian branch. In conjunction with the classification of the Canadian branch as an asset held for sale, the Company tested the goodwill related to the Canadian branch for impairment and determined that the balance of $190.9 million was impaired. The Company also recognized a loss of $6.0 million after tax to write down the value of bonds in the Canadian branch investment portfolio to market value. These two charges, which total $196.9 million after tax, were included in the 2003 loss from discontinued operations. The Company recognized an additional loss of $0.4 million after tax in the first quarter of 2004 to further write down the value of bonds in the Canadian branch investment portfolio to market 64 Table of Contents value. The transaction closed April 30, 2004, and in the second quarter of 2004, the Company reported a loss of $70.9 million after tax on the sale of the branch. Income (loss) from discontinued operations was $(60.8) million, $(161.7) million, and $11.4 million, net of tax, in 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively. Excluding the 2004 and 2003 losses on the sale and the write-downs, income from discontinued operations was $10.5 million and $35.2 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein in Item 8 for further discussion of the Company discontinued operations. Investments Overview Investment activities are an integral part of the Company business, and profitability is significantly affected by investment results. Invested assets are segmented into portfolios that support the various product lines. Generally, the investment strategy for the portfolios is to match the effective asset cash flows and durations with related expected liability cash flows and durations to consistently meet the liability funding requirements of the Company business. The Company seeks to maximize investment income and total return and to assume credit risk in a prudent and selective manner, subject to constraints of quality, liquidity, diversification, and regulatory considerations. The Company overall investment philosophy is to invest in a portfolio of high quality assets that provide investment returns consistent with that assumed in the pricing of its insurance products. Assets are invested predominately in fixed maturity securities, and the portfolio is matched with liabilities so as to eliminate as much as possible the Company exposure to changes in the overall level of interest rates. The Company is able to hold to this investment philosophy throughout credit and interest rate cycles because of its capital position, the fixed nature of its liabilities, and the matching of those liabilities with assets and also because of the experience gained through many years of a consistent investment philosophy. It is the Company intent, and has been its practice, to hold investments to maturity to meet liability payments. Below is a summary of the Company formal investment policy, including the overall quality and diversification objectives. The majority of investments are in high quality publicly traded securities to ensure the desired liquidity and preserve the capital value of the Company portfolios. The long-term nature of the Company insurance liabilities also allows it to invest in less liquid investments to obtain superior returns. A maximum of 10 percent of the total investment portfolio may be invested in below-investment-grade securities, two percent in equity type instruments, up to 35 percent in private placements, and five percent in commercial mortgage loans. The remaining assets can be held in publicly traded investment-grade corporate securities, mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities, and U.S. government agencies and municipal securities. The Company does not currently intend to invest in additional real estate. The Company intends to manage the risk of losses due to changes in interest rates by matching asset duration with liabilities to within a range of +/- three years. The weighted average credit quality rating of the portfolio should be BBB or higher. 65 Table of Contents The maximum investment per issuer group is limited based on internal limits established by the Company board of directors and is more restrictive than the five percent limit generally allowed by the state insurance departments which regulate the type of investments the Company insurance subsidiaries are allowed to own. These internal limits are as follows: Rating Internal Limit ($ in millions) AAA/A $ 150 BBB 100 BBB- 75 BB/BBB- 60 BB 50 B/BB 40 B 20 The portfolio is to be diversified across industry classification and geographic lines. Derivative instruments may be used to hedge interest rate risk and match liability duration and cash flows consistent with the plan approved by the board of directors. Asset mix guidelines and limits are established by the Company and approved by the board of directors. The allocation of assets and the selection and timing of the acquisition and disposition of investments are subject to ratification by the investment subcommittee of the board of directors on a weekly basis. These actions are also reviewed and approved by the board of directors on a quarterly basis. These investment policies and guidelines are reviewed and appropriately adjusted by the board of directors annually, or more frequently if deemed necessary. As previously discussed, the Company sold its Canadian branch effective April 30, 2004. Historical information pertaining to the Canadian branch is reported as discontinued operations in the consolidated financial statements and as such, the historical assets and liabilities are reported separately in the Company consolidated statements of financial condition. The Company retained a portion of the Canadian branch fixed maturity bond portfolio according to the terms of the transaction. Because the specific investments to be transferred to the buyer had not been identified for reporting periods ended prior to the closing, the disclosures on the following pages for 2003 and 2002 will in some instances necessarily include the total Canadian branch investment portfolio, including those transferred to the buyer at the close of the transaction, with appropriate disclosure noting that the information includes fixed maturity securities reported separately as discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of financial condition. Investment Results Net investment income was $2,158.7 million in 2004, virtually flat with the amount reported in 2003. The overall yield in the portfolio was 6.93 percent as of December 31, 2004, and the weighted average credit rating was A3. The overall yield in the portfolio, including fixed maturity securities reported as discontinued operations, was 7.15 percent at the end of 2003. In the current low interest rate market, the Company expects that the portfolio yield will continue to gradually decline, until the market rates increase above the level of the overall yield, due to lower yields on new purchases. As of December 31, 2004, the Company exposure to below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities was approximately 6.4 percent of the carrying value of invested assets excluding ceded policy loans, compared to 7.8 percent at the end of 2003 and 10.4 percent at the end of 2002. This asset class had increased during 2002 primarily from downgrades of existing securities that were previously investment-grade rather than the purchase of additional below-investment-grade securities. During the first quarter of 2003, the Company initiated a program to reduce its below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities holdings to comply with its investment policy regarding diversification and to better position the investment portfolio in the then current environment and reduce exposure to potential credit-related losses. The program was substantially complete at the end of the first quarter of 2003, with sales of approximately $760.9 million in market value and $758.6 million in book value. Gross gains of $23.1 million and gross losses of $20.8 million were recognized on the sale of these securities during the first quarter of 2003. 66 Table of Contents The Company reported before-tax realized investment gains and losses during the last three years as shown in the following chart, which excludes an estimate of realized investment gains and losses in 2003 and 2002 related to the fixed maturity securities reported as discontinued operations. Impairment losses were recognized as a result of management determination that the value of certain fixed maturity and equity securities had other than temporarily declined during the applicable reporting period, as well as the result of further declines in the values of fixed maturity and equity securities that had initially been written down in a prior period. The value of the securities was determined to have other than temporarily declined or to have further declined from the initial impairment based on the factors discussed herein in Critical Accounting Policies. Additional investment losses may occur during 2005. The Company adopted the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133 Implementation Issue B36 (DIG Issue B36), Embedded Derivatives: Modified Coinsurance Arrangements and Debt Instruments That Incorporate Credit Risk Exposure That Are Unrelated or Only Partially Related to the Creditworthiness of the Obligor Under Those Instruments, effective October 1, 2003. The 2004 and 2003 realized investment gains and losses include changes in fair values of the embedded derivatives, as shown in the following chart. (in millions of dollars) Year Ended December 31 2004 2003 2002 Gross Realized Investment Gain from Sales $ 93.4 $ 166.9 $ 201.3 Gross Realized Investment Loss Write-downs 88.0 187.3 442.5 Sales 64.8 154.2 67.9 Total 152.8 341.5 510.4 Change in Fair Value of DIG Issue B36 Derivatives 88.6 0.8 Net Realized Investment Gain (Loss) $ 29.2 $ (173.8 ) $ (309.1 ) The following discussion of other than temporary impairment losses includes those representing five percent or greater of the total other than temporary impairment losses for the respective periods presented, the circumstances that contributed to the impairment loss, the length of time the security had been in a continual loss position, whether it was investment-grade or below-investment-grade at the time of initial purchase and at the time of the impairment loss, and how the circumstances of the impairment loss might cause impairments in other material investments held by the Company. Approximately 58 percent of the 2004 impairments in continuing operations occurred in the financial institutions and airlines industries, and approximately 46 percent of the 2003 impairments in continuing operations occurred in the energy and utilities industries. In 2002, approximately 48 percent of the impairments in continuing operations occurred in the communications sector. Realized Investment Losses during 2004 from Other than Temporary Impairments $20.5 million loss during the third quarter of 2004 on securities issued by a large domestic based airline. The company continues to be plagued by a high cost structure and faces liquidity problems if costs are not substantially reduced in the short-term. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2001. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. 67 Table of Contents $12.0 million loss during the first quarter of 2004 on senior notes issued by a United Kingdom based engineering and manufacturing company engaged in the bus and automotive industry. The company experienced a rapid deterioration in business prospects at its main operating unit in late 2003 and early 2004, followed by the discovery of bookkeeping fraud at one of its business units. Both of these issues were discovered and disclosed to the company banks and note holders by outside financial consultants during the first quarter of 2004. The company filed for U.K. administration on March 31, 2004. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2003. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 180 days but less than 270 days. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $9.0 million aggregate loss during 2004 on structured securities issued by a trust and collateralized by a pool of high yield bonds. The Company performs a periodic review of the estimated cash flows associated with all of its securitized high yield securities. During each of the 2004 quarterly reviews, it was determined that an adverse change in estimated cash flows had occurred for these securities. The investment was originally purchased as part of the Company below-investment-grade strategy. At the time of the initial impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $8.9 million aggregate loss during 2004 on private equity securities issued by a U.S. based insurance services company. The Company initially recognized an impairment loss on these securities in the first quarter of 2002 due to the negative revenue impact resulting from the company loss of a single large client. The Company closely monitored the financial performance of the company during 2002 and 2003. In the first quarter of 2004, following a review of the company capital condition, its revenue and earnings performance, and discussions with company management, it was determined that the investment was further impaired. In the third quarter of 2004, the company was recapitalized at a market price that indicated an additional impairment loss had occurred. The investment was originally purchased as part of the Company private equity investment program. There has been no unrealized gain or loss subsequent to the initial impairment loss in 2002. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $5.2 million loss during the second quarter of 2004 on securities issued by a U.S. based heavy construction company. The company has been struggling with a number of problem projects and is below plan in attaining new business. This continued financial stress culminated in the company failure to make its monthly interest payment for June 2004. These bonds are secured by a number of real estate properties. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase, but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2002. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $4.9 million aggregate loss during 2004 on structured securities issued by a trust and collateralized by a pool of high yield bonds. The Company performs a periodic review of the estimated cash flows associated with all of its securitized high yield securities. During each of the 2004 quarterly reviews, it was determined that an adverse change in estimated cash flows had occurred for these securities. The investment was originally purchased as part of the Company below-investment-grade strategy. At the time of the initial impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $3.9 million loss during the first quarter of 2004 on securities issued by a Brazilian electric generation company. This company experienced short-term liquidity problems, significant issues at affiliated companies, concerns regarding local utility regulation, and the weak Brazilian economy. Certain changes to the terms of these notes relative to the timing of principal and interest repayments were agreed upon by the note holders subsequent to negotiations finalized in the first quarter of 2004 and in conjunction with a comprehensive restructuring of the borrower parent company operations in Brazil. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the fourth quarter of 2002. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been in an unrealized loss position 68 Table of Contents for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. Realized Investment Losses during 2003 from Other than Temporary Impairments $26.4 million loss during the first quarter of 2003 on securities issued by a related entity of a U.S. based energy company. The securities were issued by a utility company that services an industrial site in England and whose 98 percent parent filed for insolvency in December 2001. This issuer was excluded from the parent insolvency filing due to the financial separation from the parent and was operating as a going concern during 2002. Despite the financial separation, the issuer securities were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the fourth quarter of 2001. The Company initially recognized an impairment loss on these securities at the time of the parent insolvency filing in 2001. These bonds were secured by a second lien on the real estate holdings of the company. The Company closely monitored this security and the value of the collateral during 2002. Following extensive negotiations during 2002 and the first quarter of 2003 with the company two other lenders, financial advisors, and counsel, it was determined that the investment was further impaired. Prior to its impairment loss in 2003, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 270 days but less than one year. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $18.1 million loss during the first quarter of 2003 on securities issued by a Norwegian based energy services company engaged in offshore seismic surveying and floating production. The impairment loss was taken after further analysis of available information indicated the company lack of near term liquidity and that overall industry conditions in the energy sector had negatively affected the operations more than previous analysis had indicated. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2002. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $14.4 million loss during the first quarter of 2003 on securities issued by a United Kingdom electrical generation subsidiary of a U.S. based company. Although this industry operating environment in the U.K. weakened over the past few years due to competitive pricing pressures, the company had benefited from a favorable, long-term power sales agreement with a large, investment-grade U.K. power customer. Depressed electricity prices in the merchant power market and operating problems at the company, as well as financial difficulties experienced by the company U.K. power customer, contributed to a weakened financial profile. In October 2002, the financial problems associated with the major U.K. customer resulted in the termination of the favorable power contract. The company made its December 2002 interest payments as scheduled. However, due to discussions that were initiated between the issuer and senior lenders in the first quarter of 2003 and the continued weakness in the U.K. power market, it was determined that this investment was other than temporarily impaired. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the fourth quarter of 2001. Prior to its impairment loss, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The Company also owns securities in the previously mentioned U.K. power customer of this issuer and previously recorded an impairment loss on those securities in the fourth quarter of 2002. $11.3 million loss during the second quarter of 2003 on securities issued by a regulated natural gas pipeline company located in Argentina. The impairment loss was taken following continued delays by the Argentine government in implementing tariff reform and the company default on its interest payment due during the second quarter. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the second quarter of 2001. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $11.1 million loss during the fourth quarter of 2003 on securities issued by a leading producer of performance products for the automotive industry and nylon fibers for the carpet industry. The securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2002. The issuer was current on its interest payments as of September 30, 2003, but filed for bankruptcy in December 2003, despite having implemented several successful measures which improved liquidity and 69 Table of Contents reduced potential legal liabilities. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 1 year but less than two years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $11.0 million loss during the third quarter of 2003 on securities issued by a travel services company located in the United Kingdom. The impairment loss was taken following discussions between the issuer and its creditors regarding difficulties in the issuer businesses due to geopolitical unrest and persistent weakness in demand for leisure travel and requests for certain waivers and consents of debt covenants. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2003. At the time of the impairment loss, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 270 days but less than one year. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. Realized Investment Losses during 2002 from Other than Temporary Impairments $44.0 million loss during the second quarter of 2002 on securities issued by a Canadian telecommunications company engaged in transporting voice and data over its global fiber optic network. This company had an investment-grade rating immediately prior to the time its parent company unexpectedly withdrew its support for the subsidiary in April 2002. The investment was subsequently downgraded to below-investment-grade in the second quarter of 2002. Prior to its impairment loss, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The Company owns fixed maturity securities issued by another regulated subsidiary under common ownership, but this investment has not been negatively impacted, is not considered impaired, and was in an unrealized gain position at December 31, 2004. $27.8 million loss during the second quarter of 2002 on securities issued by a U.S. based global telecommunications company providing global voice and data services. It was discovered in June 2002 that the company had misclassified certain expenses, materially changing the reported financial condition and profitability of the business. The company had an investment-grade rating prior to its downgrade to below-investment-grade in the second quarter of 2002. Prior to its impairment loss, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. $25.1 million loss during the fourth quarter of 2002 on securities issued by a subsidiary of a U.S. based company engaged in the electricity business in the United Kingdom. As this industry operating environment in the United Kingdom weakened over the past few years due to competitive pricing pressures, the company remained encumbered with a number of above-market price power purchase agreements resulting in significant operating losses. The parent company had previously provided equity support and had committed an additional $700.0 million to this subsidiary to be used primarily to renegotiate these contracts. The company had an investment-grade rating prior to the time the parent company unexpectedly withdrew its promised support in October 2002, which resulted in a downgrade to below-investment-grade. The company defaulted on its October interest payments, and the parent company was subsequently placed in administration in the United Kingdom. Prior to its impairment loss, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The Company holds securities in a related subsidiary and has also recognized an other than temporary impairment loss on that related subsidiary. $23.2 million loss during the first quarter of 2002 on securities issued by the holding company of a large national wholesale communications company. In the third quarter of 2001, the company reported sales of $298 million, a 42 percent increase over the comparable prior year period, and liquidity of $1.4 billion in cash equivalents. It was expected that the company would use the proceeds from the sale of non-core assets to further supplement liquidity. In January 2002, the company banks agreed to extend the negotiating period for an amendment to the credit agreement until the end of February 2002. During the first quarter of 2002, the company reported fourth quarter 2001 results, including an 11 percent increase in revenue to $330.3 million. The company had cash equivalents in excess of $1.0 billion, an indication that the company had sufficient liquidity to fund its business plan through 2003. However, late in the first quarter of 2002, the company banks unexpectedly refused to allow the company to draw on its credit lines. The company 70 Table of Contents reported that it would seek bankruptcy protection. Both Moody and Standard & Poor downgraded the security during the first quarter of 2002. The investment was originally purchased as part of the Company below-investment-grade strategy. At the time of the impairment loss, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The circumstances of this impaired investment have no impact on other investments. Realized Investment Losses during 2004 from Sale of Fixed Maturity Securities For the year ended December 31, 2004, the Company realized a loss of $53.0 million on the sale of fixed maturity securities in its continuing operations. The securities sold during the year had a book value of $604.6 million and a fair value of $551.6 million at the time of sale and represented 67 different issuers. Realized investment losses representing five percent or more of the total loss recognized during 2004 are as follows: $5.8 million aggregate loss during the first three quarters of 2004 on the sale of securities issued by a leading builder of power plants and a provider of electricity generation in the U.S., Canada, and the United Kingdom. The company had suffered from an over supply of power generation in most of the markets in which it operates. In addition, the company had experienced weak cash flow and high debt ratios as a result of weak industry and economic fundamentals. These securities were originally purchased as part of the Company below-investment-grade strategy. At the time of the initial sale in 2004, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $5.3 million loss during the third quarter of 2004 on the sale of securities issued by an international reinsurance provider. The company was negatively impacted after it was determined it had failed to adequately reserve for projected claims. The company financial strength ratings were subsequently downgraded by Standard & Poor Corporation and A.M. Best Company. These securities were investment-grade at the time of purchase but were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2004. At the time of the sale, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of less than ninety days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $4.7 million aggregate loss during the first three quarters of 2004 on the sale of securities linked to the credit of a U.S. based supermarket chain. These securities are participation certificates in a trust, benefiting from first mortgage liens on a portfolio of strategically key real estate properties which are net leased on a non-cancelable basis to the supermarket chain. The supermarket chain experienced deterioration in its market position and financial performance over the last several years, and its credit rating was lowered from investment-grade to below-investment grade in the first quarter of 2001. At the time of the initial sale in 2004, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $4.0 million aggregate loss during the first and second quarters of 2004 on the sale of securities issued by a large domestic based airline. The company has been suffering from the aftermath of September 11 th , a higher cost structure, and industry overcapacity. The Company sold the securities to reduce its exposure to the airline. These securities had an investment-grade rating until being downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2001. At the time of the initial sale in 2004, these securities had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than two years but less than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. Realized Investment Losses during 2003 from Sale of Fixed Maturity Securities For the year ended December 31, 2003, the Company realized a loss of $143.6 million on the sale of fixed maturity securities in its continuing operations. The securities sold during the year had a book value of $821.0 million and a fair value of $677.4 million at the time of sale and represented 94 different issuers, of which approximately 59 percent were a part of the Company previously discussed program to reduce its below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities holdings. Realized investment losses representing five percent or more of the total loss recognized during 2003 are as follows: 71 Table of Contents $28.1 million aggregate loss during the third and fourth quarters of 2003 on securities issued by a leading producer of performance products for the automotive industry and nylon fibers for the carpet industry. The company operations had been severely impacted by the increased price of raw materials and energy as well as a weakening demand for its products. In addition, the company was involved in an environmental pollution lawsuit with a potentially large negative impact. These securities had an investment-grade rating until downgraded to below-investment-grade in the first quarter of 2002. At the time of sale, the investment had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $25.2 million loss during the fourth quarter of 2003 on the sale of securities guaranteed by an Italian dairy company. The loss was incurred after it was revealed that the guarantor had engaged in massive fraud, ultimately leading to the company bankruptcy. The guarantor had been rated investment-grade until December 2003. At the time of the sale, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of less than 90 days. The Company also owns $22.5 million of fixed maturity securities of a wholly-owned Canadian subsidiary of the parent company. Although the financial and operating profiles of the subsidiary are separate from the parent and no other than temporary impairment was deemed to exist, in conjunction with the classification of the Canadian branch as an asset held for sale, the Company recognized a loss of $4.0 million to write down the value of these securities, which are held in the Canadian branch investment portfolio, to market value. This loss is included in the loss from discontinued operations. $15.2 million aggregate loss during the first three quarters of 2003 on the sale of debt issued by a major domestic airline. The Company has systematically sold the securities during the first nine months of 2003 to substantially reduce its exposure to the airline. These securities had an investment-grade rating until the various issues were downgraded to below-investment-grade in the third quarter of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002. At the time of the initial sale, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The Company also took an other than temporary impairment charge of $0.3 million on the value of certain private, secured debt obligations of this issuer as part of a consensual restructuring proposal. $11.1 million aggregate loss during the second and fourth quarters of 2003 on the sale of unsecured debt and private, secured debt obligations issued by a major domestic airline. The Company sold the securities to reduce its exposure to the airline. These securities had an investment-grade rating until downgraded in the third quarter of 2001. At the time of sale, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than one year but less than two years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. $9.2 million aggregate loss during the second and fourth quarters of 2003 on the sale of securities issued by a provider of phone, cable, and internet services. This company operations were severely impacted by the decline in the telecommunications market and thus, the decision was made to reduce the exposure to this company. These securities were originally purchased as part of the Company below-investment-grade strategy. At the time of sale, this security had been continuously in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. Realized Investment Losses during 2002 from Sale of Fixed Maturity Securities For the year ended December 31, 2002, the Company realized a loss of $62.1 million on the sale of fixed maturity securities in its continuing operations. These securities had a book value of $236.4 million and a fair value of $174.3 million at the time of sale and represented 42 different issuers. Realized investment losses representing five percent or more of the total loss recognized during 2002 are as follows: The Company realized $34.0 million in losses on the sale of securities issued by a U.S. based global telecommunications company providing global voice and data services. This company had misclassified certain expenses, materially changing the reported financial condition and profitability of the business. The price of this issuer securities dropped significantly in the second quarter of 2002 as the information became public. This company is under multiple investigations, and several senior officers of the issuer have been accused of committing major accounting fraud. These circumstances were significant enough for the Company to change its intent to hold these securities to maturity or recovery. The investment was 72 Table of Contents downgraded to below-investment-grade in the second quarter of 2002, and, at the time of sale, had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 90 days but less than 180 days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. The Company realized $5.9 million in losses on the sale of securities issued by an energy services company engaged in offshore seismic surveying and floating energy production. Industry conditions in the energy sector, which is cyclical and driven by the supply and demand for oil and gas, had impacted profit margins, and the company lacked liquidity in the near-term. The investment was downgraded to below-investment-grade status in the second quarter of 2002, causing the investment holdings of this issuer to exceed the Company individual issuer group limits established by the Company board of directors. As a result, the Company sold the securities in order to lower its overall holding of securities issued by this company. At the time of sale, the investment had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of more than three years. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. The Company realized $3.9 million in losses on the sale of a below-investment-grade structured security backed by a pool of high yield bonds. The continued high level of defaults in the high-yield market and in this pool in particular continued to impact the credit quality of this investment. A review of the investment led to the conclusion that, while a decline in the level of defaults in the general market was expected, no improvement in the prospects for this structured security was expected. This conclusion resulted from the deterioration of the underlying pool of high yield bonds and the deteriorating performance record of the pool manager. The investment was downgraded to below-investment-grade status in the third quarter of 2001 and, at the time of sale, had been in an unrealized loss position for a period of greater than 270 days but less than 360 days. The circumstances of this investment have no impact on other investments. Asset Distribution The following table provides the distribution of invested assets for the periods indicated. Ceded policy loans of $2.9 billion and $2.7 billion as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively, which are reported on a gross basis in the consolidated statements of financial condition contained herein in Item 8, are excluded from the table below. The investment income on these ceded policy loans is not included in income. Distribution of Invested Assets December 31 2004 2003 Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities 90.0 % 88.5 % Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Securities 6.4 7.8 Equity Securities 0.1 Mortgage Loans 1.5 1.5 Real Estate 0.1 0.1 Short-term Investments 1.2 1.1 Other Invested Assets 0.8 0.9 Total 100.0 % 100.0 % 73 Table of Contents Fixed Maturity Securities Fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2004, included $32.4 billion, or 99.7 percent, of bonds and derivative instruments and $109.1 million, or 0.3 percent, of redeemable preferred stocks. The following table shows the fair value composition by internal industry classification of the fixed maturity bond portfolio and the associated unrealized gains and losses. Fixed Maturity Bonds By Industry Classification As of December 31, 2004 (in millions of dollars) Classification Fair Value Net Unrealized Gain Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Gain Gross Unrealized Gain Basic Industry $ 2,366.3 $ 238.9 $ 218.7 $ (9.3 ) $ 2,147.6 $ 248.2 Canadian 378.9 84.3 378.9 84.3 Capital Goods 2,335.9 280.2 228.3 (5.9 ) 2,107.6 286.1 Communications 2,775.8 330.1 321.1 (15.4 ) 2,454.7 345.5 Consumer Cyclical 1,408.6 103.9 161.0 (4.5 ) 1,247.6 108.4 Consumer Non-Cyclical 3,570.2 345.4 265.3 (14.2 ) 3,304.9 359.6 Derivative Instruments 468.5 435.8 (77.3 ) (77.3 ) 545.8 513.1 Energy (Oil & Gas) 2,620.5 376.4 60.4 (3.1 ) 2,560.1 379.5 Financial Institutions 2,865.1 125.6 764.7 (43.9 ) 2,100.4 169.5 Mortgage/Asset-Backed 4,206.3 358.5 298.4 (2.7 ) 3,907.9 361.2 Sovereigns 806.8 32.2 225.6 (3.6 ) 581.2 35.8 Technology 319.5 28.1 77.4 (3.6 ) 242.1 31.7 Transportation 1,099.5 116.4 85.8 (27.3 ) 1,013.7 143.7 U.S. Government Agencies and Municipalities 1,912.7 28.7 1,011.9 (110.8 ) 900.8 139.5 Utilities 5,244.7 515.3 642.7 (21.9 ) 4,602.0 537.2 Total $ 32,379.3 $ 3,399.8 $ 4,284.0 $ (343.5 ) $ 28,095.3 $ 3,743.3 As of December 31, 2004, $259.3 million or 75.5 percent of the unrealized losses in the fixed maturity bond portfolio were concentrated in derivative instruments, financial institutions, transportation, and U.S. government agencies and municipalities. The Company current view of risk factors relative to these industries is as follows: Derivative Instruments: The unrealized losses on derivative instruments are associated with the Company foreign currency interest rate swaps whereby the Company receives a fixed rate of interest denominated in U.S. dollars (functional currency) and pays a fixed rate of interest denominated in a foreign currency. These derivatives eliminate the variability of functional currency cash flows associated with the foreign currency denominated securities owned by the Company. Subsequent to the time these foreign currency swaps were entered into, the U.S. dollar has weakened in relation to the foreign currencies being hedged, resulting in the unrealized losses. Although the functional currency value of these foreign currency swaps has decreased, these unrealized losses are mitigated by an increase in the functional currency value of the hedged securities. The Company has the ability and intent to hold these securities and related derivatives to maturity. 74 Table of Contents Financial Institutions: This sector entered the recent economic cycle with record capital levels and strong profitability. Credit quality continues to improve in the banking sector, having reached its highest level in the past 20 years by some measurements. Results through the end of 2004 reflected strong fee income, solid profitability, and increased commercial and consumer loan growth. Profitability and credit quality are expected to remain strong for the group in 2005, as is the pace of consolidation. Challenges for the bank sector in 2005 include asset-liability management, narrowing net interest margins, and expense management. The brokerage sector also reported strong results, driven primarily by an increase in mergers and acquisitions along with continued strength in fixed-income markets. Approximately $29.4 million of the unrealized losses in this industry sector can be attributed to certain principal protected equity linked notes held by the Company, including those disclosed in the following discussion of Gross Unrealized Losses on Fixed Maturity Bonds $10 Million or Greater. Transportation : This sector consists of airlines, airports, railroads, and shipping. The sector has encountered significant difficulties during the past three years, primarily in commercial aviation. Despite an improving economy, extremely competitive conditions exist, and fare wars have contributed to weak revenues in the sector. Margins continue to be pressured by high labor costs and expenses related to rising fuel prices. The credit quality of issuers in the sector remains weak. The outlook for the airline segment depends heavily on economic improvement, negotiations with labor unions, and continued expense reductions. The outlook for airports has improved in the past two years as overall passenger traffic has risen, despite the problems endured by the mainline carriers. Demand for railroad and shipping services is also highly correlated to the economy, although the industry fundamentals are currently strong. U.S. Government Agencies and Municipalities : This sector includes the U.S. Government Treasury Department, government agencies, and government-sponsored enterprises. The sector has minimal credit risk and excellent liquidity, which enables the Company to maintain a higher limitation on investments in these subsectors. The following table is a distribution of the maturity dates for fixed maturity bonds in an unrealized loss position at December 31, 2004. Fixed Maturity Bonds By Maturity As of December 31, 2004 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value of Bonds with Gross Unrealized Loss Gross Unrealized Loss Due after 1 year up to 5 years $ 287.3 $ (6.2 ) Due after 5 years up to 10 years 662.3 (102.9 ) Due after 10 years 3,036.0 (231.7 ) Subtotal 3,985.6 (340.8 ) Mortgage/Asset-Backed Securities 298.4 (2.7 ) Total $ 4,284.0 $ (343.5 ) 75 Table of Contents Of the $343.5 million in gross unrealized losses at December 31, 2004, $286.6 million, or 83.4 percent, are related to investment-grade fixed maturity bonds. The following table shows the length of time the Company investment-grade fixed maturity bonds had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2004. Unrealized Loss on Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Bonds Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position As of December 31, 2004 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss <= 90 days $ 610.6 $ (18.4 ) > 90 <= 180 days 58.0 (0.3 ) > 180 <= 270 days 545.5 (61.9 ) > 1 year <= 2 years 2,215.4 (168.3 ) > 2 years <= 3 years 219.7 (8.2 ) > 3 years 97.0 (29.5 ) Totals $ 3,746.2 $ (286.6 ) 76 Table of Contents The following table shows the length of time the Company below-investment-grade fixed maturity bonds had been in a gross unrealized loss position as of December 31, 2004. The fair value and gross unrealized losses are categorized by the relationship of the current fair value to amortized cost for those securities on December 31, 2004. The fair value to amortized cost relationships are not necessarily indicative of the fair value to amortized cost relationships for the securities throughout the entire time that the securities have been in an unrealized loss position nor are they necessarily indicative of the relationships subsequent to December 31, 2004. Unrealized Loss on Below-Investment-Grade Fixed Maturity Bonds Length of Time in Unrealized Loss Position As of December 31, 2004 (in millions of dollars) Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss <= 90 days fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost $ 53.7 $ (0.6 ) > 90 <= 180 days fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 32.0 (1.0 ) > 270 days <= 1 year fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 66.6 (2.1 ) > 1 year <= 2 years fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 14.4 (1.3 ) > 2 years <= 3 years fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 182.7 (17.6 ) fair value < 70% >= 40% of amortized cost 14.7 (9.8 ) Subtotal 197.4 (27.4 ) > 3 years fair value < 100% >= 70% of amortized cost 158.6 (14.3 ) fair value < 70% >= 40% of amortized cost 15.1 (10.2 ) Subtotal 173.7 (24.5 ) Totals $ 537.8 $ (56.9 ) 77 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2004, the Company held two securities with a gross unrealized loss of $10.0 million or greater, as shown in the chart below. Gross Unrealized Losses on Fixed Maturity Bonds $10.0 Million or Greater As of December 31, 2004 (in millions of dollars) Fixed Maturity Bonds Fair Value Gross Unrealized Loss Length of Time in a Loss Position Investment-Grade U.S. Government Sponsored Mortgage Funding Company $ 562.4 $ (100.1 ) > 1 year <= 2 years Principal Protected Equity Linked Note 42.1 (24.2 ) > 3 years Total Investment-Grade $ 604.5 $ (124.3 ) Unrealized losses on investment-grade fixed maturity securities principally relate to changes in interest rates or changes in market or sector credit spreads which occurred subsequent to the acquisition of the securities. These changes are generally temporary and are not recognized as realized investment losses unless the securities are sold, a decision is made that it is unlikely that the Company will hold the securities until recovery, or the securities become other than temporarily impaired. Generally, below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities are more likely to develop credit concerns. As previously discussed under Critical Accounting Policies contained herein, in determining whether a decline in fair value below amortized cost of a fixed maturity security is other than temporary, the Company utilizes a formal, well-defined, and disciplined process to monitor and evaluate its fixed income investment portfolio. It includes certain members of senior management in addition to the Company other investment and accounting professionals. The process results in a thorough evaluation of problem investments and the recording of realized losses on a timely basis for investments determined to have an other than temporary impairment. For those fixed maturity securities with an unrealized loss and on which the Company has not recorded an impairment loss, the Company believes that the decline in fair value below amortized cost is temporary. The Company has the ability to hold its securities to the earlier of recovery or maturity and intends to hold all of its fixed maturity investments until maturity to meet its liability obligations. If information becomes available that changes the Company assessment as to whether the Company will receive contractual payments related to a fixed maturity security and the security is also not projected to recover in value, the related security is generally sold. The Company may also in certain circumstances sell a security in an unrealized loss position because of changes in tax laws, when a merger or the disposition of a segment or product line results in positions outside of the Company investment guidelines, due to changes in regulatory or capital requirements, due to unexpected changes in liquidity needs, or to take advantage of tender offers that recover up to or beyond the cost of the investment. For those securities with a gross unrealized loss of $10.0 million or greater, further discussed as follows are (a) the factors which the Company believes resulted in the impairment and (b) the information the Company considered, both positive and negative, in reaching the conclusion that the impairments were not other than temporary. The fixed maturity bond of the U.S. government sponsored mortgage funding company was issued by the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. The bond was rated AAA by Standard & Poor Corporation (S&P) as of December 31, 2004, with no negative outlook by rating agencies or in analysts reports. The changes in the market value of this security relates to changes in interest rates subsequent to the purchase of the bond. The Company believes that the decline in fair value of this security is temporary. The Company has the ability to hold this security to the earlier of recovery or maturity and intends to hold its fixed maturity investments until maturity to meet its liability obligations. 78 Table of Contents The principal protected equity linked note is a zero coupon bond, issued by a large, well capitalized Fortune 500 financial services company, the return of which is linked to a Vanguard S&P 500 index mutual fund. This bond matures on August 24, 2020 and carries the AAA rating of the issuer, as determined by S&P as of December 31, 2004. This note has an embedded derivative contract and substitutes highly rated bonds in place of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund to provide principal protection in the event of a significant decline in the equities market. The note derives its value from the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund. The reduction in the market value of this note was the result of the decline in the S&P 500 index subsequent to the purchase date of the note. The S&P 500 index had an 8.99 percent return for the twelve months ending December 31, 2004. Based on historical long-term returns of the S&P 500 index, the Company believes that the value of the underlying S&P 500 index mutual fund will equate to or exceed the par value of the security at maturity. The Company therefore believes that the decline in fair value of the note is temporary. The Company has the ability to hold this security to the earlier of recovery or maturity and intends to hold its fixed maturity investments until maturity to meet its liability obligations. The Company investment in mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities was approximately $3.8 billion and $4.0 billion on an amortized cost basis at December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. At December 31, 2004, the mortgage-backed securities had an average life of 5.2 years and effective duration of 3.9 years. The mortgage-backed and asset-backed securities are valued on a monthly basis using valuations supplied by the brokerage firms that are dealers in these securities. The primary risk involved in investing in mortgage-backed securities is the uncertainty of the timing of cash flows from the underlying loans due to prepayment of principal with the possibility of reinvesting the funds in a lower interest rate environment. The Company uses models which incorporate economic variables and possible future interest rate scenarios to predict future prepayment rates. The Company has not invested in mortgage-backed derivatives, such as interest-only, principal-only or residuals, where market values can be highly volatile relative to changes in interest rates. The Company exposure to below-investment-grade fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2004, was $2,169.6 million, representing 6.4 percent of the fair value of invested assets excluding ceded policy loans. Below-investment-grade bonds are inherently more risky than investment-grade bonds since the risk of default by the issuer, by definition and as exhibited by bond rating, is higher. Also, the secondary market for certain below-investment-grade issues can be highly illiquid. The Company expects that additional downgrades may occur during 2005, but the Company does not anticipate any liquidity problem caused by its investments in below-investment-grade securities, nor does it expect these investments to adversely affect its ability to hold its other investments to maturity. The Company has a significant interest in, but is not the primary beneficiary of, a special purpose entity which is a collateralized bond obligation asset trust in which the Company holds interests in several of the tranches and for which the Company acts as investment manager of the underlying securities. The Company investment in this entity was reported at fair value with fixed maturity securities in the consolidated statements of financial condition. The fair value of this investment was derived from the fair value of the underlying assets. The fair value and amortized cost of this investment was $25.6 million and $24.8 million, respectively, at December 31, 2004, and $27.0 million and $26.1 million, respectively, at December 31, 2003. Mortgage Loans and Real Estate The Company mortgage loan portfolio was $498.2 million and $474.7 million at December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Company believes its mortgage loan portfolio is well diversified geographically and among property types. The incidence of problem mortgage loans and foreclosure activity remains low, and management expects the level of delinquencies and problem loans to remain low in the future. The Company had no impaired mortgage loans at December 31, 2004 or 2003, and no restructured mortgage loans at December 31, 2004. Restructured mortgage loans totaled $7.5 million at December 31, 2003, and represented loans that had been refinanced with terms more favorable to the borrower. Interest lost on restructured loans was immaterial for 2003. 79 Table of Contents The Company invested in additional mortgage loans during 2004 and expects that during 2005 it will continue to invest in additional commercial mortgage loans either through the secondary market or through loan originations. This will allow the Company to leverage its operational structure currently in place for its existing mortgage loan portfolio and to utilize an additional investment category in its portfolio strategies. Real estate was $27.4 million and $25.9 million at December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Investment real estate is carried at cost less accumulated depreciation. Real estate acquired through foreclosure is valued at fair value at the date of foreclosure and may be classified as investment real estate if it meets the Company investment criteria. If investment real estate is determined to be permanently impaired, the carrying amount of the asset is reduced to fair value. Occasionally, investment real estate is reclassified to real estate held for sale when it no longer meets the Company investment criteria. Real estate held for sale, which is valued net of a valuation allowance that reduces the carrying value to the lower of cost or fair value less estimated cost to sell, amounted to $6.2 million at December 31, 2004 and $4.9 million at December 31, 2003. The Company uses a comprehensive rating system to evaluate the investment and credit risk of each mortgage loan and to identify specific properties for inspection and reevaluation. The Company establishes an investment valuation allowance for mortgage loans based on a review of individual loans and the overall loan portfolio, considering the value of the underlying collateral. Investment valuation allowances for real estate held for sale are established based on a review of specific assets. If a decline in value of a mortgage loan or real estate investment is considered to be other than temporary or if the asset is deemed permanently impaired, the investment is reduced to estimated net realizable value, and the reduction is recognized as a realized investment loss. Management monitors the risk associated with these invested asset portfolios and regularly reviews and adjusts the investment valuation allowance. At December 31, 2004, the balance in the valuation allowances for real estate was $9.3 million. No valuation allowance was held for mortgage loans at December 31, 2004. Derivatives The Company uses derivative financial instruments to manage duration, increase yield on cash flows expected from current holdings and future premium income, and manage currency risk. Historically, the Company has utilized interest rate futures contracts, current and forward interest rate swaps and options on forward interest rate swaps, current and forward currency swaps, interest rate forward contracts, forward treasury locks, currency forward contracts, and forward contracts on specific fixed income securities. All of these freestanding derivatives transactions are hedging in nature and not speculative. Positions under the Company hedging programs for derivative activity that were open during 2004 involved current and forward interest rate swaps, current and forward currency swaps, forward contracts on credit spreads on specific fixed income securities, currency forward contracts, and options on forward interest rate swaps. During the second quarter of 2004, the Company began utilizing a hedging strategy to lock in a reinvestment rate floor for the reinvestment of cash flows from renewals on policies with a one to two year minimum premium rate guarantee. Positions under this hedging program involved the purchase of options on forward interest rate swaps. As of December 31, 2004, the Company had $785.0 million notional amount of options open under this program. Almost all hedging transactions are associated with the individual and group long-term care and the individual and group income protection product portfolios. All other product portfolios are periodically reviewed to determine if hedging strategies would be appropriate for risk management purposes. During the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003, and 2002, the Company recognized net gains of $29.1 million, $79.6 million, and $45.4 million, respectively, on the termination of cash flow hedges and reported $29.2 million, $79.1 million, and $42.1 million, respectively, in other comprehensive income and $(0.1) million, $0.5 million, and $3.3 million, respectively, as a component of realized investment gains and losses. The Company amortized $20.7 million, $17.3 million, and $12.4 million of net deferred gains into net investment income in 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively. The Company current credit exposure on derivatives, which is limited to the value of those contracts in a net gain position, was $103.0 million at December 31, 2004. Additions and terminations, in notional amounts, to the Company hedging programs during 2004 were $1,706.6 million and $911.9 million, respectively. Additions and 80 Table of Contents terminations in 2003 were $3,945.0 million and $1,326.6 million, respectively. Additions and terminations include roll activity, which is the closing out of an old contract and initiation of a new one when a contract is about to mature but the need for it still exists. The notional amount of derivatives outstanding under the hedge programs was $4,795.9 million at December 31, 2004 and $4,001.2 million at December 31, 2003. As of December 31, 2004 the Company had $707.3 million notional amount of open current and forward foreign currency swaps to hedge fixed income Canadian dollar denominated securities the Company retained after the sale of the Canadian branch. The Company also has embedded derivatives in modified coinsurance contracts recognized under DIG Issue B36. The derivatives recognized under DIG Issue B36 are not designated as hedging instruments, and the change in fair value is reported as a realized investment gain or loss during the period of change. The Company recognized $88.6 million and $0.8 million in net realized investment gains during 2004 and 2003, respectively, due to the change in value of the embedded derivatives recognized under DIG Issue B36. Non-current Investments The Company exposure to non-current investments totaled $91.5 million at December 31, 2004, or 0.3 percent of invested assets excluding ceded policy loans, compared to $235.9 million at December 31, 2003. Non-current investments are those investments for which principal and/or interest payments are more than thirty days past due. At December 31, 2004 these investments, which are subject to the same review and monitoring procedures in place for other investments in determining when a decline in fair value is other than temporary, consisted of fixed maturity securities for which before-tax impairment losses of approximately $184.1 million had been recorded life-to-date. The amortized cost of these securities was $74.4 million. Approximately $85.0 million of these securities, on a fair value basis, had principal and/or interest payments past due for a period greater than one year. Other The Company has an investment program wherein it simultaneously enters into repurchase agreement transactions and reverse repurchase agreement transactions with the same party. The Company nets the related receivables and payables in the consolidated statements of financial condition as these transactions meet the requirements for the right of offset. As of December 31, 2004, the Company had $396.3 million face value of these agreements in an open position that were offset. The Company also uses the repurchase agreement market as a source of short-term financing. The Company had no contracts for this purpose outstanding at December 31, 2004. Liquidity and Capital Resources The Company liquidity requirements are met primarily by cash flows provided from operations, principally in its insurance subsidiaries. Premium and investment income, as well as maturities and sales of invested assets, provide the primary sources of cash. Debt and/or other securities offerings provide an additional source of liquidity. Cash is applied to the payment of policy benefits, costs of acquiring new business (principally commissions), operating expenses, and taxes, as well as purchases of new investments. The Company has established an investment strategy that management believes will provide for adequate cash flows from operations. The Company policy benefits are primarily in the form of claim payments, and the Company therefore has minimal exposure to the policy withdrawal risk associated with deposit products such as individual life policies or annuities. The Company cash flows from operations could be negatively impacted by a decrease in demand for the Company insurance products or an increase in the incidence of new claims or the duration of existing claims. Cash flow could also be negatively impacted by a deterioration in the credit market whereby the Company ability to liquidate its positions in certain of its fixed maturity securities would be impacted such that the Company might not be able to dispose of these investments in a timely manner. The Company believes its cash resources are sufficient to meet its liquidity requirements for the next twelve months. 81 Table of Contents Consolidated Cash Flows Operating Cash Flows Net cash provided by operating activities was $747.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2004, as compared to $1,345.2 million and $1,786.7 million for the comparable periods of 2003 and 2002, respectively. Included in operating cash flows for 2004 is a cash disbursement of $707.4 million made in conjunction with the reinsurance of the Company individual income protection closed block business. During 2003, by mutual consent the Company amended existing reinsurance contracts with one of its reinsurers to transform the contracts from coinsurance to modified coinsurance arrangements. Under the terms of those amendments, the Company, as the assuming reinsurer, transferred to the ceding reinsurer cash equal to the statutory disabled life reserves of approximately $286.2 million and established a corresponding receivable. The ceding reinsurer will retain the assets backing the statutory disabled life reserves and will credit interest at a 7.00 percent effective annual rate to the Company. This 2003 cash disbursement is included in cash flows from operations. Operating cash flows are primarily attributable to the receipt of premium and investment income, offset by payments of claims, commissions, expenses, and income taxes. Premium income growth is attributable not only to new sales, but to renewals of existing business, renewal price increases, and stable persistency. Investment income growth is dependent on the growth in the underlying assets supporting the Company insurance reserves and on the investment portfolio yield rates. Cash flows for commissions and operating expenses are affected by new sales growth and first year acquisition expenses associated with new business, as well as the control of administrative expenses. Cash flows for paid claims are affected by the continued growth and aging of the block of business and also by the general economy and its influence on the level of claim incidence and the duration of claims, as previously discussed in the operating results by segment. Investing Cash Flows Investing cash inflows consist primarily of the proceeds from the sales and maturities of investments. Investing cash outflows consist primarily of payments for purchases of investments. The Company generated less in proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale securities in 2004 than in 2003, primarily due to a decrease in principal prepayments on mortgage-backed securities and bond calls during 2004. The Company received less in proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities during 2004 compared to 2003 due to the Company sales and subsequent purchases during 2003 related to the reduction and restructuring of its below-investment-grade portfolio. During 2004, the Company had cash inflows of $18.8 million in conjunction with the sale of its Japanese operations. The Company transferred cash of $31.7 million in conjunction with the 2004 disposition of the Canadian branch, as well as fixed maturity securities with a fair value and book value of approximately $1,099.4 million and $957.7 million, respectively. While no cash was exchanged in the previously discussed 2004 Swiss Life transaction, the Company assumed reserves of approximately $279.6 million and received fixed maturity securities of approximately $259.0 million and other miscellaneous assets of approximately $5.2 million, for a net purchase price of $15.4 million. In 2004, the Company had cash outflows of $0.7 million to acquire Integrated Benefits Management. During 2003, the Company had cash inflows of $110.0 million related to the acquisition of Sun Life. The Company also received fixed maturity securities of approximately $118.4 million and other miscellaneous assets and liabilities of approximately $20.3 million and assumed reserves of approximately $285.9 million relative to the Sun Life acquisition, for a net purchase price of $37.2 million. During 2003, the Company had $152.5 million of cash outflows related to the disposition, through reinsurance ceded, of a block of policies previously sold through trade associations. The increase in net cash used in investing activities in 2003 over 2002 is partly attributable to the Company $1,151.7 million increase in investments acquired as a result of the deployment of the cash generated from the Company combined offering during 2003. The Company generated higher proceeds from maturities of available-for-sale securities in 2003 than in 2002, primarily due to an increase in bond calls and mortgage-backed security prepayments that resulted from the lower interest rate environment. The Company received less in proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities during 2003 compared to 2002. During 2002, the Company essentially 82 Table of Contents completed its portfolio repositioning initiated subsequent to the merger in June 1999. In 2003, the Company was more focused on investing, and its sales were primarily related to the reduction and restructuring of its below-investment-grade portfolio. In 2002, the Company had cash outflows of $2.8 million to acquire whereiwork. Financing Cash Flows Financing cash flows consist primarily of borrowings and repayments of debt, issuance or repurchase of common stock, and dividends paid to stockholders. Proceeds of $300.0 million were provided from the Company May 2004 sale of adjustable conversion-rate equity security units. Proceeds from the offering were used to restore the Company insurance subsidiaries risk-based capital to the approximate overall level that existed prior to the individual income protection closed block reinsurance transaction and to provide additional liquidity at the holding company level. The Company combined offering in May 2003 provided $575.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt, less underwriting discounts of $17.2 million, and $547.7 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock. These proceeds were used primarily to increase the capitalization of the Company insurance subsidiaries and to repay amounts loaned to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries. Proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt in 2002 were $400.0 million, used primarily to refinance existing commercial paper borrowings. See Debt as follows for further information on the Company debt offerings. During 2003, the Company reduced short-term debt $235.0 million by repayment of reverse repurchase agreements and $20.0 million by repayment of the current portion of the medium-term notes. During 2002, the Company used $45.0 million in cash to repurchase its common stock. As of December 31, 2004, the Company had $227.0 million of short-term debt payable in 2005. The Company has adequate cash resources to meet this obligation. Cash Available from Subsidiaries The Company is dependent upon payments from its subsidiaries to pay dividends to its stockholders, to pay its debt obligations, and to pay its expenses. These payments by the Company insurance and non-insurance subsidiaries may take the form of interest payments on amounts loaned to such subsidiaries by the Company, operating and investment management fees, and/or dividends. At December 31, 2004, the Company had outstanding from its insurance subsidiaries a $150.0 million surplus debenture due in 2006 with a weighted average interest rate during 2004 of 8.47 percent and a $100.0 million surplus debenture due in 2027 with a weighted average interest rate during 2004 of 8.25 percent. Semi-annual interest payments are conditional upon the approval by the insurance department of the applicable state of domicile. Restrictions under applicable state insurance laws limit the amount of ordinary dividends that can be paid to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries in any 12-month period without prior approval by regulatory authorities. For life insurance companies domiciled in the United States, that limitation equals, depending on the state of domicile, either ten percent of an insurer statutory surplus with respect to policyholders as of the preceding year end or the statutory net gain from operations, excluding realized investment gains and losses, of the preceding year. The payment of ordinary dividends to the Company from its insurance subsidiaries is further limited to the amount of statutory surplus as it relates to policyholders. Based on the restrictions under current law, during 2005, $663.3 million is available for the payment of ordinary dividends to the Company from its domestic insurance subsidiaries. The Company also has the ability to draw a dividend from its United Kingdom-based affiliate, Unum Limited. Such dividends are limited in amount, based on insurance company law in the United Kingdom, which requires a minimum solvency margin. Approximately $152.5 million will be available for the payment of dividends from Unum Limited during 2005. 83 Table of Contents The amount available during 2004 for the payment of ordinary dividends from the Company domestic insurance subsidiaries was $384.8 million. Of the total available, $160.1 million was utilized. The amount available during 2004 from Unum Limited was $135.0 million, none of which was utilized. The ability of the Company to continue to receive dividends from its insurance subsidiaries without regulatory approval will be dependent upon the level of earnings of its insurance subsidiaries as calculated under law. In addition to regulatory restrictions, the amount of dividends that will be paid by insurance subsidiaries will depend on additional factors, such as risk-based capital ratios, funding growth objectives at an affiliate level, and maintaining appropriate capital adequacy ratios to support the ratings desired by the Company. Insurance regulatory restrictions do not limit the amount of dividends available for distribution to the Company from its non-insurance subsidiaries except where the non-insurance subsidiaries are held directly or indirectly by an insurance subsidiary and only indirectly by the Company. The Company risk-based capital (RBC) ratio for its U.S. insurance subsidiaries, calculated on a weighted average basis using the NAIC Company Action Level formula, was 298 percent and 247 percent at the end of 2004 and 2003, respectively. The increase in the ratio during 2004 resulted primarily from strong statutory net income in 2004, the statutory gain on the sale of the Canadian branch, and capital contributions of $80.0 million. The individual RBC ratios for the Company principal operating subsidiaries ranged from 227 percent to 443 percent at December 31, 2004. The individual RBC ratio for each insurance subsidiary is above the range that would require state regulatory action. Debt At December 31, 2004, the Company had long-term debt, including the adjustable conversion-rate equity security units and the junior subordinated debt securities, totaling $2,862.0 million and short-term debt totaling $227.0 million. At December 31, 2004, the debt to total capital ratio was 35.2 percent compared to 31.6 percent at December 31, 2003. The debt to total capital ratio, when calculated allowing 50 percent equity credit for the Company junior subordinated debt securities and 80 percent equity credit for the Company adjustable conversion-rate equity security units, was 25.5 percent compared to 24.7 percent at December 31, 2003. During the fourth quarter of 2004, the Company filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission a shelf registration to allow the Company to issue various types of securities, including common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depository shares, stock purchase contracts, units and warrants, or preferred securities of wholly-owned finance trusts up to an aggregate of $1.0 billion. The shelf registration, which was declared effective February 7, 2005, will enable the Company to raise funds from the offering of any individual security covered by the shelf registration as well as any combination thereof, subject to market conditions and the Company capital needs. In May 2004, the Company issued 12.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a private offering for $300.0 million. The Company subsequently registered the privately placed securities for resale by the private investors. Each unit has a stated amount of $25 and will initially consist of (a) a contract pursuant to which the holder agrees to purchase, for $25, shares of the Company common stock on May 15, 2007 and which entitles the holder to contract adjustment payments at the annual rate of 3.165 percent, payable quarterly, and (b) a 1/40 or 2.5 percent ownership interest in a senior note issued by the Company due May 15, 2009 with a principal amount of $1,000, on which the Company will pay interest at the initial annual rate of 5.085 percent, payable quarterly. Upon settlement of the common stock purchase contract and successful remarketing of the senior note element of the units, the Company will receive proceeds of approximately $300.0 million and will issue between 17.7 million and 20.4 million shares of common stock. In May 2003, the Company issued 23.0 million 8.25% adjustable conversion-rate equity security units (units) in a public offering for $575.0 million. Each unit has a stated amount of $25 and will initially consist of (a) a contract pursuant to which the holder agrees to purchase, for $25, shares of the Company common stock on May 15, 2006 and which entitles the holder to contract adjustment payments at the annual rate of 2.25 percent, payable quarterly, and (b) a 1/40, or 2.5 percent, ownership interest in a senior note issued by the Company due May 15, 2008 with a principal amount of $1,000, on which the Company will pay interest at the initial annual rate of 6.00 percent, payable quarterly. Upon settlement of the common stock purchase contract and successful remarketing of the senior note element of the units, the Company will receive proceeds of approximately $575.0 million and will issue between 43.3 million and 52.9 million shares of common stock. 84 Table of Contents In the first quarter of 2001, the Company completed a long-term debt offering, issuing $575.0 million of 7.625% senior notes due March 1, 2011. In the second quarter of 2002, the Company completed two long-term offerings, issuing $250.0 million of 7.375% senior debentures due June 15, 2032 and $150.0 million of 7.250% public income notes due June 15, 2032. The public income notes are redeemable at the Company option, in whole or in part, on or after June 25, 2007. In 1998, the Company completed public offerings of $200.0 million of 7.25% senior notes due March 15, 2028, $200.0 million of 6.375% senior notes due July 15, 2005, $200.0 million of 7.0% senior notes due July 15, 2018, and $250.0 million of 6.75% senior notes due December 15, 2028. In 1998, Provident Financing Trust I issued $300.0 million of 7.405% capital securities in a public offering. These capital securities, which mature on March 15, 2038, are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Company, have a liquidation value of $1,000 per capital security, and have a mandatory redemption feature under certain circumstances. The Company issued $300.0 million of 7.405% junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures, which mature on March 15, 2038, to Provident Financing Trust I in connection with the capital securities offering. The sole assets of Provident Financing Trust I are the junior subordinated debt securities. During the second quarter of 2002, the Company board of directors authorized a common stock repurchase program under which the Company acquired approximately 1.8 million shares of its common stock in the open market at an aggregate cost of approximately $45.0 million. The treasury stock is used in connection with the Company benefit and compensation plans and for other corporate purposes. The program expired in 2003. Commitments Contractual debt, junior subordinated debt securities, adjustable conversion-rate equity security units, estimated policyholder liability maturities, and estimated lease commitments are as follows (in millions of dollars): Payments Due Total In 1 Year or Less After 1 Year up to 3 Years After 3 Years up to 5 Years After 5 Years Short-term Debt $ 227.0 $ 227.0 $ $ $ Long-term Debt 1,687.0 1,687.0 Adjustable Conversion-rate Equity Security Units 875.0 875.0 Junior Subordinated Debt Securities 300.0 300.0 Policyholder Liabilities 27,086.9 3,383.3 4,916.9 3,858.5 14,928.2 Operating Leases 136.0 27.3 51.0 30.3 27.4 Total $ 30,311.9 $ 3,637.6 $ 4,967.9 $ 4,763.8 $ 16,942.6 The Company policyholder liability maturities, which are presented net of reinsurance ceded, represent the projected payout of the current inforce policyholder liabilities and therefore incorporate uncertainties as to the timing and amount of claim payments. The Company utilizes extensive liability modeling to project future cash flows from the inforce business. The primary assumptions used to project future cash flows are claim incidence rates for mortality and morbidity, claim resolution rates, persistency rates, and interest rates. These cash flows are discounted to determine the current value of the projected claim payments. The timing and amount of payments on policyholder liabilities may vary significantly from the projections above. 85 Table of Contents The Company actively manages its asset and liability cash flow match as well as its asset and liability duration match in order to minimize interest rate risk. Changes in interest rates affect the amount and timing of cash flows. Asset and liability portfolio modeling is updated on a quarterly basis and is used as part of the overall interest rate risk management strategy. Cash flows from the inforce asset and liability portfolios are projected at current interest rate levels and also at levels reflecting an increase and a decrease in interest rates to obtain a range of projected cash flows under the different interest rate scenarios. These results enable the Company to assess the impact of projected changes in cash flows and duration resulting from potential changes in interest rates. The Company may redistribute its investments within its different lines of business, when necessary, to adjust the cash flow and/or duration of the asset portfolios to better match the cash flow and duration of the liability portfolios. Testing the asset and liability portfolios under various interest rate scenarios enables the Company to choose the most appropriate investment strategy as well as to minimize the risk of disadvantageous outcomes. This analysis is a precursor to the Company activities in derivative financial instruments, which are used to hedge interest rate risk and to match duration. At December 31, 2004, the weighted average duration of the Company policyholder liability portfolio was approximately 8.00 years, and the weighted average duration of the Company investment portfolio supporting those policyholder liabilities was approximately 7.55 years. The Company has an agreement with an outside party wherein the Company is provided computer data processing services and related functions. Under the terms of the contract, the contract will expire in 2013, but the Company may cancel the agreement effective January 2006 or later upon payment of applicable cancellation charges. The aggregate noncancelable contractual obligation remaining under this agreement was $61.8 million at December 31, 2004, with no annual payment expected to exceed $52.1 million. At December 31, 2004 the Company had capital commitments of approximately $41.3 million to fund certain of its private placement fixed maturity securities and for commercial mortgage loan originations. The funds will be due upon satisfaction of contractual notice from the trustee or issuer of the private placement securities or at closing of the mortgage loans. The amounts may or may not be funded. Ratings A.M. Best Company (AM Best), Fitch Ratings (Fitch), Moody Investors Service (Moody s), and Standard & Poor Corporation (S&P) are among the third parties that provide the Company assessments of its overall financial position. Ratings from these agencies for financial strength are available for the individual U.S. domiciled insurance company subsidiaries. Financial strength ratings are based primarily on U.S. statutory financial information for the individual U.S. domiciled insurance companies. Debt ratings for the Company are based primarily on consolidated financial information prepared using generally accepted accounting principles. Both financial strength ratings and debt ratings incorporate qualitative analyses by rating agencies on an ongoing basis. The Company competes based in part on the financial strength ratings provided by rating agencies. A downgrade of the Company financial strength ratings can be expected to adversely affect the Company. A downgrade of the financial strength ratings could, among other things, adversely affect the Company relationships with distributors of its products and services and retention of its sales force, negatively impact persistency and new sales, particularly large case group sales and individual sales, and generally adversely affect the Company ability to compete. Downgrades in the Company debt ratings can be expected to adversely affect the Company ability to raise capital or its cost of capital. In May 2004 and again in November 2004, AM Best reaffirmed the Company ratings. While reaffirming the ratings in November 2004, AM Best commented that it will be closely monitoring the Company operations as to the impact of the multistate market conduct regulatory settlement. In this regard it noted that California conducted a separate examination and that there could be fines or remediation costs in addition to the charge announced by the Company in connection with the multistate settlement. AM Best also noted that it will be monitoring the operating results of the Company core group long-term income protection business. AM Best stated that the maintenance of the Company current ratings reflected the agency expectation that several key financial and operational measures would be maintained. These measures are as follows: The maintenance of a Best Capital Adequacy Ratio (BCAR) of at least 150 percent on a consolidated basis, as well as for the primary operating companies. The maintenance of an NAIC risk-based capital ratio of at least 250 percent. No common stock repurchases through year end 2006. 86 Table of Contents After-tax operating earnings (excluding special charges) within the Company estimates of $450 and $500 million on a GAAP basis in 2004 and 2005, respectively, and after-tax statutory operating earnings of at least $375 million for both periods as well. The debt-to-capital ratio cannot exceed its present level, and this ratio should trend downward with future equity growth through retained earnings and the 2005 debt pay-down. Cash at the holding company will be maintained to cover approximately six months of after-tax debt interest service and stockholder dividends. While the agency stated that a portion of the current cash position is intended for the pay-down of debt in 2005, it expects that the Company will build to a six-month cash position over a reasonable period of time. Persistency of the Company core group long-term income protection business will not drop below 80 percent. AM Best will also be taking into consideration the quality of business lapsing and the resulting impact on the Company loss ratios. The Company should not have any additional significant charges. Settlement expectations shall not exceed 120 percent of expected response rates, amount of claims reopened, size of claims payments and expenses associated with the payout. The Company believes that its results for December 31, 2004 are in compliance with each of these measures. In the first quarter of 2004, the ratings from Fitch were placed under review for a possible downgrade due to concerns expressed about the Company fourth quarter of 2003 reserve strengthening for group income protection and the profitability for this line of business. In May 2004 and again in November 2004, Fitch reaffirmed all of the Company ratings but kept the ratings under review pending Fitch completion of an analysis of the Company reserves. In February 2005, Fitch completed its analysis, reaffirmed all of the Company ratings, and revised the outlook to stable. In May 2004, Moody downgraded the Company senior debt credit ratings to Ba1 from Baa3 and the financial strength ratings on the Company insurance company subsidiaries to Baa1 from A3. The ratings outlook is negative . This action concluded the ratings review Moody initiated in February 2004. Moody indicated that the primary driver in the rating action was concern about the execution risk associated with the Company strategic plans to restore profitability to its core U.S. group long-term income protection business. Moody also noted that the Company had made considerable progress in improving its capital position throughout 2003. The change in the senior debt rating to Ba1 represents a below-investment-grade rating. In November 2004, Moody placed the Company senior debt credit ratings and the financial strength ratings of the Company insurance company subsidiaries on review for possible downgrade due to the heightened event risk associated with the issues concerning broker compensation in the employee benefit market. Also in May 2004, S&P downgraded the Company counterparty credit rating and senior debt rating to BB+ from BBB- while at the same time lowering the counterparty credit and financial strength ratings on the Company insurance company subsidiaries to BBB+ from A-, all with a stable outlook, citing concerns about the consistency of risk controls and valuation practices, which S&P believes have led to reserve charges and asset impairments in the past several quarters and have also contributed to marginal operating performance in the Company U.S. group income protection business. The outlook reflects the effects of strengthened capital adequacy, improved investment risk, and corrective measures taken by the Company to limit the downside on the closed block of individual income protection business and to improve profitability on its U.S. group income protection insurance. The change in the senior debt rating to BB+ represents a below-investment-grade rating. The Company maintains an ongoing dialogue with these rating agencies to inform them of progress it is making regarding its strategic objectives and financial plans, as well as other issues which could impact the Company. There can be no assurance that further downgrades by these or other ratings agencies will not occur. 87 Table of Contents The table below reflects, as of the date of this filing, the senior debt ratings for the Company and the financial strength ratings for the U.S. domiciled insurance company subsidiaries. AM Best Fitch Moody S&P UnumProvident Corporation Senior Debt bbb- BBB-(Good) Ba1 (Speculative) BB+ U.S. Insurance Subsidiaries Provident Life & Accident A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Provident Life & Casualty A- (Excellent) Not Rated Not Rated Not Rated Unum Life of America A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) First Unum Life A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Colonial Life & Accident A -(Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Paul Revere Life A- (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) Paul Revere Variable A - (Excellent) A- (Strong) Baa1 (Adequate) BBB+ (Good) These ratings are not directed toward the holders of the Company securities and are not recommendations to buy, sell, or hold such securities. Each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. See Risk Factors Debt and Financial Strength Ratings in Part 1, Item 1, contained herein for further discussion. Other Information Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans The Company maintains separate U.S. and foreign pension plans and a U.S. post-retirement benefit plan. The U.S. pension plans comprise the majority of the total benefit obligation and pension expense for the Company. The value of the benefit obligations is determined based on a set of economic and demographic assumptions that represent the Company best estimate of future expected experience. These assumptions are reviewed annually. Two of the economic assumptions, the discount rate and the long-term rate of return, are adjusted accordingly based on key external indices. The Company follows Statements of Financial Accounting Standards No. 87, Employers Accounting for Pensions , No. 106, Employers Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions , and No. 132, Employers Disclosures about Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits in its financial reporting and accounting for its pension and post-retirement benefit plans. U.S. Pension and Post Retirement Benefit Plans The assumptions chosen for U.S. pension plans and the U.S. postretirement plan use consistent methodology but reflect the differences in the plan obligations. The Company uses a December 31 measurement date for each plan. The discount rate is an interest assumption used to convert the benefit payment stream to a present value. The discount rate was determined based on a review of long-term fixed income securities that receive one of the two highest ratings given by a recognized rating agency. In setting the assumption, the Company also has considered the change in the level of interest rates on these securities since the prior year end and the duration of the fixed income indices relative to the duration of the plans liabilities. Historically, the Company has used the Moody Aa corporate bond index as one of the primary benchmarks in selecting a discount rate. As of December 31, 2003, this index was 6.01 percent. The Company has estimated that the duration of the index is approximately 13 years. The majority of the obligations in the U.S. pension plans, however, is related to active and deferred vested employees, and duration, therefore, is significantly longer, at approximately 21 years. The Company therefore adjusted the Moody index upward by approximately 25 basis points to arrive at the discount rate assumptions of 6.25 percent as of December 31, 2003. As of December 31, 2004, the Company elected to set the discount rate assumption at the measurement date for each of its retirement related benefit plans to reflect the yield of a portfolio of high quality fixed income debt instruments matched against the timing and amounts of projected future benefits. The Company elected a discount rate of 6.05 percent for the U.S. pension plans. Using a similar methodology applied to the postretirement plan cash flows, a discount rate of 5.70 and 6.10 percent was used as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. 88 Table of Contents Lowering the discount rate by 50 basis points would have increased the 2004 pension expense for the U.S. pension plans by $8.6 million and would be expected to result in a $10.0 million increase in the 2005 pension plan expense. The long-term rate of return assumption is the best estimate of the average annual assumed return that will be produced from the pension trust assets until current benefits are paid. For the U.S. pension plans, the actual asset allocation at December 31, 2004 was 70 percent equities and 30 percent fixed income securities. The investment portfolio contains a diversified blend of large cap, mid cap, small cap, and convertible equity securities, as well as both investment-grade and below-investment-grade fixed income securities. The Company uses a compound interest method in computing the rate of return on pension plan assets. The expected long-term rate of return assumption used for the U.S. pension plan was 8.50 percent as of December 31, 2004 and 2003. Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on the plan assets by 50 basis points would have increased the 2004 pension expense by approximately $2.1 million. For 2005, lowering the assumption by 50 basis points would increase pension expense by approximately $2.4 million. The market related value equals the fair value of assets, determined as of the measurement date. The assets are not smoothed for purposes of SFAS 87. The expected return on assets, therefore, fully recognizes all asset gains and losses through the measurement date. The Company holds an unrecognized net loss representing cumulative liability and asset gains and losses that have not been recognized in pension expense. As of December 31, 2004, there was an estimated unrecognized loss of approximately $318.2 million in the U.S. pension plans, compared to $268.3 million at December 31, 2003. The unrecognized loss has increased due to the decline in the year end discount rate to 6.05 percent at 2004, from 6.25 percent at 2003, and due to a change in the assumed retirement age made as of December 31, 2004. The unrecognized net loss is amortized as a component of pension expense. Only amounts outside of a corridor (equal to 10 percent of the greater of the projected benefit obligation or market related value of assets) are amortized. The 2005 pension expense is expected to include a loss amortization of approximately $19.2 million. This loss amortization was $16.0 million, $18.0 million, and $1.0 million in 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively. The Company reported U.S. pension plan expense of $43.6 million and $41.8 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively, compared to a negative pension expense of $2.6 million in 2002. The fair value of plan assets in the funded U.S. pension plan was $478.1 million at December 31, 2004, compared to $423.8 million at year end 2003. In recent years, the moderate increase in assets, coupled with the liability increase due to declining discount rates, has reduced the year end funding level in the plan such that it has a deficit of $176.5 million as of December 31, 2004, compared to $113.2 million as of December 31, 2003. Foreign Pension Plans The Company U.K. operation maintains a separate defined benefit plan for its employees. The U.K. defined benefit pension plan (Scheme) was closed to new entrants on December 31, 2002. The Scheme assets are invested in pooled funds, with a 62 percent global equity securities allocation. The remainder of the assets is predominantly invested in fixed interest bonds and index linked bonds. The investment policy aims to achieve growth over the medium to long term, subject to an acceptable level of risk and subject to ensuring that the assets under management are sufficient to meet the minimum funding requirements under U.K. legislation. The long-term rate of return assumption is the best estimate of the average annual assumed return that will be produced from the Scheme assets until current benefits are paid. As of December 31, 2004 and 2003, the long-term return on asset assumption for the Scheme was 7.10 percent and 6.50 percent, respectively. The Company elected to set the discount rate assumption at the measurement date for the Scheme to reflect the yield of a portfolio of high quality fixed income debt instruments matched against the timing and amounts of projected future benefits. The discount rate assumptions were 5.30 percent and 5.50 percent as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Pension expense was $11.6 million, $8.8 million, and $4.9 million in 2004, 2003, and 2002, respectively. 89 Table of Contents The fair value of plan assets in the Scheme was $80.5 million at December 31, 2004, compared to $62.6 million at year end 2003. Despite the increase in assets in recent years, the liabilities have increased at a faster rate due to declining discount rates. The Scheme has a deficit of $50.2 million at December 31, 2004, compared to $35.9 million at December 31, 2003. The Company contributes to the Scheme in accordance with a schedule of contributions which requires the Company to contribute to the Scheme at the rate of at least 18.2 percent of eligible salaries, sufficient to meet the minimum funding requirement under U.K. legislation. The Company contribution rate of 20.25 percent of eligible salaries is currently being reviewed. Based on the current contribution rate, the Company anticipates it will make a contribution into the Scheme of approximately $11.9 million in 2005. The Company previously maintained a separate defined benefit plan for the employees of its Canadian branch. As a result of the sale of the Canadian branch, the Company terminated the Canadian defined benefit pension plan during 2004 and recorded a curtailment loss of $0.7 million. 
