CIK: 69499
Company Name: MYLAN INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2015-03-02


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition And Results of Operations The following discussion and analysis addresses material changes in the financial condition and results of operations of Mylan Inc. and subsidiaries (the Company, Mylan , our or we ) for the periods presented. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements , the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and our other Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) filings and public disclosures. This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements. These statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements may include, without limitation, statements about the acquisition (the Abbott Transaction ) by Mylan N.V. ( New Mylan ) of both Mylan and Abbott Laboratories ( Abbott ) non-U.S. developed markets specialty and branded generics business (the Business ), benefits and synergies of the Transaction, future opportunities for Mylan or New Mylan and products, and any other statements regarding Mylan or New Mylan future operations, anticipated business levels, future earnings, planned activities, anticipated growth, market opportunities, strategies, competition, and other expectations and targets for future periods. These may often be identified by the use of words such as will, may, could, should, would, project, believe, anticipate, expect, plan, estimate, forecast, potential, intend, continue, target and variations of these words or comparable words. Because forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties, actual future results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to: the ability to meet expectations regarding the accounting and tax treatments of the Transaction; changes in relevant tax and other laws, including but not limited to changes in healthcare and pharmaceutical laws and regulations in the U.S. and abroad; the integration of the Business being more difficult, time-consuming, or costly than expected; operating costs, customer loss and business disruption (including, without limitation, difficulties in maintaining relationships with employees, customers, clients, or suppliers) being greater than expected following the Transaction; the retention of certain key employees of the Business being difficult; the possibility that Mylan and New Mylan may be unable to achieve expected synergies and operating efficiencies in connection with the Transaction within the expected time-frames or at all and to successfully integrate the Business; expected or targeted future financial and operating performance and results; the capacity to bring new products to market, including but not limited to where Mylan or New Mylan uses its business judgment and decides to manufacture, market, and/or sell products, directly or through third parties, notwithstanding the fact that allegations of patent infringement(s) have not been finally resolved by the courts (i.e., an at-risk launch ); success of clinical trials and our ability to execute on new product opportunities; the scope, timing, and outcome of any ongoing legal proceedings and the impact of any such proceedings on financial condition, results of operations and/or cash flows; the ability to protect intellectual property and preserve intellectual property rights; the effect of any changes in customer and supplier relationships and customer purchasing patterns; the ability to attract and retain key personnel; changes in third-party relationships; the impacts of competition; changes in the economic and financial conditions of the business of Mylan or New Mylan; the inherent challenges, risks, and costs in identifying, acquiring, and integrating complementary or strategic acquisitions of other companies, products or assets and in achieving anticipated synergies; uncertainties and matters beyond the control of management; and inherent uncertainties involved in the estimates and judgments used in the preparation of financial statements, and the providing of estimates of financial measures, in accordance with U.S. GAAP and related standards or on an adjusted basis. For more detailed information on the risks and uncertainties associated with Mylan business activities, see the risks described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 and our and New Mylan other filings with the SEC. These risks, as well as other risks associated with Mylan, New Mylan , the Business, and the Transaction are also more fully discussed in the Registration Statement on Form S-4 that New Moon B.V. (referred to herein as New Mylan ) filed with the SEC on November 5, 2014, as amended on December 9, 2014, and as further amended on December 23, 2014, and in the proxy statement Mylan filed with the SEC on December 24, 2014, as well as the prospectus New Mylan filed with the SEC on December 24, 2014. You can access Mylan and New Mylan s filings with the SEC through the SEC website at www.sec.gov, and the Company strongly encourages you to do so. The Company undertakes no obligation to update any statements herein for revisions or changes after the date of this Form 10-K. Executive Overview Mylan is a leading global pharmaceutical company, which develops, licenses, manufactures, markets and distributes generic, branded generic and specialty pharmaceuticals. Mylan is committed to setting new standards in health care, and our mission is to provide the world 7 billion people access to high quality medicine. To do so, we innovate to satisfy unmet needs; make reliability and service excellence a habit; do what's right, not what's easy; and impact the future through passionate global leadership. Mylan offers one of the industry broadest product portfolios, including approximately 1,400 marketed products, to customers in approximately 140 countries and territories. With the completion of the Transaction, Mylan has expanded its global footprint to reach customers in approximately 145 countries and territories. We operate a global, high quality vertically- 52 integrated manufacturing platform, which includes approximately 40 manufacturing facilities around the world and one of the world largest active pharmaceutical ingredient ( API ) operations. We also operate a strong research and development ( R&D ) network that has consistently delivered a robust product pipeline. Additionally, Mylan has a specialty business that is focused on respiratory and allergy therapies. Mylan has two segments, Generics and Specialty. Generics primarily develops, manufactures, sells and distributes generic or branded generic pharmaceutical products in tablet, capsule, injectable or transdermal patch form, as well as API. Our generic pharmaceutical business is conducted primarily in the United States ( U.S. ) and Canada (collectively, North America ); Europe; and India, Australia, Japan, New Zealand and Brazil as well as our export activity into emerging markets (collectively, Rest of World ). Our API business is conducted through Mylan Laboratories Limited ( Mylan India ), which is included within Rest of World in our Generics segment. Specialty engages mainly in the manufacture and sale of branded specialty injectable and nebulized products. We also report in Corporate/Other certain R&D expenses, general and administrative expenses, litigation settlements, amortization of intangible assets and certain purchase accounting items, impairment charges, if any, and other items not directly attributable to the segments. Significant recent events include the following: Abbott Branded Generics Business On July 13, 2014 , the Company entered into a definitive agreement with Abbott to acquire Abbott s non-U.S. developed markets specialty and branded generics business (the Business ) in an all-stock transaction. On November 4, 2014 , the Company and Abbott entered into an amended and restated definitive agreement implementing the transaction (the Transaction Agreement ). The transaction, defined below, closed on February 27, 2015 , after receiving approval from Mylan shareholders on January 29, 2015 . At closing, Abbott transferred the Business to Mylan N.V. , ( New Mylan ) in exchange for 110 million ordinary shares of New Mylan . Immediately after the transfer of the Business, Mylan merged with a wholly owned subsidiary of New Mylan (together with the transfer of the Business, the Transaction ), with Mylan becoming a wholly owned indirect subsidiary of New Mylan . Mylan s outstanding common stock was exchanged on a one to one basis for New Mylan ordinary shares. As a result of the Transaction, New Mylan s corporate seat is located in Amsterdam, the Netherlands , and its principal executive offices are located in Potters Bar, United Kingdom . New Mylan will also have global centers of excellence in the U.S., Europe and India. The Business includes more than 100 specialty and branded generic pharmaceutical products in five major therapeutic areas and includes several patent protected, novel and/or hard-to-manufacture products. As a result of the acquisition, Mylan N.V. has significantly expanded and strengthened its product portfolio in Europe, Japan, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. The purchase price of the Transaction, which was on a debt-free basis, was $6.31 billion based on the closing price of Mylan stock as of the Transaction closing date, as reported by the NASDAQ Stock Market . As a result of the Transaction, Mylan shareholders own approximately 78% of New Mylan and Abbott s affiliates own approximately 22% of New Mylan . New Mylan and Abbott entered into a shareholder agreement in connection with the Transaction. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, New Mylan will use the purchase method of accounting to account for this Transaction with Mylan being treated as the accounting acquirer. Agila Specialties On February 27, 2013 , the Company announced that it signed definitive agreements to acquire Agila Specialties businesses ( Agila ), a developer, manufacturer and marketer of high-quality generic injectable products, from Strides Arcolab Limited ( Strides Arcolab ). The transaction closed on December 4, 2013 , and the total purchase price was approximately $1.43 billion (net of cash acquired of $3.4 million ), which included estimated contingent consideration of $250 million . During the three months ended September 30, 2014 , the Company entered into an agreement with Strides Arcolab to settle a portion of the contingent consideration for $150 million , for which the Company had accrued $230 million at the acquisition date. As a result of this agreement, the Company recognized a gain of $80 million during the year ended December 31, 2014 , which is included in other operating (income) expense, net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations . The remaining contingent consideration, which could total a maximum of $211 million , is primarily related to the satisfaction of certain regulatory conditions, including potential regulatory remediation costs and the resolution of certain pre-acquisition contingencies. The acquisition of Agila significantly expanded and strengthened Mylan 's injectables platform and portfolio, and also provided Mylan entry into certain new geographic markets. 53 Other Transactions On February 2, 2015 , the Company signed a definitive agreement to acquire certain female health care businesses from Famy Care Limited ( Famy Care ), a specialty women health care company with global leadership in generic oral contraceptive products. The purchase price is $750 million in cash plus additional contingent payments of up to $50 million . The transaction is expected to close in the second half of 2015, subject to regulatory approvals and certain closing conditions. On January 30, 2015 , the Company entered into a development and commercialization collaboration with Theravance Biopharma, Inc. ( Theravance Biopharma ) for the development and, subject to U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) approval, commercialization of TD-4208, a novel once-daily nebulized long-acting muscarinic antagonist ( LAMA ) for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) and other respiratory diseases. Under the terms of the agreement, Mylan and Theravance Biopharma will co-develop nebulized TD-4208 for COPD and other respiratory diseases. Theravance Biopharma will lead the U.S. registrational development program and Mylan will be responsible for reimbursement of Theravance Biopharma's costs for that program up until the approval of the first new drug application, after which costs will be shared. In addition, Mylan will be responsible for commercial manufacturing. In the U.S., Mylan will lead commercialization and Theravance Biopharma will retain the right to co-promote the product under a profit-sharing arrangement. In addition to funding the U.S. registrational development program, Mylan will pay Theravance Biopharma an initial payment of $15 million in the second quarter of 2015 and made a $30 million equity investment in Theravance Biopharma. Under the terms of the agreement, Theravance Biopharma is eligible to receive potential development and sales milestone payments totaling $220 million in the aggregate. On September 10, 2014 , the Company entered into an agreement with Aspen Global Incorporated to acquire the U.S. commercialization, marketing and intellectual property rights related to Arixtra Injection ( Arixtra ) and the authorized generic rights of Arixtra. The purchase price for this intangible asset was $300 million , of which $225 million was paid at the closing of the transaction on September 25, 2014 . An additional $37.5 million was paid during the fourth quarter of 2014 . The remaining $37.5 million is held in escrow and will be released upon satisfaction of certain conditions. Senior Credit Facilities and Issuance of Senior Notes In December 2014, the Company entered into a new Revolving Credit Agreement with a syndication of lenders, which contains a $1.5 billion revolving facility (the New Revolving Facility ). The New Revolving Facility includes a $150 million subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit and a $125 million subfacility for swingline borrowings. Amounts drawn on the New Revolving Facility become due and payable on December 19, 2019 . In December 2014, the Company also entered into a new Term Credit Agreement with a syndicate of banks which provided an $800 million term loan ( 2014 Term Loan ). The 2014 Term Loan matures on December 19, 2017 and has no required amortization payments. The proceeds of the 2014 Term Loan were used for working capital expenditures and to repay outstanding borrowings under the Company credit agreement entered into in June 2013 (the June 2013 Credit Agreement ). Borrowings under the June 2013 Credit Agreement were used to fund the redemption of the November 2018 Senior Notes. In January 2015, Mylan Securitization LLC ( Mylan Securitization ) entered into a new accounts receivable securitization facility with a group of financial institutions and commercial paper conduits sponsored by financial institutions (the Receivables Facility ). The Receivables Facility has a committed balance of $400 million, although from time-to-time, the available amount of the Receivables Facility may be less than $400 million based on accounts receivable concentration limits and other eligibility requirements. The Receivables Facility matures in January 2018. In November 2013, we issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of registered Senior Notes, comprised of 1.350% Senior Notes due 2016, 2.550% Senior Notes due 2019, 4.200% Senior Notes due 2023 and 5.400% Senior Notes due 2043. The net proceeds from the offering were used to fund the acquisition of Agila and for general corporate purposes, including, but not limited to, the repayment of short-term borrowings and funding of the share repurchase program executed in the fourth quarter of 2013. In June 2013, we issued $1.15 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.800% Senior Notes due 2016 and 2.600% Senior Notes due 2018 ( June 2013 Senior Notes ) in a private offering exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act to qualified institutional buyers in accordance with Rule 144A and to persons outside of the United States pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. The Company filed a registration statement with the SEC with respect to an offer to exchange these notes for registered notes with the same aggregate principal amount and terms substantially identical in all material respects. This registration statement was declared effective on January 31, 2014 and the exchange offer was 54 completed on March 4, 2014. Net proceeds from the June 2013 Senior Notes were used to repay all of its outstanding $1.13 billion 2011 Term Loans and for general corporate purposes. Financial Summary For the year ended December 31, 2014 , Mylan reported total revenues of $7.72 billion compared to $6.91 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 . This represents an increase in revenues of $810.5 million , or 11.7% . Consolidated gross profit for the current year was $3.53 billion , compared to $3.04 billion in the prior year, an increase of $487.7 million , or 16.0% . For the current year, earnings from operations were $1.35 billion , as compared to $1.14 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 , an increase of $217.1 million , or 19.1% . Net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. common shareholders increased $305.7 million , or 49.0% , to $929.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2014 compared to $623.7 million for the prior year. Diluted earnings per common share attributable to Mylan Inc. increased 48.1% from $1.58 to $2.34 for the year ended December 31, 2014 compared to the prior year. 55 A detailed discussion of the Company financial results can be found below in the section titled Results of Operations. As part of this discussion, we also report sales performance using the non-GAAP financial measure of constant currency sales. This measure provides information on the change in net sales assuming that foreign currency exchange rates had not changed between the prior and current period. The comparisons presented at constant currency rates reflect comparative local currency sales at the prior year's foreign exchange rates. We routinely evaluate our third party net sales performance at constant currency so that sales results can be viewed without the impact of foreign currency exchange rates, thereby facilitating a period-to-period comparison of our operational activities, and believe that this presentation also provides useful information to investors for the same reason. The following table compares third party net sales on an actual and constant currency basis for each reportable segment and the geographic regions within the Generics segment for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012. Year Ended 2014 2013 December 31, Percent Change Percent Change 2014 2013 2012 Actual Constant Currency Actual Constant Currency Generics: Third party net sales North America $ 3,361.2 $ 3,006.6 $ 3,225.4 12 % 12 % (7 )% (7 )% Europe 1,476.8 1,429.7 1,297.6 3 % 3 % 10 % 8 % Rest of World 1,621.3 1,438.6 1,391.9 13 % 18 % 3 % 14 % Total third party net sales 6,459.3 5,874.9 5,914.9 10 % 11 % (1 )% 1 % Other third party revenues 51.1 25.8 31.3 Total third party revenues 6,510.4 5,900.7 5,946.2 Intersegment sales 4.7 5.7 3.1 Generics total revenues 6,515.1 5,906.4 5,949.3 Specialty: Third party net sales 1,187.2 981.7 835.4 21 % 21 % 18 % 18 % Other third party revenues 22.0 26.8 14.6 Total third party revenues 1,209.2 1,008.5 850.0 Intersegment sales 9.0 19.3 37.0 Specialty total revenues 1,218.2 1,027.8 887.0 Elimination of intersegment sales (13.7 ) (25.1 ) (40.2 ) Consolidated total revenues $ 7,719.6 $ 6,909.1 $ 6,796.1 12 % 13 % 2 % 3 % More information about other non-GAAP measures used by the Company as part of this discussion, including Adjusted Cost of Sales, Adjusted Gross Margins, Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS can be found in Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations - Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures. Results of Operations 2014 Compared to 2013 Total Revenues and Gross Profit For the year ended December 31, 2014 , Mylan reported total revenues of $7.72 billion compared to $6.91 billion in the prior year. Total revenues include both net sales and other revenues from third parties. Third party net sales for the current year were $7.65 billion compared to $6.86 billion for the prior year, representing an increase of $789.9 million , or 11.5% . Other 56 third party revenues for the current year were $73.1 million compared to $52.5 million in the prior year, an increase of $20.6 million . Mylan s current year revenues were unfavorably impacted by the effect of foreign currency translation, primarily reflecting changes in the U.S. Dollar as compared to the currencies of Mylan s subsidiaries in India, Japan, Australia and Canada. The unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation on current year total revenues was approximately $86 million , or 1% . As such, constant currency total revenues increased approximately $897 million , or 13% . The increase in constant currency total revenues was the result of double digit third party net sales growth in the Specialty and Generics segments, which included growth in all regions. The contribution from new products, and to a lesser extent, net sales from acquired businesses, totaled approximately $593 million in 2014 . Constant currency net sales from existing products increased approximately $283 million as a result of constant currency increases in volume of approximately $203 million and in pricing of approximately $80 million . In arriving at net sales, gross sales are reduced by provisions for estimates, including discounts, rebates, promotions, price adjustments, returns and chargebacks. See the section titled Application of Critical Accounting Policies in this Item 7, for a discussion of our methodology with respect to such provisions. For 2014 , the most significant amounts charged against gross sales were $3.47 billion related to chargebacks and $1.55 billion related to incentives offered to our direct customers, such as promotions and volume related incentives. For 2013 , the most significant amounts charged against gross sales were for chargebacks in the amount of $2.35 billion and incentives offered to our direct customers in the amount of $1.64 billion . Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2014 was $4.19 billion , compared to $3.87 billion in the prior year. Cost of sales for the current year was impacted by the amortization of acquired intangible assets of approximately $403.6 million and restructuring and other special items of approximately $113.7 million as described further in the section titled Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures. The prior year comparable period cost of sales included similar purchase accounting related amortization of approximately $369.1 million and restructuring and other special items of approximately $54.7 million . The increase in current year purchase accounting related amortization and restructuring and other special items is principally the result of increased acquisition related costs and amortization expense as a result of the Agila acquisition, which was completed in late 2013. Excluding purchase accounting related amortization and restructuring and other special items, Adjusted Cost of Sales in the current year increased to $3.67 billion from $3.45 billion , corresponding to the increase in net sales. Gross profit for the current year was $3.53 billion and gross margins were 45.7% . For 2013 , gross profit was $3.04 billion , and gross margins were 44.0% . Excluding the purchase accounting related amortization and restructuring and other special items discussed in the paragraph above, Adjusted Gross Margins were approximately 52% and 50% in 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Adjusted Gross Margins were favorably impacted in the current year as a result of new product introductions by approximately 180 basis points and favorable pricing and volume on the EpiPen Auto-Injector in our Specialty segment by approximately 45 basis points. These increases were partially offset by lower pricing on existing products within the Generics segment. From time to time, a limited number of our products may represent a significant portion of our net sales, gross profit and net earnings. Generally, this is due to the timing of new product launches and the amount, if any, of additional competition in the market. Our top ten products in terms of sales, in the aggregate, represented approximately 33% and 31% of the Company total revenues in 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Generics Segment For the current year, Generics third party net sales were $6.46 billion compared to $5.87 billion in the prior year, an increase of $584.5 million , or 9.9% . Foreign currency had an unfavorable impact on third party net sales for the current year. Generics constant currency third party net sales for the current year increased by approximately $671 million , or 11% when compared to the prior year. Third party net sales from North America were $3.36 billion for the current year, compared to $3.01 billion for the prior year, representing an increase of $354.6 million , or 11.8% . The increase in current year third party net sales was principally due to net sales from new products, and to a lesser extent, net sales from acquired businesses totaling approximately $480 million . This increase was partially offset by lower volumes on existing products. The effect of foreign currency translation was insignificant within North America. Products generally contribute most significantly to revenues and gross margins at the time of their launch, even more so in periods of market exclusivity, or in periods of limited generic competition. As such, the timing of new product introductions can have a significant impact on the Company financial results. The entrance into the market of additional 57 competition generally has a negative impact on the volume and pricing of the affected products. Additionally, pricing is often affected by factors outside of the Company control. Third party net sales from Europe were $1.48 billion in 2014 , compared to $1.43 billion in 2013 , an increase of $47.1 million , or 3.3% . This increase was the result of increased volumes in France, Italy and the United Kingdom ( U.K. ) as well as new product net sales. Partially offsetting this increase was lower pricing in a number of European markets in which Mylan operates, as a result of government-imposed pricing reductions and competitive market conditions. The effect of foreign currency translation was insignificant within Europe. Local currency third party net sales from Mylan s businesses in France, Italy and the U.K. increased compared to the prior year as a result of new product launches and higher volumes on existing products partially offset by the impact of lower pricing due to government-imposed pricing reductions and an increasingly competitive market. Our market share in France remained relatively stable in 2014 as compared to 2013 , and we remain the market leader. In addition to France, Italy and the U.K., certain other markets in which we do business, including Spain, have undergone government-imposed price reductions, and further government-imposed price reductions are expected in the future. Such measures, along with the tender systems discussed below, are likely to have a negative impact on revenues and gross profit in these markets. However, government initiatives in certain markets that appear to favor generic products could help to mitigate this unfavorable effect by increasing rates of generic substitution and penetration. A number of markets in which we operate have implemented or may implement tender systems for generic pharmaceuticals in an effort to lower prices. Generally speaking, tender systems can have an unfavorable impact on revenue and profitability. Under such tender systems, manufacturers submit bids that establish prices for generic pharmaceutical products. Upon winning the tender, the winning company will receive a preferential reimbursement for a period of time. The tender system often results in companies underbidding one another by proposing low pricing in order to win the tender. Additionally, the loss of a tender by a third party to whom we supply API can also have a negative impact on our sales and profitability. Sales, primarily in Germany, continue to be negatively affected by the impact of tender systems. In Rest of World, third party net sales were $1.62 billion in 2014 , compared to $1.44 billion in 2013 , an increase of $182.7 million , or 12.7% . Rest of World constant currency third party net sales increased by approximately $260 million , or 18% . This increase was primarily driven by higher third party net sales by our operations in India as a result of strong growth in the antiretroviral ( ARV ) franchise, as well as constant currency growth in Japan. Sales were also positively impacted by increases in net sales from new products and acquired businesses. The increase in third party net sales from our operations in India is due to significant growth in sales of finished dosage form ( FDF ) ARV products used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS. In addition to third party net sales, Rest of World region also supplies both FDF generic products and API to Mylan subsidiaries in conjunction with the Company vertical integration strategy. Intercompany sales recognized by Rest of World region were $714.0 million in 2014 , compared to $678.3 million in the prior year. These intercompany sales eliminate within, and therefore are not included in Generics or consolidated third party net sales. In Japan, third party net sales increased as a result of new product introductions. The Company continues to see Japan as a key region for future sales growth as the market expands. In Australia, local currency third party net sales decreased versus the prior year as a result of significant government-imposed pricing reform and reduced volumes, partially offset by new product sales. As in Europe, both Australia and Japan have undergone government-imposed price reductions which have had, and could continue to have, a negative impact on sales and gross profit in these markets. Specialty Segment For the current year, Specialty reported third party net sales of $1.19 billion , an increase of $205.5 million , or 20.9% , from the prior year of $981.7 million . The increase was principally the result of higher sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector , which is used in the treatment of severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis), as a result of favorable pricing and increased volume. The EpiPen Auto-Injector is the number one dispensed epinephrine auto-injector and, in 2014 it became the first Mylan product to reach $1 billion in annual net sales. The market continues to grow as awareness of the risk of anaphylaxis increases. In addition, sales of the Perforomist Inhalation Solution increased by double digits from the prior year as a result of favorable pricing. 58 Operating Expenses Research & Development Expense R&D expense in 2014 was $581.8 million , compared to $507.8 million in the same prior year period, an increase of $74.0 million . R&D increased primarily due to the continued development of our respiratory and biologics programs as well as the timing of internal and external product development projects, including increased clinical activities, payroll and material costs. These increases were partially offset by a decline in up front licensing and milestone payments, which totaled approximately $18 million in 2014 compared to approximately $49 million in the prior year. Selling, General & Administrative Expense Selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expense for the current year was $1.63 billion , compared to $1.41 billion for the prior year, an increase of $217.2 million . SG&A increased due to increased selling and marketing costs of approximately $52 million , primarily related to the EpiPen Auto-Injector , which includes our direct-to-consumer marketing campaign. Additionally, as we continue to build our infrastructure in certain areas, we experienced increased employee costs of approximately $60 million and software implementation costs of approximately $13 million . To support anticipated new product launches within the North America region of the Generics segment, legal costs increased approximately $11 million during 2014. In addition the Company incurred a current year loss on the disposal of certain assets of approximately $16 million and increased costs related to acquisitions of approximately $31 million . Litigation Settlements, Net During 2014 , the Company recorded a $47.9 million net charge for litigation settlements, compared to a net gain of $14.6 million in the prior year. The charge in the current year was primarily related to the settlement of a European Commission matter of $21.7 million , the settlement of an intellectual property matter and, to a lesser extent, litigation settlements related to product liability claims. In the prior year, the Company recognized a gain related to the settlement of patent-infringement matters totaling approximately $25 million , including recoveries related to product launches. These recoveries were offset by a $10.3 million charge related to the settlement of a European Commission matter. Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net During 2014 , the Company recognized a gain of $80.0 million as a result of an agreement with Strides Arcolab to settle a component of the contingent consideration related to the Agila acquisition. The gain recognized relates to the recovery of lost revenues in 2014 arising from supply disruptions that resulted from on-going quality-enhancement activities initiated at certain Agila facilities prior to the Company acquisition of Agila in 2013 . In the prior year period, the Company recognized a charge of $3.1 million related to fair value adjustments to contingent consideration. Interest Expense Interest expense for 2014 totaled $333.2 million , compared to $313.3 million for 2013 . The increase in the current year is principally due to higher average debt balances, higher interest expense related to clean energy investments and non-cash accretion of contingent consideration liabilities. Included in interest expense is non-cash interest, primarily made up of the amortization of the discounts and premiums on our convertible debt instruments and senior notes totaling $30.2 million for the current period and $28.2 million for the prior year. Also included in interest expense is accretion of our contingent consideration liability related to certain acquisitions, which was $35.3 million in the current year compared to $32.3 million in the prior year. Other Expense (Income), Net Other expense (income), net , was expense of $44.9 million in the current year, compared to expense of $74.9 million in the prior year. Other expense (income), net includes losses from equity affiliates, foreign exchange gains and losses and interest and dividend income. In the current year, other expense (income), net included losses from equity affiliates of approximately $91 million , principally related to the Company clean energy investments, charges of approximately $33 million related to the redemption of the 6.000% Senior Notes due 2018 and the termination of forward starting swaps, partially offset by foreign exchange gains of approximately $78 million . In the prior year, the Company incurred charges of approximately $64 million related to the redemption of the 7.625% Senior Notes due in 2017, comprised of the redemption premium and the write-off of deferred financing fees, as well as charges of approximately $9 million in conjunction with the June 2013 Credit Agreement refinancing transaction related to the write-off of deferred financing fees. 59 Income Tax Expense We recorded income tax expense of $41.4 million in 2014 , compared to income tax expense of $120.8 million in 2013 , a decrease of $79.4 million . This decrease was primarily due to the Company receiving approvals in 2014 from the relevant Indian regulatory authorities to legally merge its wholly owned subsidiaries, Agila Specialties Private Limited and Onco Therapies Limited, into Mylan Laboratories Limited. The merger resulted in the recognition of a deferred tax asset of approximately $150 million for the tax deductible goodwill in excess of the book goodwill with a corresponding benefit to income tax expense. In addition, during 2014 , the Company recorded an increase in tax credits as a result of additional investments in facilities whose production is eligible for tax credits under Section 45 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended of (the Code ). Partially offsetting these items were increases in valuation allowances for net operating losses in foreign jurisdictions, lower net foreign tax credit benefits and additional amounts of uncertain tax positions in 2014 . 2013 Compared to 2012 Total Revenues and Gross Profit For the year ended December 31, 2013 , Mylan reported total revenues of $6.91 billion compared to $6.80 billion in 2012 . Total revenues include both net sales and other revenues from third parties. Third party net sales for 2013 were $6.86 billion compared to $6.75 billion for 2012 , representing an increase of $106.4 million , or 1.6% . Other third party revenues for 2013 were $52.5 million compared to $45.9 million in 2012 , an increase of $6.6 million . Mylan s 2013 revenues were unfavorably impacted by the effect of foreign currency translation, primarily reflecting changes in the U.S. Dollar as compared to the currencies of Mylan s subsidiaries in India, Australia and Japan. The unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation on 2013 total revenues was approximately $123 million , or 2% . As such, constant currency total revenues increased approximately $236 million , or 3% . The contribution from new product launches in 2013 of approximately $285 million was not as significant as the contribution in 2012 of approximately $922 million , a decline of approximately 69% . The North America region of the Generics segment accounted for the majority of this decline in the contribution from new product net sales in 2013 versus 2012 . Offsetting the decline in new product net sales was 14% constant currency revenue growth in Rest of World region of the Generics segment and 18% constant currency revenue growth in the Specialty segment. Constant currency net sales from existing products decreased approximately $56 million . The decrease was driven by a pricing decline of approximately $377 million due to lower pricing within both Generics, partially offset by favorable pricing within Specialty. The pricing decline was partially offset by incremental volume within both Generics and Specialty, which contributed approximately $321 million to 2013 sales. The operating results of Agila were included in Mylan s consolidated financial statements since the acquisition date, December 4, 2013, and were not material. In arriving at net sales, gross revenues are reduced by provisions for estimates, including discounts, rebates, promotions, price adjustments, returns and chargebacks. See the section titled Application of Critical Accounting Policies in this Item 7, for a discussion of our methodology with respect to such provisions. For 2013 , the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were $2.35 billion related to chargebacks and $1.64 billion related to incentives offered to our direct customers, such as promotions and volume related incentives. For 2012 , the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were for chargebacks in the amount of $2.35 billion and incentives offered to our direct customers in the amount of $1.67 billion . Cost of sales for 2013 was $3.87 billion , compared to $3.89 billion in 2012 . Cost of sales in 2013 was impacted by the amortization of acquired intangible assets, and restructuring and other special items as described further in the section titled Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures. These items totaled approximately $423.8 million in 2013 . Cost of sales for 2012 included similar purchase accounting and restructuring and other special items in the amount of $456.8 million . The decrease in 2013 of purchase accounting and restructuring and other special items was principally the result of a $41.6 million in-process research and development ( IPR&D ) impairment charge in 2012 as compared to an impairment charge of $18.0 million in 2013 . Excluding these amounts, Adjusted Cost of Sales increased in 2013 to $3.45 billion from $3.43 billion , corresponding to the increase in sales. Gross profit for 2013 was $3.04 billion and gross margins were 44.0% . For 2012 , gross profit was $2.91 billion , and gross margins were 42.8% . Excluding the purchase accounting, restructuring and other special items discussed in the paragraph above, Adjusted Gross Margins were approximately 50% in both 2013 and 2012 . Gross margins were favorably impacted in 2013 as a result of new product introductions by approximately 130 basis points and favorable pricing and volume on EpiPen Auto-Injector in our Specialty segment by approximately 70 basis points. These increases were almost entirely offset by lower pricing on existing products within the Generics segment. 60 From time to time, a limited number of our products may represent a significant portion of our net sales, gross profit and net earnings. Generally, this is due to the timing of new product launches and the amount, if any, of additional competition in the market. Our top ten products in terms of sales, in the aggregate, represented approximately 31% and 28% of total revenues in 2013 and 2012 , respectively. Generics Segment For 2013 , Generics third party net sales were $5.87 billion compared to $5.91 billion in 2012 , a decrease of $40.0 million , or 0.7% . Generics constant currency third party net sales for 2013 increased by approximately $83 million , or 1% . Third party net sales from North America were $3.01 billion for 2013 , compared to $3.23 billion for 2012 , representing a decrease of $218.8 million , or 6.8% . The decrease in 2013 third party net sales was due to a greater amount of net sales from new product launches in 2012 versus 2013 . Third party net sales from new product launches totaled approximately $198 million in 2013 , compared to $784 million in 2012 , a decrease of approximately 75% . The effect of foreign currency translation was insignificant within North America. Products generally contribute most significantly to revenues and gross margins at the time of their launch, even more so in periods of market exclusivity, or in periods of limited generic competition. As such, the timing of new product introductions can have a significant impact on Mylan s financial results. The entrance into the market of additional competition generally has a negative impact on the volume and pricing of the affected products. Additionally, pricing is often affected by factors outside of the Company control. Third party net sales from Europe were $1.43 billion in 2013 , compared to $1.30 billion in 2012 , an increase of $132.1 million , or 10.2% . Constant currency third party net sales from Europe in 2013 resulted in a year-over-year increase of approximately $98 million , or 8% . This increase was the result of a double-digit increase in constant currency third party net sales in France and Italy as a result of net sales from new products and favorable volumes. Partially offsetting this increase was lower pricing in a number of European markets in which Mylan operates, as a result of government imposed pricing reductions and competitive market conditions. Local currency third party net sales from Mylan s businesses in France and Italy increased in 2013 as compared to 2012 as a result of new product launches and higher volumes on existing products partially offset by the impact of lower pricing due to government-imposed pricing reductions and an increasingly competitive market. Our market share in France remained relatively stable in 2013 as compared to 2012 , and we remain the market leader. In the U.K., local currency third party net sales increased by double digits in 2013 versus 2012 as a result of favorable pricing on existing products combined with new product introductions. In addition to France and Italy, certain other markets in which we do business, including Spain, have undergone government-imposed price reductions, and further government-imposed price reductions are expected in the future. Such measures, along with the tender systems discussed below, are likely to have a negative impact on net sales and gross profit in these markets. However, government initiatives in certain markets that appear to favor generic products could help to mitigate this unfavorable effect by potentially increasing rates of generic substitution and penetration. A number of markets in which we operate have implemented tender systems for generic pharmaceuticals in an effort to lower prices. Generally speaking, tender systems can have an unfavorable impact on revenue and profitability. Under such tender systems, manufacturers submit bids which establish prices for generic pharmaceutical products. Upon winning the tender, the winning company will receive a preferential reimbursement for a period of time. The tender system often results in companies underbidding one another by proposing low pricing in order to win the tender. Additionally, the loss of a tender by a third party to whom we supply API can also have a negative impact on our sales and profitability. Sales, primarily in Germany, continue to be negatively affected by the impact of tender systems. In Rest of World, third party net sales were $1.44 billion in 2013 , compared to $1.39 billion in 2012 , an increase of $46.7 million , or 3.4% . Rest of World constant currency third party net sales would have increased by approximately $200 million , or 14% . This increase was primarily driven by higher third party net sales by our operations in India, particularly in the ARV franchise, as well as double digit constant currency growth in Japan. The increase in third party net sales from our operations in India was due to significant growth in sales of ARV products used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS, both as FDF generic products and API. In addition to third party net sales, Rest of 61 World region also supplied both FDF generic products and API to Mylan subsidiaries in conjunction with Mylan vertical integration strategy. Intercompany sales recognized by Rest of World region were $678.3 million in 2013 , compared to $595.6 million in 2012 . These intercompany sales eliminate within, and therefore are not included in, Generics or consolidated net sales. In Japan, third party net sales increased by double digits as a result of higher volumes and new product introductions. In Australia, local currency third party net sales were slightly lower in 2013 than 2012 as a result of significant government-imposed pricing reform, partially offset by new product sales and incremental volumes on existing products. As in Europe, both Australia and Japan have undergone government-imposed price reductions which have had a negative impact on sales and gross profit in these markets. Specialty Segment For 2013 , Specialty reported third party net sales of $981.7 million , an increase of $146.3 million , or 17.6% , from third party net sales in 2012 of $835.4 million . The increase was principally the result of higher sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector , which is used in the treatment of severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis), as a result of favorable pricing and increased volumes. The EpiPen Auto-Injector is the number one dispensed epinephrine auto-injector. The market continues to grow as awareness of the risk of anaphylaxis increases. In addition, sales of the Perforomist Inhalation Solution increased by double digits from 2012 as a result of favorable pricing. Operating Expenses Research & Development Expense R&D expense in 2013 was $507.8 million , compared to $401.3 million in 2012 , an increase of $106.5 million . R&D increased in 2013 primarily due to the expenses related to the development of our respiratory and biologics programs as well as the timing of internal and external product development projects. In addition, during 2013 the Company incurred up front licensing and milestone payments of approximately $49.4 million . Selling, General & Administrative Expense SG&A expense for 2013 was $1.41 billion , compared to $1.39 billion for 2012 , an increase of $16.1 million . Primary factors contributing to the increase in SG&A include an increase in certain payroll and related employee benefit costs of approximately $42 million as we continue to build out our infrastructure in certain areas and costs related to acquisitions of approximately $37 million . These items were partially offset by lower sales and marketing costs in Japan of approximately $29 million , as a result of the collaboration with Pfizer Japan Inc. ( Pfizer Japan ) and lower marketing and advertising related costs within our Specialty segment of approximately $14 million . Litigation Settlements, Net During 2013 , the Company recorded a $14.6 million net gain for litigation settlements, compared to a net gain of $3.1 million during 2012 . The net gain in litigation settlements in 2013 was principally related to recoveries of lost profits in patent-infringement matters totaling approximately $25 million , including recoveries related to product launches. These recoveries were partially offset by a $10.3 million charge related to a European Commission matter. In 2012 , the Company recorded a $3.1 million net gain comprised of gains of approximately $34 million for the favorable resolution of patent infringement matters, partially offset by an approximate $20 million charge related to pricing litigation matters and other patent infringement matters. Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net In 2013, the Company recognized a charge of $3.1 million related to fair value adjustments to contingent consideration. In 2012, the Company recognized a charge of $8.3 million related to fair value adjustments to contingent consideration. Interest Expense Interest expense for 2013 totaled $313.3 million , compared to $308.7 million for 2012 . The increase in 2013 was primarily due to higher interest expense related to clean energy investments and non-cash accretion of contingent consideration liabilities. Included in interest expense is the amortization of discounts and premiums on our convertible debt instruments and 62 senior notes, which totaled $28.2 million in 2013 and $29.4 million in 2012 . Also included in interest expense for 2013 was $32.3 million of accretion of our contingent consideration liability compared to $30.7 million in 2012. Other Expense (Income), Net Other expense (income), net , was expense of $74.9 million in 2013 compared to income of $3.5 million in 2012 . Other expense (income), net in 2013 included charges of approximately $63.9 million related to the redemption of the 7.625% Senior Notes due 2017, comprised of the redemption premium and the write-off of deferred financing fees. In addition, the Company incurred charges of approximately $8.7 million related to the write-off of deferred financing fees in conjunction with the refinancing of the senior credit facility. Also included are losses from equity affiliates, foreign exchange transaction gains and losses and interest and dividend income. Income Tax Expense We recorded income tax expense of $120.8 million in 2013 compared to income tax expense of $161.2 million in 2012 , a decrease of $40.4 million . This decrease was primarily due to a lower pre-tax income; an increase in business tax credits as a result of additional investments made during the year in facilities whose production is eligible for credits under Section 45 of the Code; a reduction in income subject to tax in the U.S.; and the retroactive effect of federal tax legislation enacted in January 2013 . Partially offsetting these items were increases in valuation allowances for net operating losses in foreign jurisdictions, lower net foreign tax credit benefits and lower releases and settlements of uncertain tax positions in 2013 . Also affecting the Company changes to its tax provision were higher levels of income earned in jurisdictions with tax rates below the U.S. rate. Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures Whenever the Company uses non-GAAP financial measures, it will provide a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure. Investors and other readers are encouraged to review the related U.S. GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure set forth below and should consider non-GAAP measures only as a supplement to, not as a substitute for or as a superior measure to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Additionally, since these are not measures determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, they have no standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP and, therefore, may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. Adjusted Cost of Sales and Adjusted Gross Margin We use the non-GAAP financial measure Adjusted Cost of Sales and the corresponding Adjusted Gross Margin. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures are useful supplemental information for our investors and when considered together with our U.S. GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, provide a more complete understanding of the factors and trends affecting our operations. The principal items excluded from Adjusted Cost of Sales include acquisition related items and restructuring and other special items, both of which are described in greater detail below. 63 A reconciliation between cost of sales, as reported under U.S. GAAP, and Adjusted Cost of Sales and Adjusted Gross Margin for the periods shown follows: Year Ended December 31, 2014 2013 2012 GAAP cost of sales $ 4,191.6 $ 3,868.8 $ 3,887.8 Deduct: Purchase accounting related amortization (403.6 ) (369.1 ) (391.1 ) Restructuring & other special items (113.7 ) (54.7 ) (65.7 ) Adjusted cost of sales $ 3,674.3 $ 3,445.0 $ 3,431.0 Adjusted gross profit (a) $ 4,045.3 $ 3,464.1 $ 3,365.1 Adjusted gross margin (a) 52 % 50 % 50 % ____________ (a) Adjusted Gross Profit is calculated as total revenues less Adjusted Cost of Sales. Adjusted Gross Margin is calculated as Adjusted Gross Profit divided by total revenue. Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS Adjusted Earnings is a non-GAAP financial measure and provides an alternative view of performance used by management. Management believes that, primarily due to acquisitions, an evaluation of the Company ongoing operations (and comparisons of its current operations with historical and future operations) would be difficult if the disclosure of its financial results were limited to financial measures prepared only in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted Earnings per Diluted Share ( Adjusted EPS ) are two of the most important internal financial metrics related to the ongoing operating performance of the Company, and management also believes that investors understanding of our performance is enhanced by these adjusted measures. Actual internal and forecasted operating results and annual budgets include Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS, and the financial performance of the Company is measured by senior management on this basis along with other performance metrics. Management annual incentive compensation is derived in part based on the Adjusted EPS metric. The significant items excluded from Adjusted Cost of Sales, Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS include: Acquisition-Related Items The ongoing impact of certain amounts recorded in connection with acquisitions is excluded from Adjusted Cost of Sales, Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS. These amounts include the amortization of intangible assets and inventory step-up, intangible asset impairment charges (including IPR&D), accretion and the fair value adjustments related to contingent consideration and certain acquisition financing related costs. These costs are excluded because management believes that excluding them is helpful to understanding the underlying, ongoing operational performance of the business. Restructuring and Other Special Items Costs related to restructuring and other actions are excluded from Adjusted Cost of Sales, Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS, as applicable. These amounts include items such as: Exit costs associated with facilities to be closed or divested, including employee separation costs, impairment charges, accelerated depreciation, incremental manufacturing variances, equipment relocation costs and other exit costs; Certain acquisition related integration costs, as well as other costs associated with acquisitions and other business transformation and/or optimization initiatives, which are not part of a formal restructuring program, including employee separation and post-employment costs; 64 Certain transition and other costs associated with the ratification of a new collective bargaining agreement in 2012 governing certain employees at our Morgantown, West Virginia manufacturing facility, including the withdrawal obligation from a multi-employer pension plan; The pre-tax loss of the Company investments in clean energy investments, whose activities qualify for income tax credits under Section 45 of the Code; only included in Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS is the net tax effect of the entity activities; Certain costs to further develop and optimize our global enterprise resource planning systems, operations and supply chain; and Certain costs related to new operations and significant alliances/business partnerships, including certain upfront and/or milestone research and development related payments. The Company has undertaken restructurings and other optimization initiatives of differing types, scope and amount during the covered periods and, therefore, these charges should not be considered non-recurring; however, management excludes these amounts from Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS because it believes it is helpful to understanding the underlying, ongoing operational performance of the business. Litigation Settlements, net Charges and gains related to legal matters, such as those discussed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 14 , Contingencies are generally excluded from Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS. Normal, ongoing defense costs of the Company made in the normal course of our business are not excluded. 65 Reconciliation of Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS A reconciliation between net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. common shareholders and diluted earnings per share attributable to Mylan Inc. common shareholders, as reported under U.S. GAAP, and Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS for the periods shown follows: Year Ended December 31, (In millions, except per share amounts) 2014 2013 2012 GAAP net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. and GAAP diluted EPS $ 929.4 $ 2.34 $ 623.7 $ 1.58 $ 640.9 $ 1.52 Purchase accounting related amortization (primarily included in cost of sales) (a) 419.0 371.1 391.1 Litigation settlements, net 47.9 (9.9 ) (3.0 ) Interest expense, primarily amortization of convertible debt discount 46.0 38.0 35.6 Non-cash accretion and fair value adjustments of contingent consideration liability 35.3 35.4 38.7 Clean energy investment subsidiary pre-tax loss (b) 78.9 22.4 16.8 Financing related costs (included in other income, net) 33.3 72.6 Acquisition related costs (primarily included in cost of sales and selling, general and administrative expense) 139.5 49.8 Restructuring and other special items included in: Cost of sales 45.1 49.3 65.7 Research and development expense 17.9 51.6 12.4 Selling, general and administrative expense 66.9 70.6 104.9 Other income (expense), net (10.9 ) 25.2 (0.7 ) Tax effect of the above items and other income tax related items (c) (432.0 ) (259.9 ) (215.7 ) Adjusted net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. and adjusted diluted EPS $ 1,416.3 $ 3.56 $ 1,139.9 $ 2.89 $ 1,086.7 $ 2.59 Weighted average diluted common shares outstanding 398.0 394.5 420.2 ____________ (a) Purchase accounting related amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2014 , 2013 and 2012 includes intangible asset impairment charges of $27.7 million , $18.0 million and $41.6 million , respectively. (b) Adjustment represents exclusion of the pre-tax loss related to Mylan's clean energy investments , the activities of which qualify for income tax credits under Section 45 of the Code. Amount is included in other expense (income), net . (c) Adjustment for other income tax related items includes the exclusion from Adjusted Net Earnings of the tax benefit of approximately $150 million related to the merger of the Company wholly owned subsidiaries, Agila Specialties Private Limited and Onco Therapies Limited, into Mylan Laboratories Limited for the year ended December 31, 2014 . Liquidity and Capital Resources Our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by operations, which was $1.01 billion for the year ended December 31, 2014 . We believe that cash provided by operating activities and available liquidity will continue to allow us to meet our needs for working capital, capital expenditures, interest and principal payments on debt obligations and other cash needs over the next several years. Nevertheless, our ability to satisfy our working capital requirements and debt service obligations, or fund planned capital expenditures, will substantially depend upon our future operating performance (which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions), and financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control. Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $91.8 million to $1.01 billion for the year ended December 31, 2014 , as compared to $1.11 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 . The net decrease in cash provided by operating activities was principally due to the following: 66 an increase in the amount of cash used for other operating assets and liabilities, net of $259.1 million , principally due to an increase in cash paid for accrued litigation settlements of $66.6 million as well as an increase in cash paid related to the settlement of derivative and foreign exchange contracts; a net decrease in the amount of cash provided by changes in trade accounts payable of $137.5 million as a result of the timing of cash disbursements; a net increase in the amount of cash used for accounts receivable, including estimated sales allowances, of $23.5 million reflecting the timing of sales, cash collections and disbursements related to sales allowances; and a net increase in the amount of cash used through changes in deferred income taxes of $228.1 million . These items were offset by the following: an increase in net earnings of $306.6 million , which includes a net increase of $160.4 million in the amount of non-cash expenses, principally as a result of increased depreciation and amortization as a result of prior year acquisitions, increased losses from equity method investments and a number of other non-cash charges including stock compensation, restructuring charges and the accretion of the contingent consideration liabilities; and a net increase in the amount of cash provided by changes in income taxes of $79.6 million as a result of the level of estimated tax payments made during the current year. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $157.6 million to $1.11 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 as compared to $949.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 . The net increase in cash provided by operating activities was principally due to the following: a net increase in cash provided through changes in legal and professional accruals of $135.0 million , primarily as a result of a higher amount of litigation payments in 2012; a net increase in cash of $25.0 million for cash collected from litigation settlements; a net decrease in the amount of cash used through changes in income taxes of $48.9 million as a result of the level of estimated tax payments made in 2013; a net increase in the amount of cash provided by changes in trade accounts payable of $55.8 million as a result of the timing of cash disbursements; and a net decrease of $14.9 million in the amount of cash used through changes in inventory balances. The decrease in cash utilized for inventory in 2013 (as compared to 2012) reflects a lower level of increases in raw material, work in process and finished goods inventories as compared to the prior year. The higher prior year investment was primarily due to an inventory build in late 2012 in anticipation of additional manufacturing capacity in India that came on-line in early 2013. Nevertheless, we continued to invest in inventory in 2013 primarily to support anticipated volume growth as a result of projected increases in generic utilization, particularly in certain European markets. These items were partially offset by the following: a decrease in net earnings of $16.5 million , combined with a net decrease in the amount of non-cash expenses for depreciation and amortization totaling $30.6 million as a result of higher 2012 IPR&D impairment charges; a net increase in the amount of cash used for accounts receivable, including estimated sales allowances, of $118.4 million reflecting the timing of sales, cash collections and disbursements related to sales allowances; and during 2013, the Company redeemed its 7.625% Senior Notes due 2017 for a total of $608.8 million , including a $58.8 million redemption premium that is included as an outflow in cash from operating activities. 67 Cash used in investing activities was $800.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2014 , as compared to cash used in investing activities of $1.87 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 , a decrease of $1.07 billion . The decrease in cash used in investing activities was principally the result of cash paid for acquisitions in 2013 totaling $1.3 billion primarily related to the Agila acquisition, as compared to $50.0 million in the current year. In 2014, payments for product rights and other investing activities, net, totaled $429.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2014 , as compared to $60.9 million in the prior year period. The increase was the result of the acquisition of certain commercialization rights in the U.S. and other countries in the current year. Cash paid for acquisitions was $50.0 million in 2014. Capital expenditures, primarily for equipment and facilities, were approximately $325.3 million in the current year, as compared to $334.6 million in the comparable prior year. The decrease as compared to 2013 is the result of the timing of expenditures. While there can be no assurance that current expectations will be realized, we expect to continue to invest in our future growth and expect capital expenditures for 2015 to be between $400 million and $500 million . In addition, during 2013, restricted cash increased $228.0 million , principally related to amounts deposited in escrow, or other restricted accounts, for potential contingent consideration payments related to the Agila acquisition. Cash used in financing activities was $267.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2014 , as compared to cash provided by financing activities of $692.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2013 , a net change of $960.3 million . During 2014 , the Company entered into a New Senior Term Credit Agreement with a syndicate of banks which provided an $800 million 2014 Term Loan. The proceeds of the 2014 Term Loan were used for working capital expenditures and to repay outstanding borrowings under the Company June 2013 Credit Agreement. Borrowings under the June 2013 Credit Agreement were used to fund the redemption of the November 2018 Senior Notes. During 2014 , net repayments under our Revolving Facility totaled $60 million . The Company repaid approximately $107.8 million of short-term borrowings under our Receivables Facility and the working capital facilities in India. The Company also paid $150.0 million of contingent consideration to Strides Arcolab related to the Agila acquisition during the third quarter of 2014. During 2014, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock. During 2013, the Company repurchased approximately 28.5 million shares of common stock for aggregate consideration of approximately $1.0 billion . The Company next significant debt maturity is in the third quarter of 2015 , and our current intention is to refinance either through future debt offerings or borrowings under the New Revolving Facility. In addition, our cash and cash equivalents at our foreign operations totaled $110 million at December 31, 2014 . The majority of these funds represented earnings considered to be permanently reinvested to support the growth strategies of our foreign subsidiaries. The Company anticipates having sufficient U.S. liquidity, including existing borrowing capacity and cash to be generated from operations, to fund foreseeable U.S. cash needs without requiring the repatriation of foreign cash. If these funds are needed for the Company operations in the U.S., the Company may be required to accrue and pay U.S. taxes to repatriate these funds. As of December 31, 2014 , because the closing price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days in the period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day in the December 31, 2014 period was more than 130% of the applicable conversion reference price of $13.32 at December 31, 2014 , the $573.1 million of Cash Convertible Notes were currently convertible. Although de minimis conversions have been requested, the Company experience is that convertible debentures are not normally converted by investors until close to their maturity date. Upon an investor election to convert, the Company is required to pay the full conversion value in cash. Should holders elect to convert, the Company intends to draw on its New Revolving Facility to fund any principal payments. The amount payable per $1,000 notional bond would be calculated as the product of (1) the conversion reference rate (currently 75.0751 ) and (2) the average Daily Volume Weighted Average Price per share of common stock for a specified period following the conversion date. Any payment above the principal amount is matched by a convertible note hedge. In connection with the consummation of the Transaction, we and New Mylan executed a supplemental indenture that amended the indenture governing the Cash Convertible Notes so that, among other things, all relevant determinations for purposes of the cash conversion rights to which holders may be entitled from time-to-time in accordance with such indenture shall be made by reference to the New Mylan ordinary shares. We are involved in various legal proceedings that are considered normal to our business. While it is not possible to predict the outcome of such proceedings, an adverse outcome in any of these proceedings could materially affect our financial position and results of operations, including our operating cash flow and could cause the market value of our stock to decline. We have approximately $40 million accrued for such legal contingencies. For certain contingencies assumed in conjunction with the acquisition of the former Merck Generics business, Merck KGaA, the seller, has indemnified Mylan. We have also been indemnified for certain contingencies by Strides Arcolab related to our acquisition of Agila . The inability or denial of 68 Merck KGaA, Strides Arcolab or another indemnitor or insurer to pay on an indemnified claim could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows, and could cause the market value of our stock to decline. We are actively pursuing, and are currently involved in, joint projects related to the development, distribution and marketing of both generic and branded products. Many of these arrangements provide for payments by us upon the attainment of specified milestones. While these arrangements help to reduce the financial risk for unsuccessful projects, fulfillment of specified milestones or the occurrence of other obligations may result in fluctuations in cash flows. We are continuously evaluating the potential acquisition of products, as well as companies, as a strategic part of our future growth. Consequently, we may utilize current cash reserves or incur additional indebtedness to finance any such acquisitions, which could impact future liquidity. In addition, on an ongoing basis, we review our operations including the evaluation of potential divestitures of products and businesses as part of our future strategy. Any divestitures could impact future liquidity. At December 31, 2014 and 2013 , we had $43.7 million and $53.2 million outstanding under existing letters of credit, respectively. Additionally, as of December 31, 2014 , we had $144.9 million available under the $150.0 million subfacility on our New Revolving Facility for the issuance of letters of credit. Mandatory minimum repayments remaining on the outstanding long term debt at December 31, 2014 , excluding the discounts, premium and conversion features, are as follows for each of the periods ending December 31: (In millions) Total 2015 $ 573 2016 1,000 2017 800 2018 650 2019 500 Thereafter 2,750 Total $ 6,273 In December 2014, the Company entered into the $1.5 billion New Revolving Facility, which expires in December 19, 2019 . The New Revolving Facility includes a $150 million subfacility for the issuance of letters of credit and a $125 million subfacility for swingline borrowings. The interest rate on borrowings under the New Revolving Facility at December 31, 2014 was LIBOR plus 1.325% per annum. The New Revolving Facility has a facility fee which is 0.175% . At December 31, 2014 , the Company had no amounts outstanding under the New Revolving Facility. In December 2014, in connection with its entry into the New Revolving Facility, the Company terminated the June 2013 Credit Agreement. The new Senior Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative covenants for facilities of this type, including among others, covenants pertaining to the delivery of financial statements, notices of default and certain material events, maintenance of corporate existence and rights, business, property, and insurance and compliance with laws, as well as customary negative covenants for facilities of this type, including limitations on the incurrence of subsidiary indebtedness, liens, mergers and certain other fundamental changes, investments and loans, acquisitions, transactions with affiliates, payments of dividends and other restricted payments and changes in our lines of business. The new Senior Credit Agreement also contains a maximum consolidated leverage ratio financial covenant. We have been compliant with the financial covenant during 2014, and we expect to remain in compliance for the next twelve months. Under the terms of the Receivables Facility, our subsidiary, Mylan Pharmaceuticals Inc. ( MPI ), sells certain accounts receivable to Mylan Securitization a wholly owned special purpose entity which in turn sells a percentage ownership interest in the receivables to financial institutions and commercial paper conduits sponsored by financial institutions. MPI is the servicer of the receivables under the Receivables Facility. Purchases under the Receivables Facility will be repaid as accounts receivable are collected, with new purchases being advanced as new accounts receivable are originated by MPI . Under the Company Receivables Facility, any amounts outstanding under the facility are recorded as a secured loan and included in short-term borrowings, and the receivables underlying any borrowings are included in accounts receivable, net, in the Consolidated Balance Sheets . In January 2015, the Receivables Facility was amended and restated, and its maturity was extended through January 2018. At December 31, 2014 , there were $325 million of short-term borrowings outstanding under 69 the Receivables Facility. The size of the Receivables Facility may be increased from time to time, upon request by Mylan Securitization and with the consent of the purchaser agents and the Agent, up to $500 million . Short-term borrowings held by the Company subsidiaries in India at December 31, 2014 totaled approximately $6 million and had a weighted average interest rate of 10.9% . The borrowings represent working capital facilities and are secured by Mylan India s current assets. The fair value measurement of contingent consideration is determined using unobservable inputs based on the Company own assumptions. Significant unobservable inputs in the valuation include the probability and timing of future development and commercial milestones and future profit sharing payments. A discounted cash flow method was used to value contingent consideration at December 31, 2014 and 2013 , which was calculated as the present value of the estimated future net cash flows using a market rate of return at December 31, 2014 and 2013 . Discount rates ranging from 0.8% to 11.3% were utilized in the valuation. Significant changes in unobservable inputs could result in material changes to the contingent consideration liability. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2014 and the effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: (In millions) Total Less than One Year One- Three Years Three- Five Years Thereafter Operating leases $ 179.7 $ 37.3 $ 58.3 $ 21.8 $ 62.3 Long-term debt 6,273.3 573.3 1,800.0 1,150.0 2,750.0 Scheduled interest payments 1,858.7 232.0 400.8 333.1 892.8 Other Commitments (1) 2,100.6 688.1 561.9 524.5 326.1 $ 10,412.3 $ 1,530.7 $ 2,821.0 $ 2,029.4 $ 4,031.2 ____________ (1) Other commitments include the estimated liability payment related to the withdrawal from a multi-employer pension plan, funding commitments related to the Company clean energy investments , agreements to purchase third-party manufactured products and open purchase orders at December 31, 2014 . We lease certain property under various operating lease arrangements that expire generally over the next five years. These leases generally provide us with the option to renew the lease at the end of the lease term. At December 31, 2014 , the $2.41 billion of debt related to the Cash Convertible Notes reported in our financial statements consists of $525 million of debt ( $573 million face amount, net of $21 million discount) and a liability with a fair value of $1.85 billion related to the bifurcated conversion feature. The bifurcated conversion feature is not included in contractual obligations as there is an offsetting hedge asset. Scheduled interest payments represent the estimated interest payments related to our outstanding borrowings under term loans, notes and other debt. Variable debt interest payments are estimated using current interest rates. Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future payments, if any, the following contingent payments have not been included in the table above. In conjunction with the acquisition of Agila on December 4, 2013 , the Company recorded estimated contingent consideration totaling $250 million as part of the purchase price. During the third quarter of 2014, the Company entered into an agreement with Strides Arcolab to settle a portion of the contingent consideration for $150 million , for which the Company accrued $230 million at the acquisition date. As a result of this agreement, the Company recognized a gain of $80 million during the year ended December 31, 2014 , which is included in other operating (income) expense, net in the Consolidated Statements of Operations . The remaining contingent consideration, which could total a maximum of $211 million , is primarily related to the satisfaction of certain regulatory conditions, including potential regulatory remediation costs and the resolution of certain pre-acquisition contingencies. 70 We are contractually obligated to make potential future development, regulatory and commercial milestone, royalty and/or profit sharing payments in conjunction with collaborative agreements or acquisitions we have entered into with third parties. The most significant of these relates to the potential future consideration related to the respiratory delivery platform. These payments are contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events and, given the nature of these events, it is unclear when, if ever, we may be required to pay such amounts. The amount of the contingent consideration liability was $470 million at December 31, 2014 . In addition, the Company expects to incur approximately $35 million to $40 million of annual non-cash accretion expense related to the increase in the net present value of the contingent consideration liability. On January 30, 2015 , the Company entered into a development and commercialization collaboration with Theravance Biopharma for the development and, subject to FDA approval, commercialization of a novel once-daily nebulized LAMA for COPD and other respiratory diseases. Under the terms of the agreement, Mylan and Theravance Biopharm will co-develop the product. In the U.S., Mylan will lead commercialization and Theravance Biopharma will retain the right to co-promote the product under a profit-sharing arrangement. In addition to funding the U.S. registrational development program, Mylan will pay Theravance Biopharma an initial payment of $15 million in the second quarter of 2015 and made a $30 million equity investment in Theravance Biopharma. Under the terms of the agreement, Theravance Biopharma is eligible to receive potential development and sales milestone payments totaling $220 million in the aggregate. In the fourth quarter of 2013, the Company entered into a licensing agreement with Pfizer for the exclusive worldwide rights to develop, manufacture and commercialize a novel long-acting muscarinic antagonist compound. As part of the agreement, the Company made an upfront development payment, which is included as a component of R&D expense in 2013, and could make additional payments upon the achievement of certain milestones as the Company development continues over the next several years. Depending on the commercialization of this novel compound and the level of future sales and profits, the Company could also be obligated to make payments upon the occurrence of certain sales milestones, along with sales royalties and profit sharing payments. We have entered into an exclusive collaboration on the development, manufacturing, supply and commercialization of multiple, high value generic biologic compounds and three insulin analog products for the global marketplace. We plan to provide funding related to the collaboration over the next several years that could total approximately $75 million or more per year. Additionally, we have entered into product development agreements under which we have agreed to share in the development costs as they are incurred by our partners and/or pay milestones. As the timing of cash expenditures is dependent upon a number of factors, many of which are outside of our control, it is difficult to forecast the amount of payments to be made over the next few years, which could be significant. We periodically enter into licensing agreements with other pharmaceutical companies for the manufacture, marketing and/or sale of pharmaceutical products. These agreements generally call for us to pay a percentage of amounts earned from the sale of the product as a royalty on a profit share. With respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2014 , we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authority. As such, $191.2 million of unrecognized tax benefits have been excluded from the contractual obligations table above. We sponsor various defined benefit pension plans in several countries. Benefit formulas are based on varying criteria on a plan by plan basis. We fund non-domestic pension liabilities in accordance with laws and regulations applicable to those plans, which typically results in these plans being unfunded. The amount accrued related to these benefits was $68.7 million at December 31, 2014 . We are unable to determine when these amounts will require payment as the timing of cash expenditures is dependent upon a number of factors, many of which are outside of our control. We have entered into employment and other agreements with certain executives and other employees that provide for compensation and certain other benefits. These agreements provide for severance payments under certain circumstances. Certain commercial agreements require us to provide performance bonds and/or indemnification; while it is difficult to forecast the amount of payments, if any, to be made over the next few years, we do not believe the amount would be material to our results of operations, cash flows or financial condition. Impact of Currency Fluctuations and Inflation Because our results are reported in U.S. Dollars, changes in the rate of exchange between the U.S. Dollar and the local currencies in the markets in which we operate, mainly the Euro, Indian Rupee, Japanese Yen, Australian Dollar, Canadian 71 Dollar, Pound Sterling and Brazilian Real affect our results as previously noted. We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our revenues or operations. Application of Critical Accounting Policies Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to Consolidated Financial Statements and are in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Included within these policies are certain policies which contain critical accounting estimates and, therefore, have been deemed to be critical accounting policies. Critical accounting estimates are those which require management to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made and for which the use of different estimates, which reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We have identified the following to be our critical accounting policies: the determination of net revenue provisions, business acquisitions, intangible assets, goodwill and contingent consideration, income taxes and the impact of existing legal matters. Net Revenue Provisions Net revenues are recognized for product sales when title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer and when provisions for estimates, including discounts, sales allowances, price adjustments, returns, chargebacks and other promotional programs are reasonably determinable. Accruals for these provisions are presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements as reductions in determining net revenues and in accounts receivable and other current liabilities. Accounts receivable are presented net of allowances relating to these provisions, which were $1.63 billion and $1.24 billion at December 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Other current liabilities include $581.3 million and $281.1 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013 , respectively, for certain sales allowances and other adjustments that are paid to indirect customers. The following is a rollforward of the most significant provisions for estimated sales allowances during 2014 : (In millions) Balance at Checks/ Credits Issued to Third Parties Current Provision Related to Sales Made in the Current Period Effects of Foreign Exchange Balance at December 31, 2013 December 31, 2014 Chargebacks $ 461.6 $ (3,473.2 ) $ 3,605.2 $ (2.1 ) $ 591.5 Incentives offered to direct customers $ 539.3 $ (1,549.5 ) $ 1,736.2 $ (19.6 ) $ 706.4 Returns $ 167.5 $ (152.5 ) $ 235.9 $ (2.7 ) $ 248.2 We have not made and do not anticipate making any significant changes to the methodologies that we use to measure chargebacks, incentives offered to direct customers or returns; however, the balances within these reserves can fluctuate significantly through the consistent application of our methodologies. In the current year, accruals for incentives offered to direct customers increased as a result of an increase in related sales and overall higher rebate rates, mainly in response to the competitive environment in various markets. Historically, we have not recorded in any current period any material amounts related to adjustments made to prior period reserves. Provisions for estimated discounts, sales allowances, promotional and other credits require a lower degree of subjectivity and are less complex in nature, yet, when combined, represent a significant portion of the overall provisions. These provisions are estimated based on historical payment experience, historical relationships to revenues, estimated customer inventory levels and contract terms. Such provisions are determinable due to the limited number of assumptions and consistency of historical experience. Others, such as chargebacks and returns, require management to make more subjective judgments and evaluate current market conditions. These provisions are discussed in further detail below. Chargebacks The provision for chargebacks is the most significant and complex estimate used in the recognition of revenue. Mylan markets products directly to wholesalers, distributors, retail pharmacy chains, mail order pharmacies and group purchasing organizations. We also market products indirectly to independent pharmacies, managed care organizations, hospitals, nursing homes and pharmacy benefit management companies, collectively referred to as indirect customers. Mylan enters into agreements with its indirect customers to establish contract pricing for certain products. The indirect customers then independently select a wholesaler from which to actually purchase the products at these contracted prices. Alternatively, certain wholesalers may enter into agreements with indirect customers that establish contract pricing for certain products, which the 72 wholesalers provide. Under either arrangement, Mylan will provide credit to the wholesaler for any difference between the contracted price with the indirect party and the wholesaler invoice price. Such credit is called a chargeback, while the difference between the contracted price and the wholesaler invoice price is referred to as the chargeback rate. The provision for chargebacks is based on expected sell-through levels by our wholesaler customers to indirect customers, as well as estimated wholesaler inventory levels. For the latter, in most cases, inventory levels are obtained directly from certain of our largest wholesalers. Additionally, internal estimates are prepared based upon historical buying patterns and estimated end-user demand. Such information allows us to estimate the potential chargeback that we may ultimately owe to our customers given the quantity of inventory on hand. We continually monitor our provision for chargebacks and evaluate our reserve and estimates as additional information becomes available. A change of 5% in the estimated sell-through levels by our wholesaler customers and in the estimated wholesaler inventory levels would have an effect on our reserve balance of approximately $34 million . Returns Consistent with industry practice, we maintain a return policy that allows our customers to return product within a specified period prior to and subsequent to the expiration date. Although application of the policy varies from country to country in accordance with local practices, generally, product may be returned for a period beginning six months prior to its expiration date to up to one year after its expiration date. The majority of our product returns occur as a result of product dating, which falls within the range set by our policy, and are settled through the issuance of a credit to our customer. Although the introduction of additional generic competition does not give our customers the right to return product outside of our established policy, we do recognize that such competition could ultimately lead to increased returns. We analyze this on a case-by-case basis, when significant, and make adjustments to increase our reserve for product returns as necessary. Our estimate of the provision for returns is based upon our historical experience with actual returns, which is applied to the level of sales for the period that corresponds to the period during which our customers may return product. This period is known by us based on the shelf lives of our products at the time of shipment. Additionally, we consider factors such as levels of inventory in the distribution channel, product dating and expiration period, size and maturity of the market prior to a product launch, entrance into the market of additional generic competition, changes in formularies or launch of over-the-counter products, and make adjustments to the provision for returns in the event that it appears that actual product returns may differ from our established reserves. We obtain data with respect to the level of inventory in the channel directly from certain of our largest customers. A change of 5% in the estimated product return rate used in our calculation of our return reserve would have an effect on our reserve balance of approximately $12 million . Business Acquisitions, Intangible Assets, Goodwill and Contingent Consideration We account for acquired businesses using the purchase method of accounting, which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective estimated fair values. The cost to acquire businesses has been allocated to the underlying net assets of the acquired businesses based on estimates of their respective fair values. Amounts allocated to acquired IPR&D are capitalized at the date of an acquisition and, at that time, such IPR&D assets have indefinite lives. As products in development are approved for sale, amounts will be allocated to product rights and licenses and will be amortized over their estimated useful lives. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over the expected life of the asset. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially impact our results of operations. Fair values and useful lives are determined based on, among other factors, the expected future period of benefit of the asset, the various characteristics of the asset and projected cash flows. Because this process involves management making estimates with respect to future sales volumes, pricing, new product launches, government reform actions, anticipated cost environment and overall market conditions, and because these estimates form the basis for the determination of whether or not an impairment charge should be recorded, these estimates are considered to be critical accounting estimates. We record contingent consideration resulting from a business acquisition at its estimated fair value on the acquisition date. Each reporting period thereafter, we revalue these obligations and record increases or decreases in their fair value as an adjustment to contingent consideration expense within the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration obligations can result from adjustments to the discount rates, payment periods and adjustments in the probability of achieving future development steps, regulatory approvals, market launches, sales targets and profitability. These fair value measurements represent Level 3 measurements as they are based on significant inputs not observable in the market. Significant judgment is employed in determining the assumptions utilized as of the acquisition date and for each subsequent measurement period. Accordingly, changes in assumptions described above, could have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations. 73 Goodwill and intangible assets, including IPR&D, are reviewed for impairment annually and/or when events or other changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles is determined to exist when the fair value is less than the carrying value of the net assets being tested. Impairment of definite-lived intangibles is determined to exist when undiscounted cash flows related to the assets are less than the carrying value of the assets being tested. Future events and decisions may lead to asset impairment and/or related costs. Goodwill is allocated and evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Mylan has four reporting units, of which three are included in the Generics segment with the remaining reporting unit consisting of our Specialty segment. As of the date of our most recent annual impairment test, April 1, 2014 , approximately 91% of Mylan total goodwill is allocated to the three reporting units within the Generics segment as follows: North America ( $764.3 million ), Europe ( $1.22 billion ) and Rest of World ( $1.98 billion ), with $349.1 million allocated to our Specialty segment and reporting unit. In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) Accounting Standards Codification ( ASC ) 350, we have performed our annual impairment test as of April 1, 2014 utilizing the two-step goodwill impairment analysis referred to as Step 1 and, if necessary, Step 2 . Step 1 of the impairment analysis consists of a comparison of the estimated fair value of the individual reporting units with their carrying amount, including goodwill. In estimating each reporting unit fair value, we performed extensive valuation analysis, utilizing both income and market-based approaches, in our goodwill assessment process. We utilized an average of the two methods in estimating the fair value of the individual reporting units, except for the Specialty reporting unit. For the reporting units in which we utilized an average of the income and market-based approaches, the averaging of the two valuation methods did not significantly impact the estimated fair value of the reporting units. Given the variability in expectations for the Specialty reporting unit product portfolio, an income based approach was utilized. The following describes the valuation methodologies used to derive the estimated fair value of the reporting units. Income Approach : Under this approach, to determine fair value, we discounted the expected future cash flows of each reporting unit. We used a discount rate, which reflected the overall level of inherent risk and the rate of return an outside investor would have expected to earn. To estimate cash flows beyond the final year of our model, we used a terminal value approach. Under this approach, we used estimated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA ) in the final year of our model, adjusted to estimate a normalized cash flow, applied a perpetuity growth assumption, and discounted by a perpetuity discount factor to determine the terminal value. We incorporated the present value of the resulting terminal value into our estimate of fair value. Market-Based Approach : The Company also utilizes a market-based approach to estimate fair value, principally utilizing the guideline company method which focuses on comparing our risk profile and growth prospects to a select group of publicly traded companies with reasonably similar guidelines. The Company performed its annual impairment test as of April 1, 2014 , and the estimated fair value of the four reporting units, described above, were in excess of the respective carrying values of each reporting unit. For the North America reporting unit, the estimated fair value of this business exceeded its carrying value by over 100% . As it relates to the income approach for the North America reporting unit at April 1, 2014 , we forecasted cash flows for the next ten years. During the forecast period, the revenue compound annual growth rate ( CAGR ) was approximately 10% . A terminal value year was calculated with a 3% revenue growth rate applied. The CAGR in EBITDA margins was approximately 2% . The discount rate utilized was 8.5% . Under the market-based approach, we utilized an estimated range of market multiples of 10.5 to 13.0 times EBITDA plus a control premium of 15% . As it relates to the income approach for the Europe reporting unit at April 1, 2014 , we forecasted cash flows for the next ten years. During the forecast period, the revenue CAGR was approximately 6% . A terminal value year was calculated with a 3% revenue growth rate applied. The CAGR in EBITDA margins was approximately 8% . The discount rate utilized was 9.0% . Under the market-based approach, we utilized an estimated range of market multiples of 10.0 to 12.0 times EBITDA plus a control premium of 15% . The estimated fair value of the Europe reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 18% . For Rest of World reporting unit, the estimated fair value of this business exceeded its carrying value by approximately 20% as of April 1, 2014 . As it relates to the income approach for Rest of World reporting unit, we forecasted cash flows for the next ten years. During the forecast period, the revenue CAGR was approximately 11% . A terminal value year was calculated with a 4% revenue growth rate applied. The CAGR in EBITDA margins was approximately 7% over the period of estimated cash flows. The discount rate utilized was 11.5% . Under the market-based approach, we utilized an estimated range of market multiples of 9.5 to 12.5 times EBITDA plus a control premium of 15% . 74 For the Specialty reporting unit, the estimated fair value of this business exceeded its carrying value by over 100% as of April 1, 2014 . As it relates to the income approach for the Specialty reporting unit, we forecasted cash flows for the next ten years. During the forecast period, the revenue CAGR was a decline of approximately 3% . A terminal value year was calculated with a 3% revenue growth rate applied. EBITDA margins remained relatively stable at approximately 53% over the period of estimated cash flows. The discount rate utilized was 13.0% . Due to the variability in expectations for the Specialty reporting unit product portfolio, primarily related to forecasted sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector and the potential generic competition, a market-based approach was not utilized for this reporting unit. The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions that affect the reporting unit expected future cash flows. These estimates and assumptions primarily include, but are not limited to, market multiples, control premiums, the discount rate, terminal growth rates, operating income before depreciation and amortization, and capital expenditures forecasts. Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making these estimates, actual results could differ from those estimates. In addition, changes in underlying assumptions, especially as it relates to the key assumptions detailed, could have a significant impact on the fair value of the reporting units. In the event the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying value, additional analysis would be required. The additional analysis would compare the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill with the implied fair value of that goodwill. The implied fair value of goodwill is the excess of the fair value of the reporting unit over the fair value amounts assigned to all of the assets and liabilities of that unit as if the reporting unit was acquired in a business combination and the fair value of the reporting unit represented the purchase price. If the carrying value of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, an impairment loss equal to such excess would be recognized, which would likely materially impact the Company reported results of operations. We have also assessed the recoverability of certain long-lived assets contained within the reporting units. Any impairment of these assets must be considered prior to our impairment review of goodwill. The assessment for impairment is based on our ability to recover the carrying value of the long-lived assets by analyzing the expected future undiscounted pre-tax cash flows specific to the asset grouping. We assess the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets at the lowest level for which identifiable undiscounted cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. For Rest of World and Europe reporting units, this assessment is generally performed at the country level within the reporting units. If these undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of long-lived assets within the asset group, an impairment loss is measured based on the difference between the estimated fair value and carrying value. Significant management judgment is involved in estimating the recoverability of these assets and is dependent upon the accuracy of the assumptions used in making these estimates, as well as how the estimates compare to the eventual future operating performance of the specific asset grouping. The Company Australia operation in Rest of World reporting unit and certain asset groupings in the Europe reporting unit, principally Portugal, Belgium and Germany, remain at risk for potential impairment charges if the projected operating results are not achieved. Any future long-lived assets impairment charges would likely materially impact the Company reported results of operations. Income Taxes We compute our income taxes based on the statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to Mylan in the various jurisdictions in which we generate income. Significant judgment is required in determining our income taxes and in evaluating our tax positions. We establish reserves in accordance with Mylan s policy regarding accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. Our policy provides that the tax effects from an uncertain tax position be recognized in Mylan s financial statements, only if the position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based on the technical merits of the position. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the settlement of a tax audit. Our provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves. Favorable resolution would be recognized as a reduction to our provision for income taxes in the period of resolution. Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to utilize the existing deferred tax assets. A significant piece of objective negative evidence evaluated was the cumulative loss incurred in certain taxing jurisdictions over the three-year period ended December 31, 2014 . Such objective evidence limits the ability to consider other subjective evidence such as our projections for future growth. Based on this evaluation, as of December 31, 2014 , a valuation allowance of $304.5 million has been recorded in order to measure only the portion of the deferred tax asset that more likely than not will be realized. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period 75 are reduced or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight may be given to subjective evidence such as projections for growth. The resolution of tax reserves and changes in valuation allowances could be material to Mylan results of operations or financial condition. A variance of 5% between estimated reserves and valuation allowances and actual resolution and realization of these tax items would have an effect on our reserve balance and valuation allowance of approximately $25 million . Legal Matters Mylan is involved in various legal proceedings, some of which involve claims for substantial amounts. An estimate is made to accrue for a loss contingency relating to any of these legal proceedings if it is probable that a liability was incurred as of the date of the financial statements and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Because of the subjective nature inherent in assessing the outcome of litigation and because of the potential that an adverse outcome in a legal proceeding could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and/or share price, such estimates are considered to be critical accounting estimates. A variance of 5% between estimated and recorded litigation reserves (excluding indemnified claims) and actual resolution of certain legal matters would have an effect on our litigation reserve balance of approximately $2 million . Recent Accounting Pronouncements In May 2014, the FASB issued revised accounting guidance on revenue recognition that will supersede nearly all existing revenue recognition guidance under U.S. GAAP. The core principal of this guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. This guidance also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts, including significant judgments and changes in judgments and assets recognized from costs incurred to obtain or fulfill a contract. This guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2016, and for interim periods within those fiscal years and can be applied using a full retrospective or modified retrospective approach. The Company is currently assessing the impact of the adoption of this guidance on its business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. 
