CIK: 69499
Company Name: MYLAN LABORATORIES INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-05-16


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition The following discussion and analysis, as well as other sections in this Annual Report, should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report. All references to fiscal years shall mean the 12-month period ended March 31. This discussion and analysis may contain forward-looking statements . These statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements may include, without limitation, statements about the Company market opportunities, strategies, competition, and expected activities and expenditures and at times may be identified by the use of words such as may, could, should, would, project, believe, anticipate, expect, plan, estimate, forecast, potential, intend, continue and variations of these words or comparable words. Forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties. Accordingly, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, the risks described under Risk Factors in ITEM 1A. The Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward-looking statements for revisions or changes after the date of this Form 10-K. Overview Mylan Laboratories Inc. and its subsidiaries (the Company, Mylan or we ) develop, license, manufacture, market and distribute generic, brand and branded generic pharmaceutical products. Net revenues for fiscal 2006 were $1.24 billion compared to fiscal 2005 revenues of $1.25 billion. Consolidated gross profit for fiscal 2006 was $627.6 million compared to $623.5 million in the prior year, an increase of 1%, while gross margins were consistent at approximately 50%. Net earnings for fiscal 2006 were $184.5 million compared to $203.6 million in fiscal 2005, a decrease of $19.0 million or 9%. In the same period, however, earnings per diluted share increased from $0.74 in fiscal 2005 to $0.79 in fiscal 2006. Current year earnings per share were impacted by share buybacks, including a modified Dutch Auction self-tender, which closed on July 21, 2005, whereby the Company accepted for payment an aggregate of 51,282,051 shares of its common stock at a purchase price of $19.50 per share. See below for further discussion. Additionally, included in the current year results are expenses in the amount of $0.04 per diluted share, net of tax, with respect to a contingent legal liability related to previously disclosed litigation in connection with the Company lorazepam and clorazepate products and $0.06 per diluted share, net of tax, of restructuring costs. Included in the financial results for fiscal 2005 were $0.06 per diluted share, net of tax, of income from the favorable settlement of other litigation. A more thorough discussion of operating results is provided under the section Results of Operations . Other factors which impacted the results of fiscal 2006 were: Nebivolol Licensing Agreement On January 11, 2006, the Company announced an agreement with Forest Laboratories Holdings, Ltd. ( Forest ), a wholly owned subsidiary of Forest Laboratories, Inc., for the commercialization, development and distribution of Mylan beta blocker, nebivolol, in the United States ( U.S. ) and Canada. Under the terms of the agreement, Mylan received an up-front payment of $75.0 million, which will be deferred until the commercial launch of the product. Mylan also has the potential to earn future milestone payments as well as royalties based on nebivolol sales. Upon commercial launch, the up-front payment will be amortized into revenue over the remaining term of the license agreement. Forest has assumed all expenses for future nebivolol development programs and will be responsible for all sales and marketing expenses. Mylan has retained an option to co-promote the product in the future. EMSAM Approval On February 28, 2006, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company ( BMS ) and Somerset Pharmaceuticals, Inc. ( Somerset ), a joint venture between Mylan and Watson Pharmaceuticals, Inc., announced that the FDA approved EMSAM (selegiline transdermal system), 27 Table of Contents the first transdermal patch for the treatment of major depressive disorder. In the prior fiscal year, Somerset entered into an agreement with BMS for the commercialization and distribution of EMSAM. EMSAM patches are manufactured by Mylan Technologies Inc., a subsidiary of Mylan. The product was launched in early fiscal 2007. Oxybutynin Agreements On December 20, 2005, Mylan announced that Mylan Pharmaceuticals Inc. ( MPI ) entered into two agreements with Ortho-McNeil Pharmaceutical, Inc. and Alza Corporation relating to oxybutynin chloride extended-release tablets, the generic equivalent of Ditropan XL. Under these agreements, an exclusive supply agreement on all strengths of oxybutynin will be triggered upon a final appellate court decision in the current patent litigation between the parties. Ortho-McNeil has also agreed to supply Mylan with a generic version of Ditropan XL sooner than a final appellate court decision if another generic version enters the market. Additionally, Mylan will be granted a non-exclusive, royalty bearing license to make and sell its ANDA products. The terms of these agreements differ depending upon the final outcome of the pending patent litigation. The terms of the agreements are confidential and subject to a number of conditions, including review by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission. Mylan has received tentative approval and is currently awaiting final approval from the FDA for its 5 mg and 10 mg strengths of oxybutynin. Prior to a final appellate court decision, Mylan retains all of the options that had been available to it with respect to oxybutynin prior to the signing of these agreements. Sale of Apokyn On November 24, 2005, the Company announced the sale of the U.S. and Canadian rights for Apokyn to Vernalis plc. Under the terms of the agreement, Mylan received a cash payment of $23.0 million. In addition, Mylan will perform certain transitional services for one year, including supply chain management and customer service assistance. During fiscal 2006, $8.9 million of revenue associated with the sale was recognized and included in other revenues. The remainder, net of certain related assets, has been recorded as deferred revenue and is being recognized over the one-year period. Share Buyback On July 21, 2005, Mylan closed on its modified Dutch Auction self-tender and accepted for payment an aggregate purchase price of approximately $1.0 billion, 51,282,051 shares of its common stock at a price of $19.50 per share. Subsequent to the completion of the Dutch Auction self-tender, Mylan completed a previously announced open market follow-on repurchase by repurchasing 12,595,200 shares of its common stock on the open market for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $250.0 million. Financing The share buyback described above was financed through Mylan existing cash reserves as well as $500.0 million in Senior Notes and a $275.0 million borrowing under a $500.0 million senior secured credit facility. The Senior Notes, which were issued on July 21, 2005, consist of $150.0 million of Senior Notes due 2010, and bearing interest at 5 3 / 4 % per annum, and $350.0 million of Senior Notes due 2015, and bearing interest at 6 3 / 8 % per annum. The senior secured credit facility, which was also entered into on July 21, 2005, consists of a $225.0 million five-year revolving credit facility, which the Company expects to use for working capital and general corporate purposes, and a $275.0 million five-year term loan. The term loan bears interest at LIBOR plus 150 basis points or prime plus 50 basis points at the Company option. The interest rate in effect on the term loan at March 31, 2006, was 6.33%. At March 31, 2006, $188.0 million was outstanding under the term loan and no borrowings were outstanding under the revolving credit facility. Closure of Mylan Bertek During the first quarter of fiscal 2006, Mylan announced that it was closing Mylan Bertek Pharmaceuticals Inc. ( Mylan Bertek ), its branded subsidiary, and transferring responsibility for selling Mylan Bertek products to its other subsidiaries, MPI and UDL Laboratories, Inc. In connection with this restructuring, the Company incurred restructuring charges of $20.9 million, of which $19.9 million was included in selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expense. The restructuring charge consisted primarily of employee termination and severance costs associated with the Mylan Bertek sales force, along with lease termination costs and asset write-downs. As of March 31, 2006, the restructuring was substantially completed. 28 Table of Contents Results of Operations Fiscal 2006 Compared to Fiscal 2005 Total Revenues and Gross Profit Net revenues for fiscal 2006 were $1.24 billion compared to $1.25 billion for fiscal 2005, a decrease of $7.8 million or 1%. In arriving at net revenues, gross revenues are reduced by provisions for estimates, including discounts, customer performance and promotions, price adjustments, returns and chargebacks. See the section titled Application of Critical Accounting Policies in this ITEM 7, for a thorough discussion of our methodology with respect to such provisions. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2006, the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were for chargebacks in the amount of $1.11 billion and customer performance and promotions in the amount of $160.8 million. For fiscal 2005, chargebacks of $892.6 million and customer performance and promotions of $195.1 million were charged against gross revenues. The increase in the amounts charged against gross revenues for chargebacks in the current year is the result of pricing pressures on certain products in the Company portfolio, most notably omeprazole and carbidopa/levodopa, a full year of chargebacks related to fentanyl and an increase in sales to customers who are entitled to chargeback credits. Customer performance and promotions include direct rebates as well as promotional programs. A greater amount was charged against gross revenues for customer performance and promotions in fiscal 2005, primarily due to promotions offered to customers in connection with the launch of fentanyl that occurred in the fourth quarter of the prior fiscal year. New products launched during the year contributed $6.7 million to net revenues in fiscal 2006 compared to $87.3 million in fiscal 2005, primarily due to fentanyl, which was launched in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2005. The Company considers a product to be a new product only in the year it is launched. Net revenues in fiscal 2006 however, did realize a significant benefit from a full year of sales of fentanyl, which accounted for over 10% of net revenues, as well as other products which were launched during fiscal 2005. The favorable impact of these products served to offset lower revenue on other products in the Company portfolio, most notably omeprazole and carbidopa/ levodopa. Both of these products realized lower net revenues as a result of increased competition. As is the case in the generic industry, the entrance into the market of other generic competition generally has a negative impact on the volume and pricing of the affected products. As it relates to other products, the trend generally observed throughout the Company product portfolio in fiscal 2006 was favorable volume which essentially offset unfavorable pricing. Doses shipped during fiscal 2006 were 12.6 billion, an increase over fiscal 2005 doses shipped of 12.5 billion. The fiscal 2006 results include other revenue of $17.2 million compared to $5.6 million in the prior year. The majority of this increase relates to the sale of Apokyn in the current year, for which $8.9 million of revenue was recognized. The remainder of the increase in fiscal 2006 is related to royalties. Gross profit for fiscal 2006 was $627.6 million, an increase of $4.1 million or 1% over fiscal 2005, while gross margins were consistent at approximately 50%. A significant portion of gross profit was comprised of fentanyl. Absent any changes to market dynamics or the current competitive landscape for fentanyl, we expect the product to continue to be a significant contributor to sales and gross profit. Additionally, gross margins in the current year were impacted by favorable product mix, partially offset by lower margins on certain products, such as omeprazole and carbidopa/ levodopa as a result of competition. Operating Expenses Research and development ( R&D ) expense for fiscal 2006 was $102.1 million compared to $87.9 million in fiscal 2005, which represents an increase of $14.2 million or 16%. This increase is primarily due to costs incurred for clinical studies related to nebivolol incurred prior to the outlicensing of the product in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006, as well as an overall increase in the number of ongoing studies. The Company continued commitment to, and investment in, R&D activities have resulted in a robust ANDA pipeline, and it is expected that R&D expenses will continue to increase in future periods. 29 Table of Contents SG&A expense for fiscal 2006 was $225.8 million compared to $259.5 million in fiscal 2005, a decrease of $33.7 million or 13%. Included in fiscal 2005 SG&A were costs of $22.9 million related to the terminated acquisition of King Pharmaceuticals, Inc. ( King ). Legal costs also decreased by approximately $9.0 million from fiscal 2005 to fiscal 2006, primarily as a result of the timing of certain litigation. Legal challenges continue to be an integral part of the Company strategy and its ability to continue to deliver new generic products to the market. The remainder of the change in SG&A during fiscal 2006 is the result of the closure of Mylan Bertek as part of the Company restructuring. Charges of $19.9 million were incurred primarily in the first and second quarters related to employee termination and severance costs, lease termination costs and asset write-downs. These costs, which were primarily related to the termination of the Mylan Bertek sales force, resulted in significant cost savings realized throughout the remainder of fiscal 2006. Litigation Settlements, net Litigation settlements during fiscal 2006 consisted primarily of a charge of $12.0 million for a contingent liability with respect to the Company previously disclosed lorazepam and clorazepate product litigation. In the prior year, net gains of $26.0 million were recorded with respect to settlement of other litigation. Interest Expense During the second quarter of fiscal 2006, Mylan completed a financing of $500.0 million in Senior Notes and a $500.0 million senior secured credit facility (see Contractual Obligations herein). Interest expense related to this financing was $31.3 million for fiscal 2006. Included in interest expense is a commitment fee on the unused portion of the revolving credit facility and the amortization of financing fees. Other Income, net Other income, net of non-operating expenses, was $18.5 million in fiscal 2006 compared to $10.1 million in fiscal 2005. The increase is primarily the result of higher interest and dividend income on our investments in marketable securities as well as less of a loss recorded on our investment in Somerset. We own a 50% equity interest in Somerset and account for this investment using the equity method of accounting. The recorded loss in Somerset for fiscal 2006 was $2.5 million compared to a loss of $3.3 million in fiscal 2005. As a result of the launch of EMSAM as previously discussed, we expect to realize income from Somerset in the foreseeable future. Income Taxes The effective income tax rate for fiscal 2006 was 32.8%, a decrease from the fiscal 2005 effective tax rate of 34.8%. During fiscal 2006, we recorded a tax benefit of $7.5 million, primarily related to the resolution of certain tax positions with taxing authorities. These previously uncertain tax positions were resolved through the completion of audits or through the acceptance of our amended return filings. This tax benefit was partially offset by liabilities booked primarily for certain state tax filing positions. Despite our belief that our tax return positions are correct, we have established liabilities in both the current and prior fiscal years for these tax positions that may become payable in the event our positions are not upheld. In addition, the fiscal 2006 effective tax rate benefited from the new domestic production deduction and an increase in tax exempt interest as compared to the prior year, offset by higher state taxes. Fiscal 2005 Compared to Fiscal 2004 Total Revenues and Gross Profit Net revenues for fiscal 2005 were $1.25 billion compared to $1.36 billion for fiscal 2004, a decrease of $107.4 million or 8%. In arriving at net revenues, gross revenues are reduced by provisions for estimates, including discounts, customer performance and promotions, price adjustments, returns and chargebacks. See the section titled Application of Critical Accounting Policies in this ITEM 7 for a thorough discussion of 30 Table of Contents our methodology with respect to such provisions. For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2005, the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were for chargebacks in the amount of $892.6 million and customer performance and promotions in the amount of $195.1 million. For fiscal 2004, chargebacks of $797.1 million and customer performance and promotions of $163.8 million were charged against gross revenues. The increase in the amounts charged against gross revenues for chargebacks in the current year is primarily the result of pricing pressures on certain products in the Company portfolio, most notably omeprazole, carbidopa/levodopa and Amnesteem tm , as well as a shift in amounts purchased by customers that are entitled to chargeback credits. Customer performance and promotions include direct rebates as well as promotional programs. The increase in the amounts charged against gross revenues for customer performance and promotions is primarily due to increased gross revenues (from which direct rebates are calculated) and promotions offered to customers in connection with the launch of fentanyl. The decrease in net revenues was primarily the result of continued pricing pressure, including the effect of additional competition, on the Company product portfolio. Omeprazole, which was launched during the second quarter of fiscal 2004, experienced significantly lower pricing as a direct result of additional generic competition. Increased competition also resulted in unfavorable pricing on Amnesteem and carbidopa/levodopa, which also experienced a loss of market share. As is the case in the generic industry, the entrance into the market of other generic competition generally has a negative impact on the volume and pricing of the affected products. In the near term, it is likely that unfavorable pricing will continue to impact certain products in the Company portfolio. Additionally, net revenues were impacted by certain customers that decreased their level of purchases in order to reduce the amount of Mylan inventory that they maintain on their shelves. Partially offsetting the impact of the items discussed above were increased overall volume and revenues from new products. Despite the additional competition experienced in the current year, omeprazole sales volume increased due primarily to expanding the customer base and capitalizing on a higher generic conversion rate. Also, Mylan was able to establish its position as market leader, based on omeprazole prescriptions dispensed. On an overall basis, volume shipped for the year increased over 5% to 12.5 billion doses compared with the prior year. New products launched subsequent to March 31, 2004 contributed net revenues of $87.3 million in the current fiscal year due largely to the launch of fentanyl in January 2005. Fiscal 2004 other revenues included $13.9 million from the sale of the U.S. and Canadian rights for sertaconazole nitrate 2% cream. Consolidated gross profit for fiscal 2005 was $623.5 million or 49.7% of revenues compared to $762.5 million or 55.5% of revenues in fiscal 2004. The decrease in gross margin is primarily the result of price erosion brought about by additional generic competition on the Company portfolio, primarily omeprazole and carbidopa/ levodopa. Operating Expenses R&D expense for fiscal 2005 was $87.9 million compared to $100.8 million in fiscal 2004, which represents a decrease of $12.9 million or 13%. This decrease is due primarily to the completion in late fiscal 2004 of clinical studies related to nebivolol, a product for the treatment of hypertension. The new drug application for nebivolol was submitted to the FDA on April 30, 2004 and accepted for filing by the FDA on June 29, 2004. Partially offsetting the decrease in R&D expenses as a result of nebivolol are increased R&D expenses related to other ongoing studies. The Company continued commitment to, and investment in, R&D activities has resulted in a robust ANDA pipeline, with 44 applications pending before the FDA and 27 ANDA approvals in fiscal 2005, more than double the number from just two years ago. As clinical development programs for other products and life cycle management studies are initiated, it is expected that R&D expenses will increase in future periods. SG&A expense for fiscal 2005 was $259.5 million compared to $201.6 million in fiscal 2004, an increase of $57.9 million or 29%. Included in SG&A expense for fiscal 2005 are approximately $18.3 million of costs 31 Table of Contents directly related to the terminated King acquisition and an additional $4.6 million of consulting expenses related to the planned integration of the two companies. The remainder of the increase in SG&A expense is due to numerous factors, the most significant of which is payroll and payroll-related costs, which increased by approximately $9.8 million. Additionally, consulting expenses increased as a result of the Company implementation of an enterprise resource planning ( ERP ) system, and legal expenses increased as a result of new and ongoing litigation related to patent challenges and other product-related matters. Legal challenges continue to be an integral part of the Company strategy and its ability to continue to deliver new generic products to the market. Litigation Settlements, net Net gains of $26.0 million were recorded in fiscal 2005 with respect to the settlement of various lawsuits. In June 2004, Mylan received $37.5 million in settlement of certain patent litigation claims involving omeprazole. A portion of this settlement represented reimbursement of legal fees and expenses related to the litigation. Partially offsetting this gain, Mylan agreed, also in June 2004, to a $9.0 million settlement resolving all pending litigation with respect to paclitaxel. Net gains of $34.8 million, also from the settlement of various lawsuits, were recorded in fiscal 2004. Of this, $12.5 million was related to a favorable settlement reached with respect to the marketing and manufacturing of Zagam , and $10.2 million was related to a favorable settlement reached with respect to mirtazapine. The remainder of the settlement primarily relates to future payments to be made to Mylan totaling $10.0 million from Mylan co-defendants in the lorazepam and clorazepate litigation. Other Income, net Other income, net of other expenses, was $10.1 million in fiscal 2005 compared to $17.8 million in fiscal 2004. This decrease of $7.7 million is primarily the result of lower realized gains on the sale of marketable securities in fiscal 2005 and a $5.0 million gain on the sale of an office building recorded in fiscal 2004, partially offset by less of a loss recorded in fiscal 2005 on our investment in Somerset. We own a 50% equity interest in Somerset and account for this investment using the equity method of accounting. The recorded loss in Somerset for fiscal 2005 was $3.3 million compared to a loss of $7.1 million in fiscal 2004. The investment in Somerset was reduced to zero during fiscal 2005. As such, in accordance with Accounting Principles Board ( APB ) Opinion No. 18, The Equity Method of Accounting for Investments in Common Stock, the Company temporarily ceased recording losses on this investment. Liquidity and Capital Resources The Company primary source of liquidity continues to be cash flows from operating activities, which were $416.6 million for fiscal 2006. Working capital as of March 31, 2006 was $926.7 million, a decrease of $356.3 million from the balance at March 31, 2005. The majority of this decrease was the result of net sales of marketable securities and lower accounts receivable, net. In addition to long-term borrowings, the Company used existing cash and marketable securities to finance certain transactions described below. The decrease in accounts receivable, net, is due to the timing of cash collections since the end of fiscal 2005, primarily with respect to sales of fentanyl, which was launched in the fourth quarter. During the third quarter of fiscal 2006, the Company received $23.0 million related to the sale of the U.S. and Canadian rights for Apokyn. In fiscal 2006, $8.9 million of revenue associated with the sale was recognized and included in other revenues. The remainder, net of certain related assets, has been recorded as deferred revenue. During the fourth quarter, Mylan received $75.0 million related to its licensing agreement for nebivolol and has the potential to earn future milestone payments as well as royalties on nebivolol sales. Mylan also received payments totaling $20.0 million with respect to other licensing agreements. These payments, along with the $75.0 million, are also included in deferred revenue. Cash provided by investing activities during fiscal 2006 was $195.1 million. Of the Company $1.9 billion of total assets at March 31, 2006, $518.1 million was held in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. 32 Table of Contents Investments in marketable securities consist of a variety of high credit quality debt securities, including U.S. government, state and local government, and corporate obligations. These investments are highly liquid and available for working capital needs. As these instruments mature, the funds are generally reinvested in instruments with similar characteristics. Capital expenditures during fiscal 2006 were $103.7 million. These expenditures were incurred primarily with respect to the Company planned expansions and the implementation of an ERP system. The Company anticipates that the majority of the remaining expenditures related to planned expansions and the ERP implementation will occur in fiscal 2007 and therefore expects capital expenditures for fiscal 2007 to be approximately $100.0 million. Cash used in financing activities was $599.3 million for fiscal 2006. A total of $1.26 billion was used during fiscal 2006 to repurchase Mylan common stock. Of this, $1.0 billion was used to repurchase shares as part of the Company modified Dutch Auction self-tender, with the remainder used to pay for expenses related to the self-tender and to repurchase shares under a previously announced open market follow-on repurchase program. In total, approximately 12.6 million shares were repurchased under the repurchase program in fiscal 2006 for approximately $250.0 million. Cash proceeds of $775.0 million from the issuance of debt were received in the current year and used to partially finance the stock buybacks described above. During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2006, the Company made an optional principal payment of $85.0 million on its term loan, in addition to the required 1% annual amortization. This amount was in excess of the mandatory repayment obligation. Financing fees of $14.7 million were paid during fiscal 2006. In order to provide additional operating leverage, if necessary, the Company maintains a revolving credit facility under its senior credit facility providing for borrowing of up to $225.0 million. As of March 31, 2006, no funds were advanced under this facility. Also included in cash flows from financing activities are proceeds of $56.9 million from the exercise of stock options and cash dividends paid of $49.8 million. In the first quarter of fiscal 2006, the Board of Directors voted to double the amount of the quarterly dividend to 6.0 cents per share from 3.0 cents per share, effective with the dividend paid for the first quarter of fiscal 2006. Additionally, included in financing activities in fiscal 2006 was a $21.8 million change in the amount of outstanding checks in excess of cash in our primary disbursement accounts. The Company utilizes a cash management system under which uncleared checks in excess of the cash balance in the bank account at the end of the reporting period are shown as a book cash overdraft. The Company transfers cash on an as-needed basis to fund clearing checks. The Company does not incur any financing charges with respect to this arrangement. The Company is involved in various legal proceedings that are considered normal to its business (see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements). While it is not feasible to predict the outcome of such proceedings, an adverse outcome in any of these proceedings could materially affect the Company financial position and results of operations. The Company is actively pursuing, and is currently involved in, joint projects related to the development, distribution and marketing of both generic and brand products. Many of these arrangements provide for payments by or to the Company upon the attainment of specified milestones. While these arrangements help to reduce the financial risk for unsuccessful projects, fulfillment of specified milestones resulting in either cash inflows or outflows or the occurrence of other obligations may result in fluctuations in cash flows. The Company is continuously evaluating the potential acquisition of products, as well as companies, as a strategic part of its future growth. Consequently, the Company may utilize current cash reserves or incur additional indebtedness to finance any such acquisitions, which could impact future liquidity. 33 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at March 31, 2006 and the effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Less than One-Three Three-Five As of March 31, 2006 Total One Year Years Years Thereafter (in thousands) Operating leases $ 9,911 $ 3,944 $ 5,466 $ 321 $ 180 Other long-term obligations 22,435 1,821 5,463 5,463 9,688 Long-term debt 691,927 6,739 8,250 176,938 500,000 Scheduled interest payments 286,889 42,660 122,817 47,967 73,445 Revolving credit facility Letter of credit 975 975 $ 1,012,137 $ 56,139 $ 141,996 $ 230,689 $ 583,313 We lease certain real property under various operating lease arrangements that expire generally over the next eight years. These leases generally provide us with the option to renew the lease at the end of the lease term. We have also entered into agreements to lease vehicles, which are typically 24 to 36 months, for use by our key employees. Long-term debt consists of $500.0 million in Senior Notes and a $275.0 million borrowing under a $500.0 million senior secured credit facility. The Senior Notes consist of $150.0 million of Senior Notes due 2010, and bearing interest at 5 3 / 4 % per annum (the 2010 Notes ), and $350.0 million of Senior Notes due 2015, and bearing interest at 6 3 / 8 % per annum (the 2015 Notes , and collectively, the Notes ). The Senior Notes were originally issued on July 21, 2005, but were exchanged on January 14, 2006 in accordance with a registration rights agreement in a transaction consummated on January 19, 2006. The form and terms of the Senior Notes are identical in all material respects to the original notes except the transfer restrictions, registration rights and additional interest provisions relating to the original notes do not apply to the Notes. The senior secured credit facility, which was also entered into on July 21, 2005, consists of a $225.0 million five-year revolving credit facility, which the Company expects to use for working capital and general corporate purposes, and a $275.0 million five-year term loan, of which the balance is approximately $188.0 million at March 31, 2006. The term loan bears interest at LIBOR plus 150 basis points or prime plus 50 basis points at the Company option. The interest rate in effect on the term loan at March 31, 2006 was 6.33%. No borrowings were outstanding under the revolving credit facility at March 31, 2006. Scheduled interest payments represent the estimated interest payments on the Notes and the senior secured credit facility. Variable debt interest payments are estimated using current interest rates, as discussed above. Other long-term obligations, primarily deferred compensation, consist of the discounted future payments under individually negotiated agreements with certain key employees and directors. In addition to the above, the Company has entered into various product licensing and development agreements. In some of these arrangements, we provide funding for the development of the product or obtain the rights to the use of the patent, through milestone payments, in exchange for marketing and distribution rights to the product. Because milestones represent the completion of specific contractual events and it is uncertain if and when these milestones will be achieved, such contingencies have not been recorded on the Company Consolidated Balance Sheet. In the event that all projects are successful, milestone and development payments of approximately $13.7 million would be paid. The Company periodically enters into licensing agreements with other pharmaceutical companies for the manufacture, marketing and/or sale of pharmaceutical products. These agreements generally call for the Company to pay a percentage of amounts earned from the sale of the product as a royalty. 34 Table of Contents The Company does not have material financial guarantees or other contractual commitments that are reasonably likely to adversely affect liquidity. The Company does not have any special purpose entities or off-balance sheet financing arrangements. We have entered into employment and other agreements with certain executives that provide for compensation and certain other benefits. These agreements provide for severance payments under certain circumstances. Application of Critical Accounting Policies Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which were prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Included within these policies are certain policies which contain critical accounting estimates and, therefore, have been deemed to be critical accounting policies. Critical accounting estimates are those which require management to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made and for which the use of different estimates, which reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. The Company has identified the following to be its critical accounting policies: the determination of net revenue provisions and the impact of existing legal matters. Net Revenue Provisions Net revenues are recognized for product sales upon shipment when title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer and when provisions for estimates, including discounts, rebates, promotional adjustments, price adjustments, returns, chargebacks, and other potential adjustments are reasonably determinable. Accruals for these provisions are presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements as reductions to net revenues and accounts receivable and within other current liabilities. Accounts receivable are presented net of allowances relating to these provisions, which were $381.8 million and $349.4 million at March 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively. Other current liabilities include $60.4 million and $51.8 million at March 31, 2006 and 2005, respectively for certain rebates and other adjustments that are paid to indirect customers. The following is a rollforward of the most significant provisions for estimated sales allowances during fiscal year ended March 31, 2006: Current Provision Balance at Checks/Credits Related to Sales Balance at March 31, Issued to Third Made in the March 31, 2005 Parties Current Period 2006 (in thousands) Chargebacks $ 166,066 $ (1,081,389 ) $ 1,106,560 $ 191,237 Customer performance and promotions $ 69,802 $ (167,837 ) $ 160,797 $ 62,762 Returns $ 46,544 $ (39,177 ) $ 44,401 $ 51,768 The accrual for chargebacks increased primarily as a result of continued pricing pressures on certain products in the Company portfolio, most notably omeprazole and carbidopa/ levodopa, as well as an increase in amounts purchased by customers that are entitled to chargeback credits. No material amounts included in the provision for chargebacks recorded in the current period relate to sales made in the prior period. Provisions for estimated discounts, rebates, promotional and other credits require a lower degree of subjectivity and are less complex in nature yet, combined, represent a significant portion of the overall provisions. These provisions are estimated based on historical payment experience, historical relationship to revenues, estimated customer inventory levels and contract terms. Such provisions are determinable due to the limited number of assumptions and consistency of historical experience. Others, such as price adjustments, returns and chargebacks, require management to make more subjective judgments and evaluate current market conditions. These provisions are discussed in further detail below. 35 Table of Contents Price Adjustments Price adjustments, which include shelf stock adjustments, are credits issued to reflect decreases in the selling prices of our products. Shelf stock adjustments are based upon the amount of product that our customers have remaining in their inventories at the time of the price reduction. Decreases in our selling prices and the issuance of credits are discretionary decisions made by us to reflect market conditions. Amounts recorded for estimated price adjustments are based upon specified terms with direct customers, estimated launch dates of competing products, estimated declines in market price, and, in the case of shelf stock adjustments, estimates of inventory held by the customer. In most cases, data with respect to the level of inventory held by the customer is obtained directly from certain of our largest customers. Additionally, internal estimates are prepared based upon historical buying patterns and estimated end-user demand. Such information allows us to assess the impact that a price adjustment will have given the quantity of inventory on hand. We regularly monitor these and other factors and evaluate our reserves and estimates as additional information becomes available. Returns Consistent with industry practice, we maintain a return policy that allows our customers to return product within a specified period prior to and subsequent to the expiration date. Our estimate of the provision for returns is based upon our historical experience with actual returns, which is applied to the level of sales for the period that corresponds to the period during which our customers may return product. This period is known based on the shelf lives of our products at the time of shipment. Additionally, we consider factors such as levels of inventory in the distribution channel, product dating and expiration period, size and maturity of the market prior to a product launch, entrance in the market of additional generic competition, changes in formularies or launch of over-the -counter products, to name a few, and make adjustments to the provision for returns in the event that it appears that actual product returns may differ from our established reserves. We obtain data with respect to the level of inventory in the channel directly from certain of our largest customers. Although the introduction of additional generic competition does not give our customers the right to return product outside of our established policy, we do recognize that such competition could ultimately lead to increased returns. We analyze this on a case-by-case basis, when significant, and make adjustments to increase our reserve for product returns as necessary. Chargebacks The provision for chargebacks is the most significant and complex estimate used in the recognition of revenue. The Company markets products directly to wholesalers, distributors, retail pharmacy chains, mail order pharmacies and group purchasing organizations. The Company also markets products indirectly to independent pharmacies, managed care organizations, hospitals, nursing homes and pharmacy benefit management companies, collectively referred to as indirect customers. Mylan enters into agreements with its indirect customers to establish contract pricing for certain products. The indirect customers then independently select a wholesaler from which to actually purchase the products at these contracted prices. Alternatively, certain wholesalers may enter into agreements with indirect customers that establish contract pricing for certain products which the wholesalers provide. Under either arrangement, Mylan will provide credit to the wholesaler for any difference between the contracted price with the indirect party and the wholesaler invoice price. Such credit is called a chargeback, while the difference between the contracted price and the wholesaler invoice price is referred to as the chargeback rate. The provision for chargebacks is based on expected sell-through levels by our wholesaler customers to indirect customers, as well as estimated wholesaler inventory levels. For the latter, in most cases, inventory levels are obtained directly from certain of our largest wholesalers. Additionally, internal estimates are prepared based upon historical buying patterns and estimated end-user demand. Such information allows us to estimate the potential chargeback that we may ultimately owe to our customers given the quantity of inventory on hand. We continually monitor our provision for chargebacks and evaluate our reserve and estimates as additional information becomes available. Legal Matters The Company is involved in various legal proceedings, some of which involve claims for substantial amounts. An estimate is made to accrue for a loss contingency relating to any of these legal proceedings if it is probable that a liability was incurred as of the date of the financial statements and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Because of the subjective nature inherent in assessing the outcome of litigation and because of the potential that an adverse outcome in a legal proceeding could have a material impact on the 36 Table of Contents Company financial position or results of operations, such estimates are considered to be critical accounting estimates. During fiscal 2006, the Company recorded an accrual of $12.0 million following a jury verdict of approximately that amount in the Company lorazepam and clorazepate litigation. See ITEM 3, Legal Proceedings, for further discussion. After a review of all other legal proceedings in which we are involved, it was determined at March 31, 2006, that the conditions mentioned above were not met. The Company will continue to evaluate all legal matters as additional information becomes available. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In December 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Statement of Financial Accounting Standards ( SFAS ) No. 123(R), Share-Based Payment. SFAS No. 123(R) establishes standards for the accounting for transactions in which an entity exchanges its equity instruments for goods and services. Under SFAS 123(R), companies will no longer be able to account for share-based compensation transactions using the intrinsic method in accordance with APB No. 25, Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees. Instead, companies will be required to account for such transactions using a fair-value method and to recognize compensation expense over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award. The Company has adopted SFAS No. 123(R) effective April 1, 2006. Based on the amount of options outstanding for which the requisite service has not yet been rendered by the employee, the Company expects to incur costs of approximately $11.0 million, net of tax, in fiscal 2007 as a result of the adoption of this standard. 
