CIK: 69499
Company Name: MYLAN INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-02-24


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition And Results of Operations The following discussion and analysis addresses material changes in the financial condition and results of operations of Mylan Inc. and subsidiaries (collectively the Company, Mylan or we ) for the periods presented. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements, the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and our other Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) filings and public disclosures. This Form 10-K may contain forward-looking statements. These statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements may include, without limitation, statements about our market opportunities, strategies, competition and expected activities and expenditures, and at times may be identified by the use of words such as may, could, should, would, project, believe, anticipate, expect, plan, estimate, forecast, potential, intend, continue and variations of these words or comparable words. Forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties. Accordingly, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, the risks described above under Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements for revisions or changes after the filing date of this Form 10-K. Executive Overview Mylan ranks among the leading generic and specialty pharmaceutical companies in the world, offering one of the industry broadest and highest quality product portfolios, a robust pipeline and a global commercial footprint that spans more than 150 countries and territories. With a workforce of more than 16,000 employees and external contractors, Mylan has attained leading positions in key international markets through its wide array of dosage forms and delivery systems, significant manufacturing capacity, global scale and commitment to customer service. Through our Matrix Laboratories Limited ( Matrix ) subsidiary, Mylan operates one of the world largest active pharmaceutical ingredient ( API ) manufacturers with respect to the number of drug master files filed with regulatory agencies. This capability makes Mylan one of only two global generics companies with a comprehensive, vertically integrated supply chain. We hold a leading generics sales position in three of the world largest pharmaceutical markets, those being the United States ( U.S. ), France and the United Kingdom ( U.K. ), and we also hold leading sales positions in several other key generics markets, including Australia, Belgium, Italy, Portugal and Spain. Mylan has two segments, Generics and Specialty. Generics primarily develops, manufactures, sells and distributes generic or branded generic pharmaceutical products in tablet, capsule, injectable or transdermal patch form, as well as API. Specialty engages mainly in the manufacture and sale of branded specialty nebulized and injectable products. We also report in Corporate/Other certain research and development expenses, general and 50 Table of Contents administrative expenses, litigation settlements, amortization of intangible assets and certain purchase-accounting items, impairment charges, and other items not directly attributable to the segments. Acquisition of Bioniche Pharma Holdings Limited On September 7, 2010, we acquired 100% of the outstanding equity in Bioniche Pharma Holdings Limited ( Bioniche Pharma ), a privately held, global injectable pharmaceutical company, for a purchase price of approximately $544 million in cash. Mylan did not assume any of Bioniche Pharma outstanding long-term debt or acquire any of its cash as part of the transaction. We financed this transaction using a combination of cash on hand and proceeds from long-term borrowings. With its manufacturing and research operations based in Galway, Ireland, Bioniche Pharma manufactures and sells a diverse portfolio of injectable products across several therapeutic areas to hospital customers, including analgesics/anesthetics, orthopedics, oncology, and urology, with most of its sales made to customers in the U.S. Bioniche Pharma and our wholly-owned unit dose subsidiary UDL Laboratories, Inc. ( UDL ) were integrated to form Mylan Institutional, our hospital/institutional business based in the U.S. The results for Bioniche Pharma from the date of the acquisition through December 31, 2010, are included in the consolidated financial statements and as part of the North American region within our Generics segment. Acquisition of the Remaining Interest in Matrix In March 2009, we announced plans to buy the remaining public interest in Matrix from its minority shareholders pursuant to a voluntary delisting offer. At the time, we owned approximately 71.2% of Matrix through a wholly owned subsidiary and controlled more than 76% of its voting rights. During 2010 and 2009, we completed the purchase of an additional portion of the remaining interest from minority shareholders of Matrix for cash of approximately $6 million and $182 million, respectively, bringing both our total ownership and control to approximately 97% as of December 31, 2010. In November 2010, we announced the re-opening of the offer to purchase the remainder of the shares held by minority shareholders. Issuance of Senior Notes and Loan Repayment In May 2010, we issued $550 million aggregate principal amount of 7.625% Senior Notes due 2017 (the 2017 Senior Notes ) and $700 million of 7.875% Senior Notes due 2020 (the 2020 Senior Notes ) in a private offering exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act of 1933 to qualified institutional buyers in accordance with Rule 144A and to persons outside of the United States pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. In July 2010, we privately placed $300 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes through a reopening of our 2020 Senior Notes. The 2017 Senior Notes and 2020 Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain of our domestic subsidiaries. We used $1 billion of the net proceeds of the initial 2017 Senior Notes and 2020 Senior Notes offering to repay a portion of the U.S. Tranche B Term Loans due under the terms of its Senior Credit Agreement. Additionally, in September 2010, we repaid $300 million of debt under the Senior Credit Agreement, by repaying the remaining balance of the U.S. Tranche A Term Loans and a portion of the U.S. Tranche B Term Loans. In November 2010, we issued $800 million aggregate principal amount of 6.0% Senior Notes due 2018 (the 2018 Senior Notes ). These notes were also issued in a private offering exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act to qualified institutional buyers in accordance with Rule 144A and to persons outside of the United States pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. The 2018 Senior Notes are also senior unsecured obligations and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain of our domestic subsidiaries. We used the gross proceeds of the 2018 Senior Notes offering to repay a portion of the U.S. Tranche B Term Loans due under the terms of its Senior Credit Agreement, thereby reducing senior secured leverage and extending the maturity profile of our outstanding indebtedness. We believe that through the foregoing 2010 capital market transactions, Mylan debt maturity schedule was substantially improved. Mylan has no significant debt maturities in 2011. The Company has $724 million due in 51 Table of Contents 2012 and $124 million due in 2013. Our current intention is to repay such amounts using available cash on hand at maturity. Financial Summary For the year ended December 31, 2010, Mylan reported total revenues of $5.45 billion compared to $5.09 billion for 2009. This represents an increase in revenues of $357.7 million, or 7.0%. Consolidated gross profit for the current year was $2.22 billion, compared to $2.07 billion in the prior year, an increase of $142.9 million, or 6.9%. For the current year, earnings from operations were $721.6 million compared to $523.4 million in the prior year. The net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. common shareholders for the current year were $223.6 million, and earnings per diluted share were $0.68. In the prior year, net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. common shareholders were $93.5 million, or earnings of $0.30 per diluted share. A more detailed discussion of the company financial results can be found below in the section titled Results of Operations. Included in the results for 2010 and 2009 are the following items of note: 2010: Amortization expense, primarily related to purchased intangible assets associated with acquisitions, of $309.2 million; Interest of $60.0 million, primarily related to the amortization of the discounts on our convertible debt instruments and 2018 Senior Notes, net of amortization of the premium on our 2020 Senior Notes; Net charges related to the settlement of litigation of $127.1 million; Charges, related to the refinancing transactions noted above, of $37.4 million, primarily swap termination fees and the write-off of deferred financing costs included in other (expense) income, net; Costs related to the acquisition of Bioniche Pharma of $12.7 million; Additional costs, primarily restructuring, product transfers and loss on sale of certain non-operating assets totaling $68.5 million; and A tax effect of $252.8 million related to the above items and other income tax related items. 2009: Amortization expense, primarily related to purchased intangible assets associated with acquisitions, of $282.5 million; Interest of $42.9 million relating to the amortization of the discounts on our convertible debt instruments; Other revenue of approximately $28.5 million resulting from the cancellation of product development agreements for which the revenue had been previously deferred; Net charges related to the settlement of litigation of $225.7 million; An upfront payment of $18.0 million made with respect to the execution of a co-development agreement; Rebranding costs associated with a migration to the Mylan brand for the former Merck Generics business totaling $21.4 million; Additional costs, primarily restructuring, totaling $60.7 million; A tax effect of $207.5 million related to the above items and other income tax related items; and An income tax benefit of approximately $65.0 million related to losses recognized as a result of reorganizations among certain of our foreign subsidiaries. 52 Table of Contents For comparative purposes 2008 included the following: Amortization expense, primarily related to purchased intangible assets and inventory associated with acquisitions, of $415.6 million; The recognition of $468.1 million of deferred revenue related to Mylan sale of the product rights of Bystolic; An impairment loss on the goodwill of the Dey business of $385.0 million; Intangible asset impairment charges of $72.5 million on certain non-core, insignificant, third-party products; Net charges related to the settlement of litigation of $16.6 million; Interest of $29.5 million relating to the amortization of the discounts on our convertible debt instruments; Rebranding costs associated with a migration to the Mylan brand for the former Merck Generics business totaling $42.9 million; Consulting and information technology ( IT ) costs directly associated with the integration of newly acquired businesses totaling approximately $38.7 million; Additional costs, other than consulting and IT, primarily restructuring, related to the integration of recently acquired entities, and other costs, totaling $77.2 million; and A tax effect of $30.6 million related to the above items and other income tax related items. 2010 Compared to 2009 Total Revenues and Gross Profit For the year ended December 31, 2010, Mylan reported total revenues of $5.45 billion compared to $5.09 billion in the prior year. Total revenues include both net revenues and other revenues from third parties. Third party net revenues for the current year were $5.40 billion compared to $5.02 billion for the prior year, representing an increase of $388.9 million, or 7.8%. Other third party revenues for the current year were $46.3 million compared to $77.4 million in the prior year, a decrease of $31.1 million. In 2009, within Generics, we recognized $28.5 million of incremental other revenue resulting from the cancellation of product development agreements for which the revenue had been previously deferred. There was no such revenue recognized during the current year period. Mylan revenues are impacted by the effect of foreign currency translation, primarily reflecting changes in U.S. dollar in comparison to the functional currencies of Mylan Euro-denominated subsidiaries, as well as the currencies of Mylan subsidiaries in Australia, Japan and India. The favorable impact of foreign currency translation on current year total revenues was less than 1%. In arriving at net revenues, gross revenues are reduced by provisions for estimates, including discounts, rebates, promotions, price adjustments, returns and chargebacks. See the section titled Application of Critical Accounting Policies in this Item 7, for a thorough discussion of our methodology with respect to such provisions. For 2010, the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were for chargebacks in the amount of $2.07 billion and promotions and indirect sales allowances in the amount of $1.27 billion. For 2009, the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were for chargebacks in the amount of $1.89 billion and promotions and indirect sales allowances in the amount of $1.08 billion. Gross profit for the current year was $2.22 billion and gross margins were 40.7%. For 2009, gross profit was $2.07 billion, and gross margins were also 40.7%. Gross profit for the current year is impacted by certain purchase accounting related items recorded during 2010, of approximately $309.2 million, which consisted primarily of amortization related to purchased intangible assets associated with acquisitions. Excluding such items, gross margins would have been approximately 46%. Prior year gross profit is also impacted by similar purchase accounting related items in the amount of $282.5 million. Excluding such items, gross margins in the prior year would have also been approximately 46%. 53 Table of Contents From time to time, a limited number of our products may represent a significant portion of our net revenues, gross profit and net earnings. Generally, this is due to the timing of new product launches and the amount, if any, of additional competition in the market. Our top ten products in terms of sales, in the aggregate, represented approximately 23% of total revenues in 2010. Generics Segment For the current year, Generics third party net revenues were $4.98 billion compared to $4.61 billion in the prior year, an increase of $371.4 million, or 8.1%. Translating Generics 2010 third party net revenues at prior year comparative period foreign current exchange rates would have resulted in year-over-year growth of approximately 7%. Generics sales are derived primarily in or from the U.S. and Canada (collectively North America ), Europe, Middle East and Africa (collectively, EMEA ) and India, Australia, Japan, and New Zealand (collectively, Asia Pacific ). Third party net revenues from North America were $2.36 billion for the current year, compared to $2.09 billion for the prior year, representing an increase of $265.0 million, or 12.6%. The increase in current year net revenues was driven by increased volume, as a result of Mylan ability to continue to be a stable and reliable source of supply to the market, new product launches and incremental revenue from the Bioniche Pharma acquisition, partially offset by lower pricing on certain existing products. The effect of foreign currency translation was insignificant within North America. The entrance into the market of additional competition generally has a negative impact on the volume and pricing of the affected products. Such competition, including additional generic competition on divalproex sodium extended-release ( divalproex ER ) tablets, the generic version of Abbott Laboratories Depakote ER, which entered the market in August 2009, contributed to the lower pricing. Products generally contribute most significantly to revenues and gross margin at the time of their launch, even more so in periods of market exclusivity, as was the case with divalproex ER, or in periods of limited generic competition. As such, the timing of new product introductions can have a significant impact on Mylan financial results. New products launched in the U.S. and Canada in 2010 contributed sales of $158.6 million, over half of which consisted of valacyclovir and minocycline hydrochloride extended release ( minocycline ER ) tablets, the generic version of Medicis Pharmaceuticals Corporation ( Medicis ) Solodyn ER. Upon receiving final approval from the FDA in July 2010, Mylan commenced immediate shipment of minocycline ER. Mylan also reached settlement and license agreements with Medicis resolving patent litigation relating to minocycline ER, and the Company ceased additional distribution. Pursuant to the terms of the agreements, Medicis released Mylan from any liability related to the prior sales of the product, and Mylan has the right to market minocycline ER in the U.S. beginning in November 2011, or earlier under certain circumstances. As a result of significant uncertainties surrounding the pricing and market conditions with respect to this product, we are not able to reasonably estimate the amount of potential price adjustments, including product returns. Therefore, revenues on shipments of this product are currently being deferred until the resolution of such uncertainties. At the present time, such uncertainties are resolved upon our customers sale of this product. As a result, the Company is recognizing revenue only upon our customers sale of this product. Third party net revenues from EMEA were $1.55 billion in 2010, compared to $1.64 billion in 2009, a decrease of $90.8 million, or 5.5%. However, translating current year third party net revenues from EMEA at prior year exchange rates would result in a decrease of approximately $24 million, or 1%. This decrease was mainly the result of unfavorable pricing in many of the European markets in which Mylan operates, partially offset by new product launches throughout EMEA and a strong performance in Italy. Excluding the unfavorable effect of foreign currency translation, our business in France experienced a low single digit year over year decline in third party net sales primarily due to unfavorable pricing as a result of increased competition. Such recent competition in France includes the launch, by brand companies, of generic versions of their own products. Despite this local currency decline, the market share of our French business remained relatively stable in 2010 as compared to 2009. 54 Table of Contents In Italy, excluding the effect of foreign currency, third party sales increased by approximately 43% as a result of successful product launches and increased market penetration, which has favorably affected sales volume. In addition, our Italian business benefitted from certain regulatory changes in early 2010 which resulted in an overall positive pricing effect. In June 2010, additional regulatory changes were introduced which decreased prices on certain products, partially offsetting these positive pricing impacts. If such changes continue in this market, we may experience a negative impact on sales and gross profit in future periods. Certain markets in which we do business have recently undergone government-imposed price reductions, and further government-imposed price reductions are expected in the future. Such measures, along with the tender systems discussed below, are likely to have a negative impact on sales and gross profit in these markets. However, pro-generic government initiatives in certain markets could help to offset some of this unfavorability by potentially increasing rates of generic substitution. A number of markets in which we operate have implemented or may implement tender systems for generic pharmaceuticals in an effort to lower prices. Generally speaking, tender systems can have an unfavorable impact on revenue and profitability. Under such tender systems, manufacturers submit bids which establish prices for generic pharmaceutical products. Upon winning the tender, the winning company will receive a preferential reimbursement for a period of time. The tender system often results in companies underbidding one another by proposing low pricing in order to win the tender. Sales in Germany continue to be negatively affected by the implementation of tender systems in that country, while certain of our subsidiaries, in particular, the Netherlands, have benefited from recent tenders. Additionally, the loss of a tender by a third party to whom we supply API can also have a negative impact on our sales and profitability. In Asia Pacific, third party net revenues were $1.07 billion in 2010, compared to $877.1 million in 2009, an increase of $197.2 million, or 22.5%. Excluding the favorable effect of foreign currency translation, calculated as described above, the increase was approximately $108 million, or 12%. This increase is primarily driven by higher third party sales by Matrix. At Matrix, the increase in third party net revenues is due to double-digit growth, excluding the effect of foreign currency, in sales of both anti-retroviral ( ARV ) finished dosage form ( FDF ) generic products, which are used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS, and API. In addition to third party sales, the Asia Pacific region also supplies both FDF generic products and API to Mylan subsidiaries in conjunction with Mylan vertical integration strategy. Intercompany revenues recognized by the Asia Pacific region were $162.2 million in 2010, compared to $67.8 million in the prior year. These intercompany sales eliminate within, and therefore are not included in, Generics or consolidated net revenues. In Japan, third party net revenues were favorably impacted by increasing government promotion of generic drugs through incentives to pharmacies, as well as through new product launches. In Australia, the impact of new product launches and favorable product mix were more than offset by the impact of government-imposed price reductions as local currency third party net revenues experienced a low single digit year over year decrease. As in EMEA, both Japan and Australia have undergone government-imposed price reductions which have had, and could continue to have, a negative impact on sales and gross profit in these markets. Specialty Segment For the current year, Specialty reported third party net revenues of $422.8 million, an increase of $17.5 million, or 4.3%, from the prior year of $405.3 million. Intercompany sales by Specialty totaled $61.8 million in the current year compared to $40.8 million in the prior year. The increase is due to the fact that certain generic products previously sold to third parties by Specialty are now sold to Mylan subsidiaries in North America who, in turn, sell the products to third parties. These generic products contributed $46.8 million to total revenues of the Specialty Segment in 2009. Excluding the sale of such products from 2009 third party net revenues would have resulted in an increase in third party net revenues in the current year of $64.3 million or 17.9%. The most significant contributor to Specialty revenues continues to be the EpiPen Auto-Injector, which is used in the treatment of severe allergic reactions. The EpiPen Auto-Injector is the number one epinephrine auto-injector 55 Table of Contents for the treatment of severe allergic reactions with over 90% market share in the U.S. and worldwide. Specialty realized increased sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector as a result of favorable pricing and increased volume. In addition to the continued strong sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector, the increase in third-party sales included higher sales volumes of Perforomist Solution, Dey maintenance therapy for patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Operating Expenses Research and development ( R&D ) expense in 2010 was $282.1 million, compared to $275.3 million in the same prior year period, an increase of $6.8 million, with almost one-third of this increase due to the unfavorable impact from foreign currency. Included in R&D in 2009 was an up-front payment of $18.0 million related to our execution of a co-development agreement. Excluding this payment, as well as the effect of foreign currency, R&D increased due primarily to costs associated with higher volumes of internal and external product development and resulting submissions and R&D expense related to Bioniche Pharma. Selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expense for the current year was $1.09 billion, compared to $1.05 billion for the prior year, an increase of $36.5 million. SG&A increased primarily as a result of increased legal costs and higher professional fees, including those related to the acquisition of Bioniche Pharma, and an unfavorable impact from foreign currency, partially offset by cost savings which have resulted from restructuring programs undertaken in prior years. Litigation Settlements, net During 2010, we recorded net litigation charges of $127.1 million, compared to $225.7 million during the prior year. The current year consists primarily of charges related to the outstanding pricing litigation and product liability-related matters. With regard to our outstanding pricing litigation, the Company recorded pre-tax charges of $66.0 million in 2010 and $160.0 million in 2009 related to settlements in principal to resolve certain claims and estimated potential losses on other claims. In addition, the Company recorded pre-tax charges of approximately $41.0 million in 2010 to reserve for estimated potential losses and settlements in principle related to certain product liability claims. Also included in 2009 was a pre-tax charge of $121.0 million, related to the settlement of an investigation by the U.S. Department of Justice concerning calculations of Medicaid drug rebates, partially offset by certain litigation-related recoveries. Interest Expense Interest expense for 2010 totaled $331.5 million, compared to $318.5 million for 2009. The increase is primarily due to higher interest associated with the 2010 debt offerings, including higher net debt balances and the amortization of discounts. Included in interest expense for the current year and the prior year are $60.0 million and $42.9 million primarily related to the amortization of the discounts on our convertible debt instruments and the 2018 Senior Notes, net of amortization of the premium on our 2020 Senior Notes. Other (Expense) Income, net Other (expense) income, net, was expense of $34.2 million in the current year compared to income of $22.1 million in the prior year. Generally included in other (expense) income, net, are interest and dividend income and foreign exchange transaction gains and losses. Additionally, included in the current year is a $4.9 million loss on the sale of certain non-operating assets, charges associated with the termination of certain interest rate swaps totaling $18.6 million and the write-off of previously deferred financing fees of $18.8 million related to the repayment of the senior credit facility debt. The prior year includes a favorable adjustment of $13.9 million to the restructuring reserve as a result of a reduction in the estimated remaining spending on accrued projects, as well as a net gain of $10.4 million realized on the termination of two joint ventures by our Matrix subsidiary, partially offset by an $11.7 million loss on the sale, by Matrix, of a majority owned subsidiary. 56 Table of Contents Income Tax Expense We recorded income tax expense of $10.4 million in 2010, compared to a $20.8 million benefit for 2009. 2010 included a net foreign tax credit of $28.0 million, while 2009 included a $65.0 million tax benefit related to losses recognized as a result of reorganizations among certain of our foreign subsidiaries. In addition to these items, the change in the provision year over year was driven primarily by changes in losses of certain foreign subsidiaries for which we have not recognized the related income tax benefit and different levels of income in different tax jurisdictions. Also, there were net decreases to our tax reserves due to favorable tax rulings from taxing authorities, expirations of statutes of limitations, and participation in voluntary disclosure agreements with certain tax jurisdictions. 2009 Compared to 2008 Total Revenues and Gross Profit For the year ended December 31, 2009, Mylan reported total revenues of $5.09 billion compared to $5.14 billion in 2008. Total revenues include both net revenues and other revenues from third parties. Third party net revenues in 2009 were $5.02 billion compared to $4.63 billion in 2008, representing an increase of $384.2 million, or 8.3%. Revenues were negatively impacted by the effect of foreign currency translation, primarily reflecting a stronger U.S. dollar in comparison to the functional currencies of Mylan other subsidiaries, primarily those in Europe, Australia and India. Translating 2009 revenues at prior year exchange rates would have resulted in year-over-year growth in third party net revenues excluding foreign currency of approximately $559 million, or approximately 12%. Other revenues for 2009 were $77.4 million compared to $506.3 million in 2008, a decrease of $429.0 million. Included in other revenue for 2008 is the recognition of $468.1 million of previously deferred revenue related to the sale of our rights of Bystolic. Excluding this item, other revenues increased in 2009 mainly due to incremental revenue resulting from the cancellation of product development agreements for which the revenue had been previously deferred. Prior to the termination of these agreements, Mylan had been amortizing the previously received non-refundable payments over a period of several years. In January 2006, we announced an agreement with Forest Laboratories Holdings, Ltd. ( Forest ), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Forest Laboratories, Inc., for the commercialization, development and distribution of Bystolic in the United States and Canada (the 2006 Agreement ). Under the terms of that agreement, Mylan received a $75 million up-front payment and $25 million upon approval of the product. Such amounts were being deferred until the commercial launch of the product and were to be amortized over the remaining term of the license agreement. Mylan also had the potential to earn future milestones and royalties on Bystolic sales and an option to co-promote the product, while Forest assumed all future development and selling and marketing expenses. In February 2008, Mylan executed an agreement with Forest whereby Mylan sold to Forest its rights to Bystolic (the Amended Agreement ). Under the terms of the Amended Agreement, Mylan received a cash payment of $370 million, which was deferred along with the $100 million received under the 2006 Agreement, and retained its contractual royalties for three years, through 2010. Mylan obligations under the 2006 Agreement to supply Bystolic to Forest were unchanged by the Amended Agreement. Mylan believed that these supply obligations represented significant continuing involvement as Mylan remained contractually obligated to manufacture the product for Forest while the product was being commercialized. As a result of this continuing involvement, Mylan had been amortizing the $470 million of deferred revenue ratably through 2020 pending the transfer of manufacturing responsibility that was anticipated to occur in the second half of 2008. In September 2008, Mylan completed the transfer of all manufacturing responsibilities for the product to Forest, and Mylan supply obligations had therefore been eliminated. We believed that we no longer had significant continuing involvement and that the earnings process had been completed. As such, the deferred revenue of $468.1 million was recognized and included in other revenues in our Consolidated Statements of Operations for 2008. 57 Table of Contents Royalties under the Amended Agreement were considered to be contingent consideration and were recognized in other revenue as earned upon sale of the product by Forest. Such royalties were recorded at the net royalty rates specified in the Amended Agreement. Gross profit for 2009 was $2.07 billion and gross margins were 40.7%. For 2008, gross profit was $2.07 billion, and gross margins were 40.3%. Gross profit for 2009 is impacted by certain purchase accounting related items recorded during 2009 of approximately $282.5 million, which consisted primarily of amortization related to the purchased intangible assets associated with acquisitions. Excluding these items, gross margins would have been approximately 46.3%. Prior year gross profit is also impacted by similar purchase accounting related items in the amount of $481.4 million, including certain intangible assets impairment charges. Excluding such items, as well as the Bystolic revenue, gross margins in the prior year would have been approximately 44.6%. The increase in gross margins, excluding the items noted above, can primarily be attributed to the impact of the timing of significant product launches. Products generally contribute most significantly to gross margin at the time of their launch and even more so in periods of market exclusivity or limited generic competition. During 2009, we launched divalproex ER and lansoprazole delayed-release (DR) capsules ( lansoprazole DR ). Generics Segment In 2009, Generics third party net revenues were $4.61 billion compared to $4.25 billion in 2008, an increase of $364.9 million, or 8.6%. Translating Generics third party net revenues for 2009 at prior year comparative period exchange rates would have resulted in year-over-year constant currency growth of approximately $540 million, or 13%. Third party net revenues from North America were $2.10 billion for 2009, compared to $1.83 billion for 2008, representing an increase of $270.5 million, or 14.8%. The effect of foreign currency is insignificant within North America. Year over year growth was driven by new products launched in the U.S. and Canada, which contributed sales of approximately $322.5 million, the majority of which were divalproex ER and lansoprazole DR. Year over year decreases from our existing products were driven by unfavorable pricing, largely offset by increased volume. Loss of exclusivity and increased competition on certain products drove price declines, while volumes were favorably impacted by Mylan ability to remain a source of stable supply as certain competitors experienced regulatory and supply issues. On November 10, 2009, Mylan announced that Matrix received final approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for its ANDA for lansoprazole DR 15 mg and 30 mg. Lansoprazole DR capsules are the generic version of Tap Pharmaceuticals proton pump inhibitor Prevacid DR Capsules. The brand product had U.S. sales of approximately $3.0 billion for the twelve months ended June 30, 2009, according to IMS Health. Mylan began shipment of its product immediately upon approval, and began selling it under the MPI brand. On January 30, 2009, we announced that MPI received final approval from the FDA for our ANDA for divalproex ER. Divalproex ER tablets are the generic version of Abbott Laboratories Depakote ER and had U.S. sales of approximately $901 million for the twelve months ended September 30, 2008, with $789 million for the 500 mg strength and $112 million for the 250 mg strength, according to IMS. Mylan was awarded 180 days of marketing exclusivity for the 500 mg strength, which it began to ship on February 2, 2009. Mylan began shipment of its 250 mg product immediately upon approval. Included in total revenues from North America are other revenues of $54.6 million in 2009 versus $26.4 million in 2008. This increase in other revenues is primarily the result of incremental revenue resulting from the cancellation of certain product development agreements of $28.5 million for which the revenue had been previously deferred. Third party net revenues from EMEA were $1.64 billion for 2009 compared to $1.62 billion for 2008, an increase of $18.2 million, or 1.1%. However, translating 2009 third party net revenues from EMEA at 2008 exchange rates would have resulted in a year-over-year increase in third party net revenues, excluding the effect of foreign currency, of approximately $135 million, or 8%. This increase was driven by new product launches, favorable market dynamics in certain countries, and a full year of revenue contribution from the Central and Eastern European businesses acquired in June 2008. 58 Table of Contents The launch of new products and increased product volumes resulted in overall higher revenues in Spain, Italy and France, the latter of which also realized sales growth across all sectors, mainly as a result of a gain in market share. In Italy, the increase in revenues was also driven by regulatory changes that have had a significant favorable impact on pricing. In the U.K., 2008 revenues were negatively impacted by excess supply in the market at that time. The increase in 2009 is the result of such excess supply issues having since been resolved. A number of markets in which we operate have implemented or may implement tender systems for generic pharmaceuticals in an effort to lower prices. These measures have a negative impact on sales and gross profit in the affected markets. While certain of our subsidiaries, in particular, the Netherlands, have benefited from recent tenders, 2009 sales in Germany were negatively impacted by the price reductions as a result of these tenders, as well as general pricing pressure on its non-tender business and the loss of exclusivity on certain Statutory Health Insurance contracts. In Asia Pacific, third party net revenues were $877.1 million for 2009 compared to $801.0 million for 2008, an increase of $76.1 million, or 9.5%. Excluding the effect of foreign currency, calculated as described above, the increase was approximately $123 million, or 15%. Driving the year over year revenue increase were higher sales of generics, primarily in Japan, and API sales by Matrix. In Australia, as well as certain countries within EMEA, government-imposed price reductions have had, and could continue to have, a negative impact on sales and gross profit. In Australia during 2009, the impact of these price reductions was partially offset by the impact of favorable volume. At our Matrix subsidiary, year over year growth was driven by third party net revenues from both FDF generic products and API. The increase in FDF is primarily due to continued growth in ARV products, including the awarding in 2009 of several key contracts and tenders, while third party net revenues from the sale of API were driven by significant product launches in the U.S. and Europe. In addition to third party sales, the Asia Pacific region also supplies both FDF generic products and API to Mylan subsidiaries in conjunction with Mylan vertical integration strategy. Intercompany revenues recognized by the Asia Pacific region were $119.7 million for 2009, compared to $108.7 million in 2008. These intercompany sales eliminate within, and therefore are not included in, Generics or consolidated net revenues. In Japan, sales increased over the prior year due to Mylan growth in the Japanese market and the continued impact of certain pro-generic measures implemented by the Japanese government. Specialty Segment For 2009, Specialty reported third party net revenues of $405.3 million, an increase of $19.3 million, or 5.0%, from $386.0 million in 2008. The most significant contributor to the Specialty Segment revenues is the EpiPen Auto-Injector, which is used in the treatment of severe allergic reactions. The EpiPen Auto-Injector is the number one prescribed auto-injector for severe allergic reactions with market share of over 90% in the U.S. and worldwide. In addition to the continued strong sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector, the increase in third party revenues was driven by higher sales of Perforomist Solution, Dey maintenance therapy for patients with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Increased sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector and Perforomist Solution in 2009 were partially offset by lower revenue from DuoNeb for which patent protection was lost in late 2007. The additional competition which followed the loss of patent protection has not only affected Dey sales of the branded product, but also impacted the profit share received from sales of the licensed generic. Operating Expenses R&D expense for 2009 was $275.3 million, compared to $317.2 million for 2008, a decrease of $42.0 million or 13.2%. The decrease in R&D was driven by decreases in both Generics and Specialty, and the favorable impact of foreign exchange, partially offset by an increase in Corporate/Other. The decreases in Generics and Specialty are reflective of certain restructuring activities with respect to the previously announced rationalization and optimization of the global manufacturing and research and development platforms. The overall decreases in 59 Table of Contents Generics and Specialty were partially offset by an increase in Corporate/Other driven by an up-front payment of $18.0 million made with respect to our execution of a co-development agreement. SG&A expense for 2009 was flat year over year at $1.05 billion, with decreases in Generics and Specialty offset by an increase in Corporate/Other. The decrease in Generics was driven primarily by the effect of foreign exchange, partially offset by costs related to the restructurings referred to above. The cost savings as a result of these restructurings began to materialize in 2009, but is expected to have a more favorable impact on future periods. However, the benefit from the restructuring programs in Specialty was a driver, along with a decrease in professional fees, of lower SG&A in the current year in that segment These decreases in SG&A explained above were offset by an increase in Corporate/Other due primarily to an increase in legal and professional fees, as well as higher payroll and payroll-related costs. Goodwill Impairment On February 27, 2008 we announced that we were reviewing strategic alternatives for our specialty business, Dey, including the potential sale of the business. This decision was based upon several factors, including a strategic review of the business, the expected performance of the Perforomist product, where anticipated growth was determined to be slower than expected and the timeframe to reach peak sales was determined to be longer than was originally anticipated. As a result of our ongoing review of strategic alternatives, we determined that it was more likely than not that the business would be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. Accordingly, a recoverability test of Dey long-lived assets was performed during the three months ended March 31, 2008. We included both cash flow projections and estimated proceeds from the eventual disposition of the long-lived assets. The estimated undiscounted future cash flows exceeded the book values of the long-lived assets and, as a result, no impairment charge was recorded. Upon the closing of the former Merck Generics business acquisition, Dey was defined as the Specialty Segment. Dey is also considered a reporting unit. Upon closing of the transaction, we allocated approximately $711 million of goodwill to Dey. We test goodwill for possible impairment on an annual basis and at any other time events occur or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of goodwill may be impaired. As we had determined that it was more likely than not that the business would be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life, we were required, during the three months ended March 31, 2008, to assess whether any portion of its recorded goodwill balance was impaired. The first step of the impairment analysis consisted of a comparison of the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including the goodwill. We performed extensive valuation analyses, utilizing both income and market-based approaches, in our goodwill assessment process. The following describes the valuation methodologies used to derive the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. Income Approach: To determine fair value, we discounted the expected future cash flows of the reporting unit. We used a discount rate, which reflected the overall level of inherent risk and the rate of return an outside investor would have expected to earn. To estimate cash flows beyond the final year of our model, we used a terminal value approach. Under this approach, we used estimated operating income before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization in the final year of our model, adjusted to estimate a normalized cash flow, applied a perpetuity growth assumption, and discounted by a perpetuity discount factor to determine the terminal value. We incorporated the present value of the resulting terminal value into our estimate of fair value. Market-Based Approach: To corroborate the results of the income approach described above, we estimated the fair value of our reporting unit using several market-based approaches, including the guideline company method which focused on comparing our risk profile and growth prospects to a select group of publicly traded companies with reasonably similar guidelines. Based on the step one analysis that was performed for Dey, we determined that the carrying amount of the net assets of the reporting unit was in excess of its estimated fair value. As such, we were required to perform the 60 Table of Contents step two analysis for Dey, in order to determine the amount of any goodwill impairment. The step two analysis consisted of comparing the implied fair value of the goodwill with the carrying amount of the goodwill, with an impairment charge resulting from any excess of the carrying value of the goodwill over the implied fair value of the goodwill based on a hypothetical allocation of the estimated fair value to the net assets. Based on the second step analysis, we concluded that $385 million of the goodwill recorded at Dey was impaired. As a result, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $385 million during the three months ended March 31, 2008, which represented our best estimate as of March 31, 2008. The allocation discussed above was performed only for purposes of assessing goodwill for impairment; accordingly, we have not adjusted the net book value of the assets and liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheet, other than goodwill, as a result of this process. The determination of the fair value of the reporting unit required us to make significant estimates and assumptions that affect the reporting unit expected future cash flows. These estimates and assumptions primarily include, but are not limited to, the discount rate, terminal growth rates, operating income before depreciation and amortization, and capital expenditures forecasts. Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making these estimates, actual results could differ from those estimates. In addition, changes in underlying assumptions would have a significant impact on either the fair value of the reporting unit or the goodwill impairment charge. The hypothetical allocation of the fair value of the reporting unit to individual assets and liabilities within the reporting unit also required us to make significant estimates and assumptions. The hypothetical allocation required several analyses to determine the estimate of the fair value of assets and liabilities of the reporting unit. In September 2008, following the completion of the comprehensive review of strategic alternatives for Dey, we announced our decision to retain the Dey business. This decision included a plan to realign the business, which has resulted in the incurrence of severance and other exit costs. In addition, the comprehensive review resulted in an intangible asset impairment charge related to certain non-core, insignificant, third-party products. Litigation Settlements, net During 2009, we recorded net unfavorable litigation charges of $225.7 million, compared to $16.6 million during the prior year. The 2009 amount is made up primarily of a pre-tax charge of $160.0 million related to settlements in principal to resolve certain claims and estimated potential losses on other open claims relating to our outstanding pricing litigation and a charge for $121.0 million, pre-tax, related to the settlement of an investigation by the U.S. Department of Justice concerning calculations of Medicaid drug rebates, offset by certain litigation-related recoveries. Interest Expense Interest expense for 2009 totaled $318.5 million, compared to $380.8 million for 2008. In March 2009, we pre-paid all of our required 2010 principal payments, and in December 2009 we pre-paid all of our required 2011 principal payments on our term debt, which, along with lower overall interest rates, drove the decrease in interest expense. Included in interest expense for 2009 and 2008 are $42.9 million and $29.5 million primarily related to the amortization of the discounts on our convertible debt instruments. Other (Expense) Income, net Other (expense) income, net, was income of $22.1 million for 2009, compared to income of $11.3 million in 2008. Other (expense) income, net in 2009 included a favorable adjustment of $13.9 million to the restructuring reserve as a result of a reduction in the estimated remaining spending on accrued projects, a $10.4 million net gain realized on the termination of certain joint ventures by our Matrix subsidiary, and interest income of $6.7 million, partially offset by a $11.7 million loss on the sale, by Matrix, of a majority-owned subsidiary. In 2008, other (expense) income, net was primarily comprised of interest and dividend income. Income Tax Expense For 2009, we recorded an income tax benefit of $20.8 million, compared to expense of $128.6 million for 2008. 2009 included a $65.0 million tax benefit related to losses recognized as a result of reorganizations among certain of 61 Table of Contents our foreign subsidiaries. In 2008, a pre-tax operating loss was offset by the non-deductible goodwill impairment charge related to Dey. The effective tax rate in the prior year was largely influenced by the gain on the sale of Bystolic as well. In addition to these items, the change in the provision year over year was driven primarily by the deductibility of certain foreign attributes, changes in losses of certain foreign subsidiaries for which we have not recognized the related income tax benefit, different levels of income, and changes to our tax reserves as required by the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) Accounting Standards Codification topic regarding income taxes. Liquidity and Capital Resources Our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by operations, which were $931.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2010. We believe that cash provided by operating activities will continue to allow us to meet our needs for working capital, capital expenditures, interest and principal payments on debt obligations and other cash needs over the next several years. Nevertheless, our ability to satisfy our working capital requirements and debt service obligations, or fund planned capital expenditures, will substantially depend upon our future operating performance (which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions), and financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control. Contributing to the current year cash from operations are certain items that resulted in a net increase in cash provided by operating activities of approximately $150 million. Favorable items included the receipt of an income tax refund in the first quarter, cash received for deferred revenue and lower income taxes paid as a result of anticipated tax benefits on the indemnified litigation. These favorable items were partially offset by payments made during the year with respect to the Company AWP litigation settlements. For 2011, the potential reduction of deferred revenue, the timing of payments of litigation settlements, income taxes and amounts due to Merck KGaA related to the anticipated tax benefits on the indemnified litigation may lead to a reduction of $250 million or more in cash flows from operations as compared to 2010. Cash used in investing activities was $725.4 million for 2010, consisting primarily of cash paid for acquisitions and capital expenditures. On September 7, 2010, we acquired Bioniche Pharma, a privately held, global injectable pharmaceutical company, for $543.7 million. Bioniche Pharma provides Mylan not only an immediate entry into the North American injectables market but also a platform for future growth opportunities. In addition, cash of approximately $16.0 million was paid as the purchase consideration for an FDF manufacturing facility in India. Capital expenditures primarily for equipment were $192.8 million including a portion related to our previously announced planned expansions and integration plans. While there can be no assurance that current expectations will be realized, capital expenditures for 2011 are expected to be between $250 million and $300 million. The 2010 capital expenditures were lower than originally expected due to the timing of some projects moving into 2011, which is driving the projected increase in capital expenditures in 2011. Cash provided by financing activities was $100.3 million for 2010. In May 2010, we completed a private placement of $550.0 million aggregate principal amount of 7.625% Senior Notes due 2017 and $700.0 million aggregate principal amount of 7.875% Senior Notes due 2020. Through a reopening of the 2020 Senior Notes in July 2010, we privately placed $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes, which were issued at a price of 105.5%, giving an effective yield to maturity of 7.087%. We used approximately $1.30 billion of the net proceeds from the private placement in May and July and cash on hand to repay a portion of our outstanding term loans with the remaining proceeds being utilized to fund a portion of the Bioniche acquisition. In November 2010, we issued $800.0 million aggregate principal amount of 6.0% Senior Notes due 2018 (the 2018 Senior Notes ) in a private placement. We used the gross proceeds of the 2018 Senior Notes offering to repay a portion of the U.S. Tranche B Term Loans due under the terms of its Senior Credit Agreement, thereby reducing senior secured leverage and extending the maturity profile of our outstanding indebtedness. We believe that through the foregoing 2010 capital market transactions that Mylan debt maturity schedule was substantially improved. Mylan has no significant debt maturities in 2011. The Company has $724 million due in 2012 and $124 million due in 2013. Our current intention is to repay such amounts using available cash on hand at maturity. 62 Table of Contents During 2010, we declared quarterly preferred dividends of $16.25 per share, based on the annual preferred dividend rate of 6.5% and a liquidation preference of $1,000 per share, as follows: To Holders of Preferred Stock of Date Declared: Date Payable: Record As of: January 10, 2010 February 16, 2010 February 1, 2010 April 15, 2010 May 17, 2010 May 1, 2010 July 19, 2010 August 16, 2010 August 1, 2010 October 19, 2010 November 15, 2010 November 1, 2010 Total preferred dividends declared during 2010 were $121.5 million and total preferred dividends paid during 2010 were $139.0 million. On November 15, 2010, all of our 6.50% mandatorily convertible preferred stock was converted into 125,234,172 shares of common stock, the minimum conversion permitted by the Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation, as Amended. As a result, the preferred dividend payable on November 15, 2010 was the final preferred dividend. In addition, we currently do not expect to pay dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2010, because the closing price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days in the period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day in the December 31, 2010 period was more than 130% of the applicable conversion reference price of $13.32 at December 31, 2010, the $575.0 million of Cash Convertible Notes were currently convertible. Although the Company experience is that convertible debentures are not normally converted by investors until close to their maturity date, it is possible that debentures could be converted prior to their maturity date if, for example, a holder perceives the market for the debentures to be weaker than the market for the common stock. Upon an investor election to convert, the Company is required to pay the full conversion value in cash. The amount payable per $1,000 notional bond would be calculated as the product of (1) the conversion reference rate (currently 75.0751) and (2) the average Daily Volume Weighted Average Price per share of common stock for a specified period following the conversion date. Any payment above the principal amount is matched by a convertible note hedge. Should holders elect to convert, we intend to draw on our revolving credit facility to fund any principal payments. The facility is a secured revolving credit agreement expiring in October 2013, with available capacity of $695 million at December 31, 2010. We are involved in various legal proceedings that are considered normal to our business. While it is not possible to predict the outcome of such proceedings, an adverse outcome in any of these proceedings could materially affect our financial position and results of operations, including our operating cash flow. We have over $200 million accrued for such legal contingencies. Additionally, for certain contingencies assumed in conjunction with the acquisition of the former Merck Generics business, Merck KGaA, the seller, has indemnified Mylan. The inability or denial of Merck KGaA to pay on an indemnified claim could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. We are actively pursuing, and are currently involved in, joint projects related to the development, distribution and marketing of both generic and branded products. Many of these arrangements provide for payments by us upon the attainment of specified milestones. While these arrangements help to reduce the financial risk for unsuccessful projects, fulfillment of specified milestones or the occurrence of other obligations may result in fluctuations in cash flows. We are continuously evaluating the potential acquisition of products, as well as companies, as a strategic part of our future growth. Consequently, we may utilize current cash reserves or incur additional indebtedness to finance any such acquisitions, which could impact future liquidity. In addition, on an ongoing basis, we review our operations including the evaluation of potential divestitures of products and businesses as part of our future strategy. Any divestitures could impact future liquidity. At December 31, 2010 and December 31, 2009, we had $85.4 million and $77.5 million outstanding under existing letters of credit. Additionally, as of December 31, 2010, we had $44.9 million available under the $100.0 million subfacility on our Senior Credit Agreement for the issuance of letters of credit. 63 Table of Contents Mandatory minimum repayments remaining on the outstanding borrowings under the term loans and notes at December 31, 2010, excluding the discounts, premium and conversion features, are as follows for each of the periods ending December 31: Euro U.S. Euro Senior Cash 2017 2018 2020 Tranche A Tranche B Tranche B Convertible Convertible Senior Senior Senior Term Loans Term Loans Term Loans Notes Notes Notes Notes Notes Total (In thousands) 2011 $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ 2012 117,275 7,028 600,000 724,303 2013 117,275 7,028 124,303 2014 500,000 660,649 1,160,649 2015 575,000 575,000 Thereafter 550,000 800,000 1,000,000 2,350,000 Total $ 234,550 $ 500,000 $ 674,705 $ 600,000 $ 575,000 $ 550,000 $ 800,000 $ 1,000,000 $ 4,934,255 The Senior Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative covenants for facilities of this type, including covenants pertaining to the delivery of financial statements, notices of default and certain other information, maintenance of business and insurance, collateral matters and compliance with laws, as well as customary negative covenants for facilities of this type, including limitations on the incurrence of indebtedness and liens, mergers and certain other fundamental changes, investments and loans, acquisitions, transactions with affiliates, dispositions of assets, payments of dividends and other restricted payments, prepayments or amendments to the terms of specified indebtedness and changes in lines of business. The Senior Credit Agreement also contains financial covenants requiring maintenance of a minimum interest coverage ratio and a senior leverage ratio, both of which are defined within the agreement. We have been compliant with the financial covenants during 2010, and expect to remain in compliance for the next twelve months. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2010 and the effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: Less than One-Three Three-Five Total One Year Years Years Thereafter (In thousands) Operating leases $ 135,253 $ 35,284 $ 55,290 $ 24,249 $ 20,430 Long-term debt 4,945,789 4,809 854,311 1,736,669 2,350,000 Scheduled interest payments 1,853,417 292,056 527,286 581,137 452,938 $ 6,934,459 $ 332,149 $ 1,436,887 $ 2,342,055 $ 2,823,368 The chart above does not include short-term borrowings held by Matrix in the amount of approximately $162.5 million, which represent working capital facilities with several banks, which are secured first by Matrix current assets and second by Matrix property, plant and equipment and has a weighted average interest rate of 5.8%. Additionally, due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2010, we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authority. As such, $203.4 million of unrecognized tax benefits have been excluded from the contractual obligations table above. We lease certain property under various operating lease arrangements that expire generally over the next five years. These leases generally provide us with the option to renew the lease at the end of the lease term. Total long-term debt consists of the Euro Tranche A Term Loans of 175.2 ($234.6) million, the U.S. Tranche B Term Loans of $500.0 million, the Euro Tranche B Term Loans of 504.0 ($674.7) million, $600.0 million in the nominal value of the Senior Convertible Notes, $575.0 million in the nominal value of the Cash Convertible Notes, $550.0 million in the nominal value of the 2017 Senior Notes, $800.0 million in the 64 Table of Contents nominal value of the 2018 Senior Notes, $1.0 billion in the nominal value of the 2020 Senior Notes and $11.5 million of other miscellaneous debt. At December 31, 2010, the $928.3 million of debt related to the Cash Convertible Notes reported in our financial statements consists of $455.9 million of debt ($575.0 million face amount, net of $119.1 million discount) and a liability with a fair value of $472.4 million related to the bifurcated conversion feature. The bifurcated conversion feature is not included in contractual obligations as there is an offsetting hedge asset. Holders may convert their notes subject to certain conversion provisions including (i) during any quarter if the closing price of our common stock exceeds 130% of the respective conversion price per share. During a defined period at the end of the previous quarter; (ii) during a defined period following five consecutive trading days in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount was less than 98% of the product of the closing price of our common stock on such day and the applicable conversion reference rate; (iii) if we make specified distributions to holders of our common stock including sales of rights or common stock on a preferential basis, certain distribution of assets or other securities or rights to all holders of our common stock or certain transactions resulting in substantially all shares of our common stock being converted into cash, securities or other property; or (iv) upon a change of control or if our securities cease to be traded on a major U.S. stock exchange. The amount payable per $1,000 notional bond would be calculated as the product of (1) the conversion reference rate (currently 75.0751) and (2) the average Daily Volume Weighted Average Price per share of common stock for a specified period following the conversion date. Any payment above the principal amount is matched by a convertible note hedge. At December 31, 2010, the $565.5 million of debt related to the Senior Convertible Notes reported in our financial statements is net of a $34.5 million discount. Scheduled interest payments represent the estimated interest payments related to our outstanding borrowings under term loans, notes and other debt. Variable debt interest payments are estimated using current interest rates. We have entered into various product licensing and development agreements. In some of these arrangements, we provide funding for the development of the product or to obtain rights to the use of the patent, through milestone payments, in exchange for marketing and distribution rights to the product. Milestones represent the completion of specific contractual events, and it is uncertain if and when these milestones will be achieved, hence, we have not attempted to predict the period in which such milestones would possibly be incurred. In the event that all projects are successful, milestone and development payments of approximately $18.0 million would be paid subsequent to December 31, 2010. We have entered into an exclusive collaboration on the development, manufacturing, supply and commercialization of multiple, high value generic biologic compounds for the global marketplace. Mylan has committed to provide funding related to the collaboration over the next several years and amounts could be substantial. Additionally, we have entered into product development agreements under which we have agreed to share in the development costs as they are incurred by our partners. As the timing of cash expenditures is dependent upon a number of factors, many of which are outside of our control, it is difficult to forecast the amount of payments to be made over the next few years, which could be significant. We periodically enter into licensing agreements with other pharmaceutical companies for the manufacture, marketing and/or sale of pharmaceutical products. These agreements generally call for us to pay a percentage of amounts earned from the sale of the product as a royalty. Mylan sponsors various defined benefit pension plans in several countries. Benefit formulas are based on varying criteria on a plan by plan basis. We fund non-domestic pension liabilities in accordance with laws and regulations applicable to those plans, which typically results in these plans being unfunded. The amount accrued related to these benefits was $73.7 million at December 31, 2010. We are unable to determine when these amounts will require payment as the timing of cash expenditures is dependent upon a number of factors, many of which are outside of our control. We have entered into employment and other agreements with certain executives and other employees that provide for compensation and certain other benefits. These agreements provide for severance payments under certain circumstances. 65 Table of Contents Impact of Currency Fluctuations and Inflation Because Mylan results are reported in U.S. Dollars, changes in the rate of exchange between the U.S. Dollar and the local currencies in the markets in which Mylan operates, mainly the Euro, Australian Dollar, Indian Rupee, Japanese Yen, Canadian Dollar, and Pound Sterling, affect Mylan results as noted above. Application of Critical Accounting Policies Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to Consolidated Financial Statements, which were prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ( GAAP ). Included within these policies are certain policies which contain critical accounting estimates and, therefore, have been deemed to be critical accounting policies. Critical accounting estimates are those which require management to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made and for which the use of different estimates, which reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We have identified the following to be our critical accounting policies: the determination of net revenue provisions, intangible assets and goodwill, income taxes, and the impact of existing legal matters. Net Revenue Provisions Net revenues are recognized for product sales when title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer and when provisions for estimates, including discounts, sales allowances, price adjustments, returns, chargebacks and other promotional programs are reasonably determinable. Accruals for these provisions are presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements as reductions in determining net revenues and in accounts receivable and other current liabilities. Accounts receivable are presented net of allowances relating to these provisions, which were $751.8 million and $607.9 million at December 31, 2010 and December 31, 2009. Other current liabilities include $167.0 million and $238.2 million at December 31, 2010 and December 31, 2009, for certain sales allowances and other adjustments that are paid to indirect customers. The following is a rollforward of the most significant provisions for estimated sales allowances during 2010: Current Provision Checks/Credits Related to Sales Balance Effects of Balance at Issued to Third Made in the Acquired in the Foreign Balance at 12/31/2009 Parties Current Period Current Period Exchange 12/31/2010 (In thousands) Chargebacks $ 242,722 $ (2,059,065 ) $ 2,072,143 $ 19,775 $ 437 $ 276,012 Promotions and indirect sales allowances $ 399,533 $ (1,264,196 ) $ 1,267,253 $ 2,161 $ (1,819 ) $ 402,932 Returns $ 89,731 $ (66,831 ) $ 90,628 $ 784 $ 581 $ 114,893 In addition to the increase in provisions for estimated sales allowances as a result of the acquisition of Bioniche Pharma, the accruals for chargebacks and returns increased primarily as a result of accruals made for significant new products launched during the year. Provisions for estimated discounts, sales allowances, promotional and other credits require a lower degree of subjectivity and are less complex in nature, yet, combined, represent a significant portion of the overall provisions. These provisions are estimated based on historical payment experience, historical relationships to revenues, estimated customer inventory levels and contract terms. Such provisions are determinable due to the limited number of assumptions and consistency of historical experience. Others, such as returns and chargebacks, require management to make more subjective judgments and evaluate current market conditions. These provisions are discussed in further detail below. Returns Consistent with industry practice, we maintain a return policy that allows our customers to return product within a specified period prior to and subsequent to the expiration date. Although application of the policy varies from country to country in accordance with local practices, generally, product may be returned for a period beginning six months prior to its expiration date to up to one year after its expiration date. The majority of our 66 Table of Contents product returns occurs as a result of product dating, which falls within the range set by our policy, and are settled through the issuance of a credit to our customer. Although the introduction of additional generic competition does not give our customers the right to return product outside of our established policy, we do recognize that such competition could ultimately lead to increased returns. We analyze this on a case-by-case basis, when significant, and make adjustments to increase our reserve for product returns as necessary. Our estimate of the provision for returns is based upon our historical experience with actual returns, which is applied to the level of sales for the period that corresponds to the period during which our customers may return product. This period is known by us based on the shelf lives of our products at the time of shipment. Additionally, we consider factors such as levels of inventory in the distribution channel, product dating, and expiration period, size and maturity of the market prior to a product launch, entrance into the market of additional generic competition, changes in formularies or launch of over-the-counter products, and make adjustments to the provision for returns in the event that it appears that actual product returns may differ from our established reserves. We obtain data with respect to the level of inventory in the channel directly from certain of our largest customers. A change of 5% in the estimated product return rate used in our calculation of our return reserve would have an effect on our reserve balance of approximately $6 million. Chargebacks The provision for chargebacks is the most significant and complex estimate used in the recognition of revenue. Mylan markets products directly to wholesalers, distributors, retail pharmacy chains, mail order pharmacies and group purchasing organizations. We also market products indirectly to independent pharmacies, managed care organizations, hospitals, nursing homes and pharmacy benefit management companies, collectively referred to as indirect customers. Mylan enters into agreements with its indirect customers to establish contract pricing for certain products. The indirect customers then independently select a wholesaler from which to actually purchase the products at these contracted prices. Alternatively, certain wholesalers may enter into agreements with indirect customers that establish contract pricing for certain products, which the wholesalers provide. Under either arrangement, Mylan will provide credit to the wholesaler for any difference between the contracted price with the indirect party and the wholesaler invoice price. Such credit is called a chargeback, while the difference between the contracted price and the wholesaler invoice price is referred to as the chargeback rate. The provision for chargebacks is based on expected sell-through levels by our wholesaler customers to indirect customers, as well as estimated wholesaler inventory levels. For the latter, in most cases, inventory levels are obtained directly from certain of our largest wholesalers. Additionally, internal estimates are prepared based upon historical buying patterns and estimated end-user demand. Such information allows us to estimate the potential chargeback that we may ultimately owe to our customers given the quantity of inventory on hand. We continually monitor our provision for chargebacks and evaluate our reserve and estimates as additional information becomes available. A change of 5% in the estimated sell-through levels by our wholesaler customers and in the estimated wholesaler inventory levels would have an effect on our reserve balance of approximately $11 million. We do not anticipate any significant changes to the methodologies that we use to measure chargebacks, customer performance and promotions or returns; however, the balances within these reserves can fluctuate significantly through the consistent application of our methodologies. Historically, we have not recorded in any current period any material amounts related to adjustments made to prior period reserves. Should any material amounts from any prior period be recorded in any current period such amounts will be disclosed. Intangible Assets and Goodwill We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective estimated fair values. The cost to acquire a business has been allocated to the underlying net assets of the acquired business based on estimates of their respective fair values. For business acquisitions subsequent to 2009, amounts allocated to acquired in-process research and development ( IPR&D ) are capitalized at the date of acquisition. Intangible assets are amortized over the expected life of the asset. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially impact our results of operations. Fair values and useful lives are determined based on, among other factors, the expected future period of benefit of the asset, the various 67 Table of Contents characteristics of the asset and projected cash flows. Because this process involves management making estimates with respect to future sales volumes, pricing, new product launches, anticipated cost environment and overall market conditions, and because these estimates form the basis for the determination of whether or not an impairment charge should be recorded, these estimates are considered to be critical accounting estimates. Goodwill and intangible assets, including IPR&D, are reviewed for impairment annually and/or when events or other changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles is determined to exist when the fair value is less than the carrying value of the net assets being tested. Impairment of definite-lived intangibles is determined to exist when undiscounted cash flows related to the assets are less than the carrying value of the assets being tested. Future events and decisions may lead to asset impairment and/or related costs. As discussed above with respect to determining an asset fair value and useful life, because this process involves management making certain estimates and because these estimates form the basis for the determination of whether or not an impairment charge should be recorded, these estimates are considered to be critical accounting estimates. Mylan will continue to assess the carrying value of its goodwill and intangible assets in accordance with applicable accounting guidance. Income Taxes We compute our income taxes based on the statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to Mylan in the various jurisdictions in which we earn income. Significant judgment is required in determining our income taxes and in evaluating our tax positions. We establish reserves in accordance with Mylan policy regarding accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. Our policy provides that the tax effects from an uncertain tax position be recognized in Mylan financial statements, only if the position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based on the technical merits of the position. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the settlement of a tax audit. Our provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves. Favorable resolution would be recognized as a reduction to our provision for income taxes in the period of resolution. Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to utilize the existing deferred tax assets. A significant piece of objective negative evidence evaluated was the cumulative loss incurred in certain taxing jurisdictions over the three-year period ended December 31, 2010. Such objective evidence limits the ability to consider other subjective evidence such as our projections for future growth. Based on this evaluation, as of December 31, 2010, a valuation allowance of $232.1 million has been recorded in order to measure only the portion of the deferred tax asset that more likely than not will be realized. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight may be given to subjective evidence such as projections for growth. The resolution of tax reserves and changes in valuation allowances could be material to Mylan results of operations or financial position. A variance of 5% between estimated reserves and valuation allowances and actual resolution and realization of these tax items would have an effect on our reserve balance and valuation allowance of approximately $10 million and $12 million, respectively. Legal Matters Mylan is involved in various legal proceedings, some of which involve claims for substantial amounts. An estimate is made to accrue for a loss contingency relating to any of these legal proceedings if it is probable that a liability was incurred as of the date of the financial statements and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Because of the subjective nature inherent in assessing the outcome of litigation and because of the potential that an adverse outcome in a legal proceeding could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, and our cash flow, such estimates are considered to be critical accounting estimates. 68 Table of Contents A variance of 5% between estimated and recorded litigation reserves (excluding indemnified claims) and actual resolution of certain legal matters would have an effect on our litigation reserve balance of approximately $10 million. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In December 2010, the FASB issued accounting guidance for fees paid to the federal government by pharmaceutical manufacturers. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as amended by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act imposed an annual fee on the pharmaceutical industry for each calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 2011. A portion of the annual total will be allocated to individual entities on the basis of the amount of their branded prescription drug sales for the preceding year as a percentage of the industry branded prescription drug sales for the preceding year as a percentage of the industry branded prescription drug sales for the same period. It is not expected that this new guidance will have a material impact on the Company Consolidated Financial Statements. 
