CIK: 69499
Company Name: MYLAN INC 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2014-02-27


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition And Results of Operations The following discussion and analysis addresses material changes in the financial condition and results of operations of Mylan Inc. and subsidiaries (collectively, the Company, Mylan, our or we ) for the periods presented. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements , the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements and our other Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) filings and public disclosures. This Form 10-K may contain forward-looking statements. These statements are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements may include, without limitation, statements about our market opportunities, strategies, competition and expected activities and expenditures, and at times may be identified by the use of words such as may, will, could, should, would, project, believe, anticipate, expect, plan, estimate, forecast, potential, intend, continue, pursue and variations of these words or comparable words. Forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties. Accordingly, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, the risks described above under Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements for revisions or changes after the filing date of this Form 10-K. Executive Overview Mylan is a leading global pharmaceutical company, which develops, licenses, manufactures, markets and distributes generic, branded generic and specialty pharmaceuticals. Mylan is committed to setting new standards in health care, and our mission is to provide the world 7 billion people access to high quality medicine. To do so, we innovate to satisfy unmet needs; make reliability and service excellence a habit; do what's right, not what's easy; and impact the future through passionate global leadership. Mylan offers one of the industry broadest product portfolios, including more than 1,300 marketed products, to customers in approximately 140 countries and territories. We operate a global, high quality vertically-integrated manufacturing platform, which includes more than 35 manufacturing facilities around the world and one of the world largest active pharmaceutical ingredient ( API ) operations. We also operate a strong research and development ( R&D ) network that has consistently delivered a robust product pipeline. Additionally, Mylan has a specialty business that is focused on respiratory and allergy therapies. Mylan has two segments, Generics and Specialty. Generics primarily develops, manufactures, sells and distributes generic or branded generic pharmaceutical products in tablet, capsule, injectable or transdermal patch form, as well as API. Our generic pharmaceutical business is conducted primarily in the United States ( U.S. ) and Canada (collectively, North America ); Europe, the Middle East and Africa (collectively, EMEA ); and India, Australia, Japan, New Zealand and Brazil (collectively, Rest of World ). References in this Annual Report to Asia Pacific represent our generic pharmaceutical business in India, Australia, Japan and New Zealand prior to the acquisition of Agila Specialties business ( Agila ) and the inclusion of Brazil within the Rest of World. Our API business is conducted through Mylan Laboratories Limited ( Mylan India ), which is included within the Rest of World in our Generics segment. Specialty engages mainly in the manufacture and sale of branded specialty injectable and nebulized products. We also report in Corporate/Other certain R&D expenses, general and administrative expenses, litigation settlements, amortization of intangible assets and certain purchase accounting items, impairment charges, if any, and other items not directly attributable to the segments. 47 Table of Contents Significant recent events include the following: Agila Specialties On February 27, 2013 , the Company announced that it signed definitive agreements to acquire Agila , a developer, manufacturer and marketer of high-quality generic injectable products, from Strides Arcolab Limited ( Strides Arcolab ). The transaction closed on December 4, 2013 , and the total purchase price was approximately $1.43 billion (net of cash acquired of $3.4 million ), which includes estimated contingent consideration of $250 million . The contingent consideration, which could total a maximum of $461 million , is primarily related to the satisfaction of certain regulatory conditions, including any potential regulatory remediation costs and the resolution of certain pre-acquisition contingencies. The acquisition of Agila significantly expands and strengthens Mylan's existing injectables platform and portfolio, and also provides Mylan entry into certain new geographic markets. Pfizer Japan Collaboration Agreement Beginning in 2013, we established an exclusive long-term strategic collaboration with Pfizer Japan Inc. ( Pfizer Japan ) to develop, manufacture, distribute and market generic drugs in Japan. Under the agreement, both parties operate separate legal entities in Japan and collaborate on current and future generic products, sharing the costs and profits resulting from the collaboration. Mylan responsibilities in Japan primarily consist of managing operations, including R&D and manufacturing. Pfizer Japan responsibilities primarily consist of the commercialization of the combined generics portfolio and managing a combined marketing and sales effort. Respiratory Delivery Platform On December 23, 2011, we completed the acquisition of the exclusive worldwide rights to develop, manufacture and commercialize a generic equivalent to GlaxoSmithKline Advair Diskus and Seretide Diskus, incorporating Pfizer Inc. proprietary dry powder inhaler delivery platform (the respiratory delivery platform ). Advair Diskus and Seretide Diskus are inhaled fixed-dose combinations of Fluticasone Propionate and Salmeterol delivered via a dry powder inhaler and are used to treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder. The acquisition of the respiratory delivery platform filled an important strategic gap in our product portfolio and expanded our focus on difficult-to-produce, limited competition products, and it has served as a base for our respiratory franchise. The respiratory delivery platform and scientific expertise are also being used to develop additional branded specialty products, building upon the capabilities and assets that we have in place within our Specialty segment. As part of the agreement, we will fund the remaining development and capital requirements as well as make certain potential development and commercial milestone payments as the products are brought to market. This transaction was accounted for as a purchase of a business with a total purchase consideration of $348 million . This amount consisted of an initial cash payment of $22 million , approximately $4 million in assumed liabilities and contingent consideration with an estimated fair value of approximately $322 million to be paid upon the achievement of future development and commercial milestones and the sharing of future profits. Other Transactions In the fourth quarter of 2013, the Company entered into a licensing agreement with Pfizer for the exclusive worldwide rights to develop, manufacture and commercialize a novel long-acting muscarinic antagonist compound. Also during 2013, the Company entered into a definitive agreement with Biocon Limited for an exclusive strategic collaboration on the development and commercialization of generic versions of three insulin analog products. Issuance of Senior Notes In November 2013, we issued $2.0 billion aggregate principal amount of registered Senior Notes, comprised of 1.350% Senior Notes due 2016, 2.550% Senior Notes due 2019, 4.200% Senior Notes due 2023 and 5.400% Senior Notes due 2043. The net proceeds from the offering were used to fund the acquisition of Agila and for general corporate purposes, including, but not limited to, the repayment of short-term borrowings and funding of the share repurchase program executed in the fourth quarter of 2013. In June 2013, we issued $1.15 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.800% Senior Notes due 2016 and 2.600% Senior Notes due 2018 ( June 2013 Senior Notes ) in a private offering exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act to qualified institutional buyers in accordance with Rule 144A and to persons outside of the United States pursuant to Regulation S under the Securities Act. The Company filed a registration statement with the SEC with respect to an 48 Table of Contents offer to exchange these notes for registered notes with the same aggregate principal amount and terms substantially identical in all material respects. This registration statement was declared effective on January 31, 2014. The exchange offer will expire on March 3, 2014, unless extended or terminated by the Company. Net proceeds from the June 2013 Senior Notes were used to repay all of its outstanding $1.13 billion in U.S. Term Loans and for general corporate purposes. Share Repurchase Programs During 2013 , the Company completed two share repurchase programs by purchasing approximately 28.5 million shares of common stock for approximately $1.0 billion . During 2012 , the Company also completed two share repurchase programs by purchasing approximately 41.4 million shares of common stock for approximately $1.0 billion . During 2011 , the Company repurchased approximately 14.8 million shares of common stock for approximately $350 million . Financial Summary For the year ended December 31, 2013 , Mylan reported total revenues of $6.91 billion compared to $6.80 billion for the year ended December 31, 2012 . This represents an increase in revenues of $113.0 million , or 1.7% . Consolidated gross profit for the current year was $3.04 billion , compared to $2.91 billion in the comparable prior year period, an increase of $132.0 million , or 4.5% . For the current year, earnings from operations were $1.14 billion , as compared to $1.11 billion for the year ended December 31, 2012 , an increase of $26.2 million , or 2.4% . Net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. common shareholders decreased $17.1 million , or 2.7% , to $623.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2013 compared to $640.9 million for the prior year comparable period. Diluted earnings per common share attributable to Mylan Inc. increased 3.9% from $1.52 to $1.58 for the year ended December 31, 2013 compared to the prior year comparable period. A more detailed discussion of the Company financial results can be found below in the section titled Results of Operations. Results of Operations 2013 Compared to 2012 Total Revenues and Gross Profit For the year ended December 31, 2013 , Mylan reported total revenues of $6.91 billion compared to $6.80 billion in the prior year period. Total revenues include both net revenues and other revenues from third parties. Third party net revenues for the current year were $6.86 billion compared to $6.75 billion for the same prior year period, representing an increase of $106.4 million , or 1.6% . Other third party revenues for the current year were $52.5 million compared to $45.9 million in the prior year period, an increase of $6.6 million . Mylan current year revenues were unfavorably impacted by the effect of foreign currency translation, primarily reflecting changes in the U.S. Dollar as compared to the currencies of Mylan subsidiaries in India, Japan and Australia. When translating total revenues for the current year at prior year comparative period exchange rates ( constant currency ), the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation on current year total revenues was approximately $125 million , or 2% . As such, translating total revenues for 2013 at prior year foreign currency exchange rates would have resulted in year over year constant currency growth of approximately $238 million , or 4% . The contribution from new product launches in the current period of approximately $285 million was not as significant as the contribution in the comparable prior year period of approximately $922 million , a decline of approximately 69% . The North America region of the Generics segment accounted for the majority of this decline in the contribution from new product revenues in 2013 versus 2012. Offsetting the decline in new product revenues was 14% constant currency revenue growth in the Rest of World region of the Generics segment and 18% growth in the Specialty segment. On a constant currency basis, revenues from existing products decreased approximately $56 million . The decrease was driven by a pricing decline of approximately $377 million due to unfavorable pricing within Generics, partially offset by favorable pricing within Specialty. The pricing decline was partially offset by incremental volume within both Generics and Specialty, which contributed approximately $321 million to current year sales. The operating results of Agila have been included in Mylan consolidated financial statements since the acquisition date, December 4, 2013 , and were not material. In arriving at net revenues, gross revenues are reduced by provisions for estimates, including discounts, rebates, promotions, price adjustments, returns and chargebacks. See the section titled Application of Critical Accounting Policies in this Item 7, for a discussion of our methodology with respect to such provisions. For 2013 , the most significant amounts 49 Table of Contents charged against gross revenues were $2.35 billion related to chargebacks and $1.64 billion related to incentives offered to our direct customers, such as promotions and volume related incentives. For 2012 , the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were for chargebacks in the amount of $2.35 billion and incentives offered to our direct customers in the amount of $1.67 billion . Cost of sales for the current year ended December 31, 2013 was $3.87 billion , compared to $3.89 billion in the prior year. Cost of sales for is impacted by the amortization of acquired intangible assets and restructuring and other special items as described further in the section titled Adjusted Earnings. These items totaled approximately $423.8 million in the current year. The prior year cost of sales included similar purchase accounting and restructuring and other special items in the amount of $456.8 million . The decrease in current year purchase accounting and restructuring and other special items is principally the result of a $41.6 million in-process research and development ( IPR&D ) asset impairment charge in the prior year compared to an IPR&D asset impairment charge of $18.0 million in the current year. Excluding purchase accounting and restructuring and other special items, cost of sales in the current year increased to $3.45 billion from $3.43 billion , corresponding to the increase in sales. Gross profit for the current year was $3.04 billion and gross margins were 44.0% . For 2012 , gross profit was $2.91 billion , and gross margins were 42.8% . Excluding purchase accounting, restructuring and other special items discussed in the paragraph above, gross margins would have been approximately 50% in both 2013 and 2012 . Gross margins were favorably impacted in the current year as a result of new product introductions by approximately 130 basis points and favorable pricing and volume on the EpiPen Auto-Injector in our Specialty segment by approximately 70 basis points. These increases were almost entirely offset by lower gross margins on existing products principally as a result of unfavorable pricing within the Generics segment. From time to time, a limited number of our products may represent a significant portion of our revenues, gross profit and net earnings. Generally, this is due to the timing of new product launches and the amount, if any, of additional competition in the market. Our top ten products in terms of sales, in the aggregate, represented approximately 31% and 28% of total revenues in 2013 and 2012 , respectively. Generics Segment For the current year, Generics third party net revenues were $5.87 billion compared to $5.91 billion in the prior year period, a decrease of $40.0 million , or 0.7% . Foreign currency had an unfavorable impact on third party net revenues for the current year. When translated at prior year foreign currency exchange rates, Generics third party net revenues for the current year would have increased by approximately $83 million , or 1% when compared to the prior year period. Generics sales are derived primarily in or from North America, EMEA and the Rest of World. Third party net revenues from North America were $3.01 billion for the current year, compared to $3.23 billion for the prior year, representing a decrease of $217.7 million , or 6.7% . The decrease in current year third party net revenues was due to a greater amount of revenue from new product launches in the prior year, which included the launches of Escitalopram, Valsartan and Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets, USP and Pioglitazone. Revenues from new product launches in the current year totaled $198 million compared to $784 million in the prior year, a decrease of approximately 75% . The effect of foreign currency translation was insignificant within North America. Products generally contribute most significantly to revenues and gross margins at the time of their launch, even more so in periods of market exclusivity, or in periods of limited generic competition. As such, the timing of new product introductions can have a significant impact on Mylan financial results. The entrance into the market of additional competition generally has a negative impact on the volume and pricing of the affected products. Additionally, pricing is often affected by factors outside of the Company control. Third party net revenues from EMEA were $1.50 billion in 2013 , compared to $1.36 billion in 2012 , an increase of $143.3 million , or 10.6% . Translating current period third party net revenues from EMEA at comparable prior year exchange rates would have resulted in a year-over-year increase in third party net revenues of approximately $108 million , or 8% . This increase was the result of a double-digit increase in revenues in France and Italy as a result of new product revenue and favorable volumes. Partially offsetting this increase was unfavorable pricing in a number of European markets in which Mylan operates, as a result of government-imposed pricing reductions and competitive market conditions. Local currency net revenues from Mylan businesses in France and Italy increased compared to the prior year as a result of new product launches and higher volumes on existing products partially offset by the impact of lower pricing due to 50 Table of Contents government-imposed pricing reductions and an increasingly competitive market. Our market share in France remained relatively stable in 2013 as compared to 2012 , and we remain the market leader. In the United Kingdom, local currency third party net revenues increased by double digits in the current year versus the prior year as a result of favorable pricing on existing products combined with new product introductions. In addition to France and Italy, certain other markets in which we do business, including Spain, have undergone government-imposed price reductions, and further government-imposed price reductions are expected in the future. Such measures, along with the tender systems discussed below, are likely to have a negative impact on sales and gross profit in these markets. However, government initiatives in certain markets that appear to favor generic products could help to mitigate this unfavorable effect by increasing rates of generic substitution and penetration. A number of markets in which we operate have implemented or may implement tender systems for generic pharmaceuticals in an effort to lower prices. Generally speaking, tender systems can have an unfavorable impact on revenue and profitability. Under such tender systems, manufacturers submit bids that establish prices for generic pharmaceutical products. Upon winning the tender, the winning company will receive a preferential reimbursement for a period of time. The tender system often results in companies underbidding one another by proposing low pricing in order to win the tender. Additionally, the loss of a tender by a third party to whom we supply API can also have a negative impact on our sales and profitability. Sales, primarily in Germany, continue to be negatively affected by the impact of tender systems. In the Rest of World, third party net revenues were $1.36 billion in 2013 , compared to $1.33 billion in 2012 , an increase of $34.4 million , or 2.6% . Excluding the unfavorable effect of foreign currency translation, calculated as described above, net third party revenues would have increased by approximately $190 million , or 14% . This increase was primarily driven by higher third party sales by our operations in India, particularly in the antiretroviral ( ARV ) franchise, as well as double digit constant currency growth in Japan. The increase in third party net revenues from our operations in India, excluding the effect of foreign currency, is due to significant growth in sales of ARV products used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS, both as finished dosage form ( FDF ) generic products and API. In addition to third party sales, the Rest of World region also supplies both FDF generic products and API to Mylan subsidiaries in conjunction with the Company vertical integration strategy. Intercompany revenues recognized by the Rest of World region were $307.9 million in 2013 , compared to $283.8 million in the prior year. These intercompany sales eliminate within, and therefore are not included in Generics or consolidated third party net revenues. In Japan, third party net revenues, excluding the effects of foreign currency, increased by double digits as a result of higher volumes and new product introductions. In Australia, local currency third party net revenues were slightly lower than the prior year as a result of significant government imposed pricing reform, partially offset by new product sales and incremental volumes on existing products. As in EMEA, both Australia and Japan have undergone government-imposed price reductions which have had, and could continue to have, a negative impact on sales and gross profit in these markets. Specialty Segment For the current year, Specialty reported third party net revenues of $981.7 million , an increase of $146.3 million , or 17.6% , from the prior year period of $835.4 million . The increase was principally the result of higher sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector , which is used in the treatment of severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis), as a result of favorable pricing and increased volume. The EpiPen Auto-Injector is the number one dispensed epinephrine auto-injector. The market continues to grow as awareness of the risk of anaphylaxis increases. In addition, sales of the Perforomist Inhalation Solution increased by double digits from the prior year as a result of favorable pricing. Operating Expenses Research & Development Expense R&D expense in 2013 was $507.8 million , compared to $401.3 million in the same prior year period, an increase of $106.5 million . R&D increased due primarily to the expenses related to the development of our respiratory and biologics programs as well as the timing of internal and external product development projects. In addition, during 2013 the Company incurred up front licensing and milestone payments of approximately $49.4 million , which are included as a component of R&D expense. 51 Table of Contents Selling, General & Administrative Expense Selling, general and administrative ( SG&A ) expense for the current year was $1.41 billion , compared to $1.40 billion for the prior year, an increase of $10.9 million . Primary factors contributing to the increase in SG&A include an increase in certain payroll and related employee benefit costs of approximately $42 million as we continue to build out our infrastructure in certain areas and acquisition related costs of approximately $37 million . Additional factors contributing to the increase in SG&A include fair value adjustments to contingent consideration of approximately $3 million during 2013. These items were partially offset by lower sales and marketing costs in Japan of approximately $29 million , as a result of the collaboration with Pfizer Japan and lower marketing and advertising related costs within our Specialty segment of approximately $14 million . Litigation Settlements, net During 2013 , the Company recorded a $14.6 million net gain for litigation settlements, compared to a net gain of $3.1 million in the prior year period. The net gain in litigation settlements in the current year was principally related to recoveries of lost profits in patent-infringement matters totaling approximately $25 million , including recoveries related to product launches. These recoveries were offset by a $10.3 million charge related to a European Commission matter. In the prior year period, the Company recorded a $3.1 million net gain comprised of gains of approximately $34 million for the favorable resolution of patent infringement matters, partially offset by an approximate $20 million charge related to pricing litigation matters and other patent infringement matters. Interest Expense Interest expense for 2013 totaled $313.3 million , compared to $308.7 million for 2012 . The increase in the current year is principally due to higher interest expense related to clean energy investments and non-cash accretion of contingent consideration liabilities. Included in interest expense is the amortization of the discounts and premiums on our convertible debt instruments and senior notes, which totals $28.2 million for the current period and $29.4 million for the same prior year period. Also included in interest expense for the current period is accretion of our contingent consideration liability related to certain acquisitions. The amount of accretion included in the current year was $32.3 million compared to $30.7 million in the prior year. Other (Expense) Income, Net Other (expense) income, net , was expense of $74.9 million in the current year compared to income of $3.4 million in the prior year period. Other (expense) income, net for the current year included charges of approximately $63.9 million related to the redemption of the 7.625% Senior Notes due in 2017, comprised of the redemption premium and the write-off of deferred financing fees. In addition, the Company incurred charges of approximately $8.7 million in conjunction with the Senior Credit Agreement refinancing transaction related to the write-off of deferred financing fees. Also included are losses from equity affiliates, foreign exchange transaction gains and losses and interest and dividend income. Income Tax Expense We recorded income tax expense of $120.8 million in 2013 compared to expense of $161.1 million in 2012 , a decrease of $40.3 million . This decrease was primarily due to lower pretax income; an increase in business tax credits as a result of additional investments made during the year in facilities whose production is eligible for IRC Section 45 credits; a reduction in income subject to tax in the U.S.; and the retroactive effect of federal tax legislation enacted in January 2013. Partially offsetting these items were increases in valuation allowances for net operating losses in foreign jurisdictions, lower net foreign tax credit benefits and lower releases and settlements of uncertain tax positions in 2013. Also affecting the Company's changes to its tax provision were higher levels of income earned in jurisdictions with tax rates below the U.S. rate. 2012 Compared to 2011 Total Revenues and Gross Profit For the year ended December 31, 2012 , Mylan reported total revenues of $6.80 billion compared to $6.13 billion in 2011 . Total revenues include both net revenues and other revenues from third parties. Third party net revenues for 2012 were $6.75 billion compared to $6.11 billion for 2011 , representing an increase of $644.0 million , or 10.5% . Other third party revenues for 2012 were $45.9 million compared to $23.5 million in 2011 , an increase of $22.3 million , primarily due to increased royalties. 52 Table of Contents Mylan revenues were unfavorably impacted by the effect of foreign currency translation, primarily reflecting changes in the U.S. Dollar as compared to the currencies of Mylan Euro-denominated subsidiaries, as well as the currencies of Mylan subsidiaries in India, Australia and Japan. The unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation on 2012 total revenues was approximately $197 million , or 3% . As such, translating total revenues for 2012 at prior year foreign currency exchange rates would have resulted in year-over-year growth of approximately $863 million , or approximately 14% . New product launches totaled approximately $922 million . On a constant currency basis, revenues from existing products decreased approximately $81 million . The decline in pricing of approximately $340 million was due to unfavorable pricing with Generics, partially offset by favorable pricing within Specialty. Incremental volume within both Generics and Specialty contributed approximately $260 million to current year sales. In arriving at net revenues, gross revenues are reduced by provisions for estimates, including discounts, rebates, promotions, price adjustments, returns and chargebacks. See the section titled Application of Critical Accounting Policies in this Item 7, for a discussion of our methodology with respect to such provisions. For 2012 , the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were for chargebacks in the amount of $2.35 billion related to chargebacks and $1.67 billion related to incentives offered to our direct customers, such as promotions and volume related incentives. For 2011 , the most significant amounts charged against gross revenues were for chargebacks in the amount of $2.13 billion and incentives offered to our direct customers in the amount of $1.26 billion . Cost of sales for 2012 was $3.89 billion , compared to $3.57 billion in 2011 . Cost of sales in 2012 was impacted by the amortization of acquired intangible assets, and restructuring and other special items as described further in the section titled Adjusted Earnings. These items totaled approximately $456.8 million , which includes an IPR&D asset impairment charge of $41.6 million . Cost of sales for 2011 included similar purchase accounting and restructuring and other special items in the amount of $373.2 million , including a $16.2 million IPR&D asset impairment charge. The increase in purchase accounting and restructuring and other special items is principally the result of various restructuring programs for certain production employees, the IPR&D impairment charge noted above and costs associated with the ratification of a new collective bargaining agreement with the United Steel, Paper and Forestry, Rubber, Manufacturing, Energy, Allied Industrial and Service Workers International Union and its Local Union 8-957 AFL-CIO. The agreement governs certain employees at our Morgantown, West Virginia manufacturing site, including the estimated withdrawal obligation from a multi-employer pension plan. Excluding these amounts, cost of sales increased to $3.43 billion from $3.19 billion , corresponding to the increase in sales. Gross profit for 2012 was $2.91 billion and gross margins were 42.8% . For 2011 , gross profit was $2.56 billion , and gross margins were 41.8% . Excluding the purchase accounting and other special items discussed in the paragraph above, gross margins would have been approximately 50% in 2012 , and 48% in 2011 . The increase in gross margin was the result of new product introductions in 2012 , which increased gross margins by approximately 320 basis points and favorable pricing and volume on EpiPen Auto-Injector in our Specialty segment, the impact of which was approximately 105 basis points. These increases were partially offset by lower gross margins on existing products principally as a result of unfavorable pricing in Generics. From time to time, a limited number of our products may represent a significant portion of our net revenues, gross profit and net earnings. Generally, this is due to the timing of new product launches and the amount, if any, of additional competition in the market. Our top ten products in terms of sales, in the aggregate, represented approximately 28% and 23% of total revenues in 2012 and 2011 , respectively. Generics Segment For 2012 , Generics third party net revenues were $5.91 billion compared to $5.52 billion in 2011 , an increase of $390.4 million , or 7.1% . Translating Generics 2012 third party net revenues at 2011 foreign currency exchange rates would have resulted in year-over-year growth of approximately $587 million , or 11% . Generics sales are derived primarily in or from North America, EMEA and Asia Pacific. Third party net revenues from North America were $3.23 billion for 2012 , compared to $2.82 billion for 2011 , representing an increase of $405.5 million , or 14.4% . The increase in 2012 third party net revenues was primarily driven by new product launches, partially offset by lower sales of existing products. The effect of foreign currency translation was insignificant within North America. The increase in 2012 third party net revenues from new product launches totaled approximately $784 million . Products generally contribute most significantly to revenues and gross margins at the time of their launch, even more so in periods of market exclusivity, or in periods of limited generic competition. As such, the timing of new product introductions can have a significant impact on Mylan financial results. The most significant new products launched in 2012 included 53 Table of Contents Escitalopram Tablets USP, 5 mg, 10 mg and 20 mg, the first equivalent product to Forest Laboratories Lexapro , Valsartan and Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets USP, the generic version of Novartis Diovan HCT Tablets, Doxycycline Hyclate Delayed-release (DR) Tablets USP, 150 mg, the generic version of Mayne Pharma Doryx 150 mg product that is marketed by Actavis Inc. (formerly known as Warner Chilcott) and Pioglitazone Tablets USP, 15 mg, 30 mg and 45 mg, the generic version of Takeda Pharmaceuticals Company Actos Tablets. The entrance into the market of additional competition generally has a negative impact on the volume and pricing of the affected products. Additionally, pricing is often affected by factors outside of the Company control. The decrease in existing products was due to both unfavorable pricing and volume. Third party net revenues from EMEA were $1.36 billion in 2012 , compared to $1.47 billion in 2011 , a decrease of $109.8 million , or 7.5% . Third party net revenues from EMEA for 2012 were essentially flat when translated at comparable 2011 exchange rates. This slight decrease was the result of competitive market conditions, which resulted in lower pricing on existing products in a number of European markets in which Mylan operates, almost fully offset by new product introductions throughout Europe and favorable volume, principally in France and Italy. Local currency net revenues from Mylan business in France increased slightly in 2012 as compared to 2011 as a result of new product launches and higher volumes on existing products almost fully offset by the impact of lower pricing due to government-imposed pricing reductions and an increasingly competitive market. Our market share in France remained relatively stable in 2012 as compared to 2011. In Italy, excluding the effect of foreign currency, third party net revenues increased almost 20% as a result of successful product launches and increased market penetration, which had favorably affected sales volume. Italy was one of the fastest growing markets in Europe. Our growth in Italy outpaced the market in terms of both volume and sales value, in 2012 . In the U.K. and Spain, excluding the effect of foreign currency, third party net revenues increased approximately 2 - 4% , also the result of new product launches and incremental volume. Sales in both Italy and Spain were negatively impacted by governmental measures, which reduced pricing in both markets. In addition to France, Spain and Italy, certain other markets in which we do business, including Portugal, have undergone government-imposed price reductions, and further government-imposed price reductions are expected in the future. Such measures, along with the tender systems discussed below, are likely to have a negative impact on sales and gross profit in these markets. However, government initiatives in certain markets, which appear to favor generic products, could help to offset some of this unfavorable effect by potentially increasing rates of generic substitution and penetration. A number of markets in which we operate have implemented tender systems for generic pharmaceuticals in an effort to lower prices. Generally speaking, tender systems can have an unfavorable impact on revenue and profitability. Under such tender systems, manufacturers submit bids which establish prices for generic pharmaceutical products. Upon winning the tender, the winning company will receive a preferential reimbursement for a period of time. The tender system often results in companies underbidding one another by proposing low pricing in order to win the tender. Additionally, the loss of a tender by a third party to whom we supply API can also have a negative impact on our sales and profitability. Sales, primarily in Germany, continue to be negatively affected by the impact of tender systems. In Asia Pacific, third party net revenues were $1.33 billion in 2012 , compared to $1.24 billion in 2011 , an increase of $94.6 million , or 7.7% . Excluding the unfavorable effect of foreign currency translation, calculated as described above, the increase was approximately $185 million , or 15% . This increase was primarily driven by higher third party sales by our operations in India, as well as Japan, partially offset by lower sales in Australia. The increase in third party net revenues in our operations in India was due to significant growth, excluding the effect of foreign currency, in sales of ARV products used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS, both FDF generic products and API. In addition to third party sales, the Asia Pacific region also supplied both FDF generic products and API to Mylan subsidiaries in conjunction with Mylan vertical integration strategy. Intercompany revenues recognized by the Asia Pacific region were $283.8 million in 2012 , compared to $216.7 million in 2011 . These intercompany sales eliminate within, and therefore are not included in, Generics or consolidated net revenues. In Japan, third party net revenues increased mainly as a result of favorable volume, which served to more than offset the impact of government-imposed price reductions that took place in the first quarter of 2012 . In Australia, sales were negatively impacted by the most significant government-imposed pricing reform in the country history. As in EMEA, both Australia and Japan have undergone government-imposed price reductions which have had a negative impact on sales and gross profit in these markets. 54 Table of Contents Specialty Segment For 2012 , Specialty reported third party net revenues of $835.4 million , an increase of $253.6 million , or 43.6% , from 2011 of $581.8 million . The increase was principally the result of higher sales of the EpiPen Auto-Injector . The EpiPen Auto-Injector is the number one dispensed epinephrine auto-injector. Operating Expenses Research & Development Expense R&D expense in 2012 was $401.3 million , compared to $294.7 million in 2011 , an increase of $106.6 million . R&D increased in 2012 primarily due to the expenses related to the development of our respiratory and biologics programs as well as the timing of internal and external product development projects. Selling, General & Administrative Expense SG&A expense for 2012 was $1.40 billion , compared to $1.21 billion for 2011 , an increase of $186.1 million . Primary factors contributing to the increase in SG&A include an increase in certain payroll and related employee benefit costs, including increased costs for retirement and post-employment programs of approximately $63 million as we continue to build out our infrastructure in certain areas; increased selling and marketing and related costs of approximately $38 million , principally within our Specialty segment; an increase in costs associated with various restructuring activities of approximately $19 million ; and the fair value adjustment related to the contingent consideration liability of approximately $8 million . Litigation Settlements, net During 2012 , the Company recorded a $3.1 million net gain for litigation settlements, compared to expense of $48.6 million during 2011 . The net gain in litigation settlements in 2012 was principally the result of a favorable settlement of the Levalbuterol patent infringement matter, which resulted in an approximate $18 million reduction of a previously established accrual and the receipt of a net payment of approximately $16 million related to a separate patent infringement matter. These items were partially offset by various unfavorable items, principally an approximate $20 million charge related to existing pricing litigation matters and other patent infringement matters. Interest Expense Interest expense for 2012 totaled $308.7 million , compared to $335.9 million for 2011 . The decrease was primarily due to lower interest expense on variable rate debt instruments. Included in interest expense is the amortization of discounts and premiums on our convertible debt instruments and Senior Notes, which totaled $29.4 million in 2012 and $49.8 million in 2011 . Also included in interest expense for 2012 was $30.7 million of accretion of our contingent consideration liability. Other (Expense) Income, Net Other income (expense), net, was income of $3.4 million in 2012 compared to expense of $14.9 million in 2011 . Generally included in other (expense) income, net , are losses from equity method affiliates ( $16.8 million in 2012 ), certain foreign exchange transaction gains and losses and interest and dividend income. Additionally, included in 2012 were charges associated with the termination of certain interest rate swaps totaling $13.9 million and the write-off of previously deferred financing fees of $20.1 million related to the refinancing of the senior credit facility in November 2011. Income Tax Expense We recorded income tax expense of $161.1 million in 2012 compared to expense of $115.8 million in 2011 , an increase of $45.3 million . This increase was primarily due to a higher effective tax rate and an increase in pre-tax income. The higher effective tax rate was primarily the result of lower tax benefits from repatriation of foreign earnings in 2012 compared to 2011 , which was partially offset by the following items. In 2012 , the Company realized a higher amount of net reductions in previously established reserves for uncertain tax positions as compared to 2011 . Additionally, in 2011 , the Company incurred audit settlements in a foreign taxing jurisdiction and benefits related to the restructuring of certain foreign subsidiaries. Also affecting the change in the Company's effective tax rate were changes in losses by certain foreign subsidiaries for which the Company has not recorded a tax benefit and differing levels of income in tax jurisdictions with differing statutory tax rates. 55 Table of Contents Adjusted Earnings Adjusted earnings are an alternative view of performance used by management. Management believes that, primarily due to acquisitions, an evaluation of the Company ongoing operations (and comparisons of its current operations with historical and future operations) would be difficult if the disclosure of its financial results were limited to financial measures prepared only in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. ( GAAP ), and management also believes that investors understanding of our performance is enhanced by these adjusted measures. Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted Earnings per Diluted Share ( Adjusted EPS ) are two of the most important internal financial metrics related to the ongoing operating performance of the Company. Actual internal and forecasted operating results and annual budgets include Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS, and the financial performance of the Company is measured by senior management on this basis along with other performance metrics. Management annual incentive compensation is derived in part based on the Adjusted EPS metric. Whenever the Company uses such non-GAAP measures, it will provide a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most closely applicable GAAP financial measure. Investors and other readers are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to their most closely applicable GAAP measure set forth below and should consider non-GAAP measures only as a supplement to, not as a substitute for or as a superior measure to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, since Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS are not measures determined in accordance with GAAP, they have no standardized meaning prescribed by GAAP and, therefore, may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. The significant items excluded from Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS include: Acquisition-Related Items The ongoing impact of certain amounts recorded in connection with acquisitions is excluded. These amounts include the amortization of intangible assets and inventory step-up, intangible asset impairment charges (including IPR&D), accretion and the fair value adjustments related to contingent consideration and certain acquisition financing related costs. These costs are excluded because management believes that excluding them is helpful to understanding the underlying, ongoing operational performance of the business. Restructuring and Other Special Items Costs related to restructuring and other actions are excluded as applicable. These amounts include items such as: Exit costs associated with facilities to be closed or divested, including employee separation costs, impairment charges, accelerated depreciation, incremental manufacturing variances, equipment relocation costs and other exit costs; Certain acquisition related integration costs, as well as other costs associated with acquisitions and other business transformation and/or optimization initiatives, which are not part of a formal restructuring program, including employee separation and post-employment costs; Certain transition and other costs associated with the ratification of a new collective bargaining agreement in 2012 governing certain employees at our Morgantown, West Virginia manufacturing facility, including the withdrawal obligation from a multi-employer pension plan; The pre-tax loss of the Company investments in clean energy partnerships, whose activities qualify for income tax credits under Section 45 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code; only included in Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS is the net tax effect of the entity activities; Certain costs to further develop and optimize our global enterprise resource planning systems, operations and supply chain; and Certain costs related to new operations and significant alliances/business partnerships including certain upfront and/or milestone research and development related payments. 56 Table of Contents The Company has undertaken restructurings and other optimization initiatives of differing types, scope and amount during the covered periods and, therefore, these charges should not be considered non-recurring; however, management excludes these amounts from Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS because it believes it is helpful to understanding the underlying, ongoing operational performance of the business. Litigation Settlements, net Charges and gains related to legal matters, such as those discussed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 15 , Contingencies are generally excluded. Normal, ongoing defense costs of the Company made in the normal course of our business are not excluded. Reconciliation of Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS A reconciliation between net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. common shareholders and diluted earnings per share attributable to Mylan Inc. common shareholders, as reported under GAAP, and Adjusted Earnings and Adjusted EPS for the periods shown follows: Year Ended December 31, (In millions, except per share amounts) 2013 2012 2011 GAAP net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. and diluted GAAP EPS $ 623.7 $ 1.58 $ 640.9 $ 1.52 $ 536.8 $ 1.22 Purchase accounting related amortization (primarily included in cost of sales) (a) 371.1 391.1 364.8 Litigation settlements, net (9.9 ) (3.0 ) 48.6 Interest expense, primarily amortization of convertible debt discount 38.0 35.6 49.8 Non-cash accretion and fair value adjustments of contingent consideration liability 35.4 38.7 Clean energy investment subsidiary pre-tax loss (b) 22.4 16.8 Financing related costs (included in other (expense) income, net) 72.6 Acquisition related costs (primarily included in selling, general and administrative expense) 49.8 34.0 Restructuring and other special items included in: Cost of sales 49.3 65.7 8.4 Research and development expense 51.6 12.4 3.6 Selling, general and administrative expense 70.6 104.9 44.9 Other (expense) income, net 25.2 (0.7 ) 0.2 Tax effect of the above items and other income tax related items (259.9 ) (215.7 ) (198.1 ) Adjusted net earnings attributable to Mylan Inc. and adjusted diluted EPS $ 1,139.9 $ 2.89 $ 1,086.7 $ 2.59 $ 893.0 $ 2.04 Weighted average diluted common shares outstanding 394.5 420.2 438.8 ____________ (a) Purchase accounting related amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 includes IPR&D asset impairment charges of $18.0 million and $41.6 million , respectively. (b) Adjustment represents exclusion of the pre-tax loss related to Mylan's investments in clean energy partnerships, the activities of which qualify for income tax credits under section 45 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code. Amount is included in other income (expense), net. 57 Table of Contents Liquidity and Capital Resources Our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by operations, which was $1.11 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 . We believe that cash provided by operating activities and available liquidity will continue to allow us to meet our needs for working capital, capital expenditures, interest and principal payments on debt obligations and other cash needs over the next several years. Nevertheless, our ability to satisfy our working capital requirements and debt service obligations, or fund planned capital expenditures, will substantially depend upon our future operating performance (which will be affected by prevailing economic conditions), and financial, business and other factors, some of which are beyond our control. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $157.6 million to $1.11 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 , as compared to $949.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 . The net increase in cash provided by operating activities was principally due to the following: a net increase in cash provided through changes in legal and professional accruals of $135.0 million , primarily as a result of a higher amount of litigation payments in the prior year; a net increase in cash of $25.0 million for cash collected from litigation settlements; a net decrease in the amount of cash used through changes in income taxes of $48.9 million as a result of the level of estimated tax payments made during the current year; a net increase in the amount of cash provided by changes in trade accounts payable of $55.8 million as a result of the timing of cash disbursements; and a net decrease of $14.9 million in the amount of cash used through changes in inventory balances. The decrease in cash utilized for inventory in 2013 (as compared to 2012) reflects a lower level of increases in raw material, work in process and finished goods inventories as compared to the prior year. The higher prior year investment was primarily due to an inventory build in late 2012 in anticipation of additional manufacturing capacity in India that came on-line in early 2013. Nevertheless, we continued to invest in inventory in 2013 primarily to support anticipated volume growth as a result of projected increases in generic utilization, particularly in certain European markets. The Company anticipates that inventory balances will continue to increase as a result of forecasted sales volume growth including new product launches. These items were offset by the following: a decrease in net earnings of $16.4 million , combined with a net decrease in the amount of non-cash expenses for depreciation and amortization totaling $30.6 million as a result of higher prior year IPR&D impairment charges; a net increase in the amount of cash used for accounts receivable, including estimated sales allowances, of $118.4 million reflecting the timing of sales, cash collections and disbursements related to sales allowances; and during 2013 the Company redeemed its 7.625% Senior Notes due 2017 for a total of $608.8 million , including a $58.8 million redemption premium that is included as an outflow in cash from operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $228.6 million to $949.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 as compared to $720.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 . The net increase in cash provided by operating activities was principally due to the following: an increase in net earnings, combined with a net increase in the amount of non-cash expenses, totaling $265.0 million as a result of increased expenses for depreciation and amortization, post employment programs, including severance, and the accretion and fair value adjustments related to the contingent consideration liability; a net increase in operating cash flow resulting from less cash used for accounts receivable, including estimated sales allowances, of $232.7 million reflecting the timing of sales and cash collections; and 58 Table of Contents a net decrease of $48.6 million in the amount of cash used through changes in inventory balances. The decrease in cash utilized for inventory in 2012 (as compared to 2011) reflects a lower level of increases in raw material, work in process and finished goods inventories as compared to the prior year. The higher prior year investment was primarily due to an inventory build in 2011 in anticipation of additional large product launches expected in early 2012. Nevertheless, we continued to invest in inventory in 2012 primarily to support anticipated additional manufacturing capacity in India that were expected to come on-line in early 2013. These items were partially offset by the following: a net decrease in the amount of cash provided through changes in trade accounts payable of $52.3 million as a result of the timing of cash disbursements; a net increase in the amount of cash used through changes in income taxes of $146.9 million as a result of the level of estimated tax payments made during 2012 ; a net decrease in deferred revenues of $18.8 million ; and a net decrease in legal and professional accruals of $110.6 million ( $232.7 million at 2011 , as compared to $122.1 million at 2012 ), primarily as a result of litigation payments. Cash used in investing activities was $1.87 billion for the year ended December 31, 2013 as compared to cash used in investing activities of $364.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 , an increase of $1.50 billion . Cash paid for acquisitions was $1.26 billion in 2013, primarily related to the Agila acquisition. Capital expenditures, primarily for equipment and facilities, were approximately $334.6 million in the current year as compared to $305.3 million in the comparable prior year. The increase as compared to 2012 is the result of expenditures to expand our global operating platform, including capital investments in our strategic growth drivers and a new global headquarters. While there can be no assurance that current expectations will be realized, we expect to continue to invest in our future growth and expect capital expenditures for 2014 to be between $350 million and $450 million . In addition, during 2013, restricted cash increased $228.0 million , principally related to amounts deposited in escrow, or other restricted accounts, for potential contingent consideration payments related to the Agila acquisition. During 2012, the Company paid approximately $72 million to acquire product rights and licenses, the majority of which related to two dermatological products acquired from Valeant Pharmaceuticals. This cash outflow is included in other investing activities. Cash provided by financing activities was $692.9 million for year ended December 31, 2013 as compared to cash used in financing activities of $611.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2012 , a net increase of $1.30 billion . During 2013, the Company issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of 1.800% Senior Notes due 2016 and $650 million aggregate principal amount of 2.600% Senior Notes due 2018, the proceeds of which were principally utilized to repay the remaining balance on the U.S. Term Loans under the Prior Credit Agreement of $1.13 billion . The Company issued $500 million aggregate principal amount of 1.350% Senior Notes due November 2016, $500 million aggregate principal amount of 2.550% Senior Notes due March 2019, $500 million aggregate principal amount of 4.200% Senior Notes due November 2023 and $500 million aggregate principal amount of 5.400% Senior Notes due November 2043 (collectively, the November 2013 Senior Notes ). Net proceeds from the November 2013 Senior Notes were used to fund the purchase price of the Agila acquisition and to fund a portion of the share repurchase programs. Also during 2013 the Company redeemed its 7.625% Senior Notes due 2017 for a total of $608.8 million , including a $58.8 million redemption premium. The payment for the principal amount of the 7.625% Senior Notes due 2017 of $550 million is included within financing activities. During 2013, net borrowings under our Revolving Facility totaled $60 million . In addition, the Company borrowed an additional $194 million on our $400 million accounts receivable securitization facility (the Receivables Facility ) during 2013. The proceeds of these borrowings were principally utilized to fund the redemption of the 7.625% Senior Notes due 2017, the share repurchase programs and for general corporate purposes. During 2013, the Company repurchased approximately 28.5 million shares of common stock for aggregate consideration of approximately $1.0 billion . The Company has minimal long-term debt due in 2014 . The Company next significant debt maturity is in 2015 , and our current intention is to repay such amounts at maturity using available liquidity. In addition, our cash and cash equivalents at our foreign operations totaled $271 million at December 31, 2013 . The majority of these funds represented earnings considered 59 Table of Contents to be permanently reinvested to support the growth strategies of our foreign operations. The Company anticipates having sufficient U.S. liquidity, including existing borrowing capacity and cash to be generated from operations, to fund foreseeable U.S. cash needs without requiring the repatriation of foreign cash. If these funds are needed for the Company operations in the U.S., the Company may be required to accrue and pay U.S. taxes to repatriate these funds. As of December 31, 2013 , because the closing price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days in the period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on the last trading day in the December 31, 2013 period was more than 130% of the applicable conversion reference price of $13.32 at December 31, 2013 , the $574.0 million of Cash Convertible Notes were currently convertible. Although the Company experience is that convertible debentures are not normally converted by investors until close to their maturity date, it is possible that some debentures could be converted prior to their maturity date if, for example, a holder perceives the market for the debentures to be weaker than the market for the common stock. Upon an investor election to convert, the Company is required to pay the full conversion value in cash. The amount payable per $1,000 notional bond would be calculated as the product of (1) the conversion reference rate (currently 75.0751 ) and (2) the average Daily Volume Weighted Average Price per share of common stock for a specified period following the conversion date. Any payment above the principal amount is matched by a convertible note hedge. We are involved in various legal proceedings that are considered normal to our business. While it is not possible to predict the outcome of such proceedings, an adverse outcome in any of these proceedings could materially affect our financial position and results of operations, including our operating cash flow and could cause the market value of our stock to decline. We have approximately $100 million accrued for such legal contingencies. For certain contingencies assumed in conjunction with the acquisition of the former Merck Generics business, Merck KGaA, the seller, has indemnified Mylan. We have also been indemnified for certain contingencies by Strides Arcolab related to our acquisition of Agila . The inability or denial of Merck KGaA or Strides Arcolab to pay on an indemnified claim could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows, and could cause the market value of our stock to decline. We are actively pursuing, and are currently involved in, joint projects related to the development, distribution and marketing of both generic and branded products. Many of these arrangements provide for payments by us upon the attainment of specified milestones. While these arrangements help to reduce the financial risk for unsuccessful projects, fulfillment of specified milestones or the occurrence of other obligations may result in fluctuations in cash flows. We are continuously evaluating the potential acquisition of products, as well as companies, as a strategic part of our future growth. Consequently, we may utilize current cash reserves or incur additional indebtedness to finance any such acquisitions, which could impact future liquidity. In addition, on an ongoing basis, we review our operations including the evaluation of potential divestitures of products and businesses as part of our future strategy. Any divestitures could impact future liquidity. At December 31, 2013 and 2012 , we had $53.2 million and $58.0 million outstanding under existing letters of credit, respectively. Additionally, as of December 31, 2013 , we had $137.3 million available under the $150.0 million subfacility on our Senior Credit Agreement for the issuance of letters of credit. Mandatory minimum repayments remaining on the outstanding long term debt at December 31, 2013 , excluding the discounts, premium and conversion features, are as follows for each of the periods ending December 31: (In thousands) Total 2014 $ 2 2015 574,093 2016 1,000,000 2017 2018 1,510,000 Thereafter 3,250,000 Total $ 6,334,095 The Senior Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative covenants for facilities of this type, including among others, covenants pertaining to the delivery of financial statements, notices of default and certain material events, maintenance of business and insurance and compliance with laws, as well as customary negative covenants for facilities of this type, 60 Table of Contents including limitations on the incurrence of indebtedness and liens, mergers and certain other fundamental changes, investments and loans, transactions with affiliates, payments of dividends and other restricted payments and changes in our lines of business. The Senior Credit Agreement contains a maximum consolidated leverage ratio financial covenant. We have been compliant with the financial covenant during 2013, and we expect to remain in compliance for the next twelve months. Under the Company Receivables Facility, any amounts outstanding under the facility are recorded as a secured loan and included in short-term borrowings, and the receivables underlying any borrowings are included in accounts receivable, net, in the Consolidated Balance Sheets . At December 31, 2013 , there were $374 million of short-term borrowings outstanding under the Receivables Facility. The size of the Receivables Facility may be increased from time to time, upon request by Mylan Securitization LLC and with the consent of the purchaser agents and the Agent, up to $500 million . Short-term borrowings held by Mylan India at December 31, 2013 totaled approximately $58 million and had a weighted average interest rate of 2.3% . The borrowings represent working capital facilities and are secured by Mylan India current assets. The fair value measurement of contingent consideration is determined using unobservable inputs based on the Company own assumptions. Significant unobservable inputs in the valuation include the probability and timing of future development and commercial milestones and future profit sharing payments. A discounted cash flow method was used to value contingent consideration at December 31, 2013 and 2012 , which was calculated as the present value of the estimated future net cash flows using a market rate of return at December 31, 2013 and 2012 . Discount rates ranging from 0.8% to 11.3% were utilized in the valuation. Significant changes in unobservable inputs could result in material changes to the contingent consideration liability. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2013 and the effect that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods: (In thousands) Total Less than One Year One- Three Years Three- Five Years Thereafter Operating leases $ 121,434 $ 38,292 $ 48,856 $ 16,625 $ 17,661 Long-term debt 6,334,095 2 1,574,093 1,510,000 3,250,000 Scheduled interest payments 2,286,816 268,089 514,463 454,920 1,049,344 Other Commitments (1) 2,073,953 457,796 516,526 513,439 586,192 $ 10,816,298 $ 764,179 $ 2,653,938 $ 2,494,984 $ 4,903,197 ____________ (1) Other commitments include the estimated liability payment related to the withdrawal from a multi-employer pension plan, agreements to purchase third-party manufactured products and open purchase orders at December 31, 2013 . We lease certain property under various operating lease arrangements that expire generally over the next five years. These leases generally provide us with the option to renew the lease at the end of the lease term. At December 31, 2013 , the $1.83 billion of debt related to the Cash Convertible Notes reported in our financial statements consists of $525 million of debt ( $574 million face amount, net of $49 million discount) and a liability with a fair value of $1.30 billion related to the bifurcated conversion feature. The bifurcated conversion feature is not included in contractual obligations as there is an offsetting hedge asset. Scheduled interest payments represent the estimated interest payments related to our outstanding borrowings under term loans, notes and other debt. Variable debt interest payments are estimated using current interest rates. Due to the uncertainty with respect to the timing of future payments, if any, the following contingent payments have not been included in the table above. In conjunction with the acquisition of Agila on December 4, 2013 , the Company recorded estimated contingent consideration totaling $250 million as part of the purchase price. The contingent consideration, which could total a maximum 61 Table of Contents of $461 million , is primarily related to the satisfaction of certain regulatory conditions, including any potential regulatory remediation costs and the resolution of certain pre-acquisition contingencies. We are contractually obligated to make potential future development, regulatory and commercial milestone, royalty and/or profit sharing payments in conjunction with collaborative agreements or acquisitions we have entered into with third parties. The most significant of these relates to the potential future consideration related to the respiratory delivery platform. These payments are contingent upon the occurrence of certain future events and, given the nature of these events, it is unclear when, if ever, we may be required to pay such amounts. The amount of the contingent consideration liability was $415 million at December 31, 2013 . In addition, the Company expects to incur approximately $30 million to $40 million of annual non-cash accretion expense related to the increase in the net present value of the contingent consideration liability. In the fourth quarter of 2013, the Company entered into a licensing agreement with Pfizer for the exclusive worldwide rights to develop, manufacture and commercialize a novel long-acting muscarinic antagonist compound. As part of the agreement, the Company made an upfront development payment, which is included as a component of R&D expense in 2013, and could make additional payments upon the achievement of certain milestones as the Company development continues over the next several years. Depending on the commercialization of this novel compound and the level of future sales and profits, the Company could also be obligated to make payments upon the occurrence of certain sales milestones, along with sales royalties and profit sharing payments. We have entered into an exclusive collaboration on the development, manufacturing, supply and commercialization of multiple, high value generic biologic compounds and three insulin analog products for the global marketplace. Mylan plans to provide funding related to the collaboration over the next several years that could total approximately $50 million or more per year. Additionally, we have entered into product development agreements under which we have agreed to share in the development costs as they are incurred by our partners and/or pay milestones. As the timing of cash expenditures is dependent upon a number of factors, many of which are outside of our control, it is difficult to forecast the amount of payments to be made over the next few years, which could be significant. We periodically enter into licensing agreements with other pharmaceutical companies for the manufacture, marketing and/or sale of pharmaceutical products. These agreements generally call for us to pay a percentage of amounts earned from the sale of the product as a royalty on a profit share. With respect to the timing of future cash flows associated with our unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2013 , we are unable to make reasonably reliable estimates of the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authority. As such, $172.7 million of unrecognized tax benefits have been excluded from the contractual obligations table above. Mylan sponsors various defined benefit pension plans in several countries. Benefit formulas are based on varying criteria on a plan by plan basis. We fund non-domestic pension liabilities in accordance with laws and regulations applicable to those plans, which typically results in these plans being unfunded. The amount accrued related to these benefits was $60.4 million at December 31, 2013 . We are unable to determine when these amounts will require payment as the timing of cash expenditures is dependent upon a number of factors, many of which are outside of our control. We have entered into employment and other agreements with certain executives and other employees that provide for compensation and certain other benefits. These agreements provide for severance payments under certain circumstances. Certain commercial agreements require us to provide performance bonds and/or indemnification; while it is difficult to forecast the amount of payments, if any, to be made over the next few years, we do not believe the amount would be material to our results of operations, cash flows or financial position. Impact of Currency Fluctuations and Inflation Because Mylan results are reported in U.S. Dollars, changes in the rate of exchange between the U.S. Dollar and the local currencies in the markets in which Mylan operates, mainly the Euro, Indian Rupee, Japanese Yen, Australian Dollar, Canadian Dollar, Pound Sterling and Brazilian Real affect Mylan results as previously noted. We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our revenues or operations. 62 Table of Contents Application of Critical Accounting Policies Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to Consolidated Financial Statements and are in accordance with GAAP. Included within these policies are certain policies which contain critical accounting estimates and, therefore, have been deemed to be critical accounting policies. Critical accounting estimates are those which require management to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made and for which the use of different estimates, which reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur from period to period could have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We have identified the following to be our critical accounting policies: the determination of net revenue provisions, business acquisitions, intangible assets, goodwill and contingent consideration, income taxes and the impact of existing legal matters. Net Revenue Provisions Net revenues are recognized for product sales when title and risk of loss have transferred to the customer and when provisions for estimates, including discounts, sales allowances, price adjustments, returns, chargebacks and other promotional programs are reasonably determinable. Accruals for these provisions are presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements as reductions in determining net revenues and in accounts receivable and other current liabilities. Accounts receivable are presented net of allowances relating to these provisions, which were $1.24 billion and $977.0 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012 . Other current liabilities include $281.1 million and $202.9 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012 , for certain sales allowances and other adjustments that are paid to indirect customers. The following is a rollforward of the most significant provisions for estimated sales allowances during 2013 : (In thousands) Balance at Checks/ Credits Issued to Third Parties Current Provision Related to Sales Made in the Current Period Effects of Foreign Exchange Balance at December 31, 2012 December 31, 2013 Chargebacks $ 268,471 $ (2,347,817 ) $ 2,542,236 $ (1,281 ) $ 461,609 Incentives offered to direct customers $ 487,662 $ (1,638,069 ) $ 1,706,073 $ (16,332 ) $ 539,334 Returns $ 156,987 $ (151,721 ) $ 160,149 $ 2,113 $ 167,528 We do not anticipate any significant changes to the methodologies that we use to measure chargebacks, incentives offered to direct customers or returns; however, the balances within these reserves can fluctuate significantly through the consistent application of our methodologies. In the current year, accruals for incentives offered to direct customers increased as a result of an increase in related sales and overall higher rebate rates, mainly in response to the competitive environment in various markets. Historically, we have not recorded in any current period any material amounts related to adjustments made to prior period reserves. Provisions for estimated discounts, sales allowances, promotional and other credits require a lower degree of subjectivity and are less complex in nature, yet, when combined, represent a significant portion of the overall provisions. These provisions are estimated based on historical payment experience, historical relationships to revenues, estimated customer inventory levels and contract terms. Such provisions are determinable due to the limited number of assumptions and consistency of historical experience. Others, such as chargebacks and returns, require management to make more subjective judgments and evaluate current market conditions. These provisions are discussed in further detail below. Chargebacks The provision for chargebacks is the most significant and complex estimate used in the recognition of revenue. Mylan markets products directly to wholesalers, distributors, retail pharmacy chains, mail order pharmacies and group purchasing organizations. We also market products indirectly to independent pharmacies, managed care organizations, hospitals, nursing homes and pharmacy benefit management companies, collectively referred to as indirect customers. Mylan enters into agreements with its indirect customers to establish contract pricing for certain products. The indirect customers then independently select a wholesaler from which to actually purchase the products at these contracted prices. Alternatively, certain wholesalers may enter into agreements with indirect customers that establish contract pricing for certain products, which the wholesalers provide. Under either arrangement, Mylan will provide credit to the wholesaler for any difference between the contracted price with the indirect party and the wholesaler invoice price. Such credit is called a chargeback, while the difference between the contracted price and the wholesaler invoice price is referred to as the chargeback rate. The provision 63 Table of Contents for chargebacks is based on expected sell-through levels by our wholesaler customers to indirect customers, as well as estimated wholesaler inventory levels. For the latter, in most cases, inventory levels are obtained directly from certain of our largest wholesalers. Additionally, internal estimates are prepared based upon historical buying patterns and estimated end-user demand. Such information allows us to estimate the potential chargeback that we may ultimately owe to our customers given the quantity of inventory on hand. We continually monitor our provision for chargebacks and evaluate our reserve and estimates as additional information becomes available. A change of 5% in the estimated sell-through levels by our wholesaler customers and in the estimated wholesaler inventory levels would have an effect on our reserve balance of approximately $27 million . Returns Consistent with industry practice, we maintain a return policy that allows our customers to return product within a specified period prior to and subsequent to the expiration date. Although application of the policy varies from country to country in accordance with local practices, generally, product may be returned for a period beginning six months prior to its expiration date to up to one year after its expiration date. The majority of our product returns occur as a result of product dating, which falls within the range set by our policy, and are settled through the issuance of a credit to our customer. Although the introduction of additional generic competition does not give our customers the right to return product outside of our established policy, we do recognize that such competition could ultimately lead to increased returns. We analyze this on a case-by-case basis, when significant, and make adjustments to increase our reserve for product returns as necessary. Our estimate of the provision for returns is based upon our historical experience with actual returns, which is applied to the level of sales for the period that corresponds to the period during which our customers may return product. This period is known by us based on the shelf lives of our products at the time of shipment. Additionally, we consider factors such as levels of inventory in the distribution channel, product dating and expiration period, size and maturity of the market prior to a product launch, entrance into the market of additional generic competition, changes in formularies or launch of over-the-counter products, and make adjustments to the provision for returns in the event that it appears that actual product returns may differ from our established reserves. We obtain data with respect to the level of inventory in the channel directly from certain of our largest customers. A change of 5% in the estimated product return rate used in our calculation of our return reserve would have an effect on our reserve balance of approximately $8 million . Business Acquisitions, Intangible Assets, Goodwill and Contingent Consideration We account for acquired businesses using the purchase method of accounting, which requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at the date of acquisition at their respective estimated fair values. The cost to acquire businesses has been allocated to the underlying net assets of the acquired businesses based on estimates of their respective fair values. Amounts allocated to acquired IPR&D are capitalized at the date of an acquisition and, at that time, such IPR&D assets have indefinite lives. As products in development are approved for sale, amounts will be allocated to product rights and licenses and will be amortized over their estimated useful lives. Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over the expected life of the asset. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to each class of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as asset lives, can materially impact our results of operations. Fair values and useful lives are determined based on, among other factors, the expected future period of benefit of the asset, the various characteristics of the asset and projected cash flows. Because this process involves management making estimates with respect to future sales volumes, pricing, new product launches, government reform actions, anticipated cost environment and overall market conditions, and because these estimates form the basis for the determination of whether or not an impairment charge should be recorded, these estimates are considered to be critical accounting estimates. We record contingent consideration resulting from a business acquisition at its estimated fair value on the acquisition date. Each reporting period thereafter, we revalue these obligations and record increases or decreases in their fair value as an adjustment to contingent consideration expense within the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration obligations can result from adjustments to the discount rates, payment periods and adjustments in the probability of achieving future development steps, regulatory approvals, market launches, sales targets and profitability. These fair value measurements represent Level 3 measurements as they are based on significant inputs not observable in the market. Significant judgment is employed in determining the assumptions utilized as of the acquisition date and for each subsequent measurement period. Accordingly, changes in assumptions described above, could have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations. Goodwill and intangible assets, including IPR&D, are reviewed for impairment annually and/or when events or other changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Impairment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles is determined to exist when the fair value is less than the carrying value of the net assets being 64 Table of Contents tested. Impairment of definite-lived intangibles is determined to exist when undiscounted cash flows related to the assets are less than the carrying value of the assets being tested. Future events and decisions may lead to asset impairment and/or related costs. Goodwill is allocated and evaluated for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Mylan has four reporting units, of which three are included in the Generics segment with the remaining reporting unit consisting of our Specialty segment. As of the date of our most recent annual impairment test, April 1, 2013 , approximately 90% of Mylan total goodwill is allocated to the three reporting units within the Generics segment as follows: North America ( $735 million ), EMEA ( $1.11 billion ) and Asia Pacific ( $1.22 billion ), with the remainder ( $349 million ) allocated to our Specialty segment and reporting unit. On December 4, 2013 , we completed the acquisition of Agila , which resulted in the recognition of an additional $884 million of goodwill, which is preliminary and is subject to change as the Company obtains additional information during the measurement period (up to one year from the acquisition date). All of the goodwill related to the Agila acquisition was allocated to the Generics segment and the allocation to the individual reporting units within the Generics segment has not been completed. For our North American and Specialty reporting units, we have utilized the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) amended guidance on goodwill impairment testing as part of our annual impairment test at April 1, 2013 . Under this guidance, entities testing goodwill for impairment have the option of performing a qualitative assessment before calculating the fair value of the reporting unit ( step 1 ). We concluded that it was more likely than not that the fair value of the North America and Specialty reporting units is greater than the carrying amount, therefore no step 1 quantitative analysis was performed. Step 1 of the impairment analysis consists of a comparison of the estimated fair value of the individual reporting units with their carrying amount, including goodwill. In estimating each reporting unit fair value, we performed extensive valuation analysis, utilizing both income and market-based approaches, in our goodwill assessment process. We utilized an average of the two methods in estimating the fair value of the individual reporting units. The following describes the valuation methodologies used to derive the estimated fair value of the reporting units. Income Approach : Under this approach to determine fair value, we discounted the expected future cash flows of each reporting unit. We used a discount rate, which reflected the overall level of inherent risk and the rate of return an outside investor would have expected to earn. To estimate cash flows beyond the final year of our model, we used a terminal value approach. Under this approach, we used estimated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ( EBITDA ) in the final year of our model, adjusted to estimate a normalized cash flow, applied a perpetuity growth assumption, and discounted by a perpetuity discount factor to determine the terminal value. We incorporated the present value of the resulting terminal value into our estimate of fair value. Market-Based Approach : The Company also utilizes a market-based approach to estimate fair value, principally utilizing the guideline company method which focuses on comparing our risk profile and growth prospects to a select group of publicly traded companies with reasonably similar guidelines. The Company performed its annual impairment test as of April 1, 2013 , and the estimated fair value of the two reporting units tested on a quantitative basis, Asia Pacific and EMEA, were in excess of the respective carrying values of each reporting unit. For the Asia Pacific reporting unit, the estimated fair value of this business exceeded its carrying value by approximately 10% . The Asia Pacific reporting unit has been impacted by government pricing reform measures in Australia and Japan and increased levels of competition. As it relates to the income approach for the Asia Pacific unit, we forecasted cash flows for the next ten years. During the forecast period, the revenue compound annual growth rate ( CAGR ) was approximately 10% . A terminal value year was calculated with a 4% revenue growth rate. The CAGR in EBITDA margins was approximately 2.4% over the period of estimated cash flows. The discount rate utilized was 11.2% . Under the market-based approach, we utilized an estimated range of market multiples of 9.0 to 10.0 times EBITDA plus a control premium of 10% . The averaging of the two valuation methods did not significantly impact the estimated fair value of the Asia Pacific reporting unit. As it relates to the income approach for the EMEA reporting unit at April 1, 2013 , we forecasted cash flows for the next ten years. During the forecast period, the revenue CAGR was approximately 7% . A terminal value year was calculated with a 3% revenue growth rate. The discount rate utilized was 9.8% . Under the market-based approach, we utilized an estimated range of market multiples of 8.5 to 10.0 times EBITDA plus a control premium of 15% . The estimated fair value of the EMEA reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 21% . The determination of the fair value of the reporting units requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions that affect the reporting unit expected future cash flows. These estimates and assumptions primarily include, but are not limited to, market multiples, control premiums, the discount rate, terminal growth rates, operating income before depreciation and amortization, and capital expenditures forecasts. Due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making these estimates, actual 65 Table of Contents results could differ from those estimates. In addition, changes in underlying assumptions, especially as it relates to the key assumptions detailed, could have a significant impact on the fair value of the reporting units. In the event the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying value, additional analysis would be required. The additional analysis would compare the carrying amount of the reporting unit goodwill with the implied fair value of that goodwill. The implied fair value of goodwill is the excess of the fair value of the reporting unit over the fair value amounts assigned to all of the assets and liabilities of that unit as if the reporting unit was acquired in a business combination and the fair value of the reporting unit represented the purchase price. If the carrying value of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, an impairment loss equal to such excess would be recognized, which would likely materially impact the Company reported results of operations. We have also assessed the recoverability of certain long-lived assets contained with the Asia Pacific and EMEA reporting units. Any impairment of these assets must be considered prior to our impairment review of goodwill. The assessment for impairment is based on our ability to recover the carrying value of the long-lived assets by analyzing the expected future undiscounted pre-tax cash flows specific to the asset grouping. We assess the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets at the lowest level for which identifiable undiscounted cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. For the Asia Pacific and EMEA reporting units, this assessment is generally performed at the country level within the reporting units. If these undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of long-lived assets within the asset group, an impairment loss is measured based on the difference between the estimated fair value and carrying value. Significant management judgment is involved in estimating the recoverability of these assets and is dependent upon the accuracy of the assumptions used in making these estimates, as well as how the estimates compare to the eventual future operating performance of the specific asset grouping. The results of our analysis performed in the fourth quarter of 2013 indicate that the undiscounted pre-tax cash flows in the individual asset groupings were sufficient to support the recoverability of the long-lived assets. The Company Australia operation in the Asia Pacific reporting unit and certain asset groupings in the EMEA reporting unit, principally Portugal, Spain and Germany, remain at risk for potential impairment charges if the projected operating results are not achieved. Any future long-lived assets impairment charges would likely materially impact the Company reported results of operations. Income Taxes We compute our income taxes based on the statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to Mylan in the various jurisdictions in which we generate income. Significant judgment is required in determining our income taxes and in evaluating our tax positions. We establish reserves in accordance with Mylan policy regarding accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. Our policy provides that the tax effects from an uncertain tax position be recognized in Mylan financial statements, only if the position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based on the technical merits of the position. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the settlement of a tax audit. Our provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves. Favorable resolution would be recognized as a reduction to our provision for income taxes in the period of resolution. Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to utilize the existing deferred tax assets. A significant piece of objective negative evidence evaluated was the cumulative loss incurred in certain taxing jurisdictions over the three-year period ended December 31, 2013 . Such objective evidence limits the ability to consider other subjective evidence such as our projections for future growth. Based on this evaluation, as of December 31, 2013 , a valuation allowance of $266.7 million has been recorded in order to measure only the portion of the deferred tax asset that more likely than not will be realized. The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are reduced or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight may be given to subjective evidence such as projections for growth. The resolution of tax reserves and changes in valuation allowances could be material to Mylan results of operations or financial position. A variance of 5% between estimated reserves and valuation allowances and actual resolution and realization of these tax items would have an effect on our reserve balance and valuation allowance of approximately $12 million and $17 million , respectively. 66 Table of Contents Legal Matters Mylan is involved in various legal proceedings, some of which involve claims for substantial amounts. An estimate is made to accrue for a loss contingency relating to any of these legal proceedings if it is probable that a liability was incurred as of the date of the financial statements and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Because of the subjective nature inherent in assessing the outcome of litigation and because of the potential that an adverse outcome in a legal proceeding could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations, and our cash flow, such estimates are considered to be critical accounting estimates. A variance of 5% between estimated and recorded litigation reserves (excluding indemnified claims) and actual resolution of certain legal matters would have an effect on our litigation reserve balance of approximately $5 million . Recent Accounting Pronouncements In July 2013, the FASB issued revised accounting guidance on the presentation of an unrecognized tax benefit when a net operating loss carryforward exists. The amended guidance clarifies when the unrecognized tax benefit should be presented in the financial statements as a reduction to a deferred tax asset for a net operating loss and when the unrecognized tax benefit should be presented in the financial statements as a liability and not combined with the deferred tax asset. The guidance is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods, beginning after December 15, 2013. The Company does not expect that the adoption of the guidance will have a material effect on its results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In February 2013, the FASB issued revised accounting guidance on the presentation of comprehensive income in the financial statements. The amended guidance requires an entity to report, in one place, the effect of significant reclassifications out of accumulated other comprehensive income on the respective line items in net income. Reclassifications must be disclosed if the amount being reclassified is required under GAAP to be reclassified in its entirety to net income. The guidance is effective prospectively for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2012. The Company adopted the guidance during 2013 by presenting additional disclosure in the notes to financial statements (see Note 8 ). The adoption of the guidance did not have a material effect on the Company results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In December 2011 and January 2013, the FASB issued revised accounting guidance for an entity with particular financial instruments and derivative instruments that offset in accordance with the FASB guidance regarding other presentation matters for derivatives and hedging. Under the amendments in this update, an entity with financial instruments that are offset in the financial statements or subject to enforceable master netting arrangements, or similar agreements, must disclose the gross amount recognized for the asset/liability, the offsetting amounts, the net amounts presented on the balance sheet and any amounts subject to enforceable master netting arrangements. The amended guidance is effective for fiscal years, including interim periods, beginning on or after January 1, 2013. Retroactive application is required. The Company adopted the guidance during 2013, and the adoption of the guidance did not have a material effect on the Company results of operations, financial position or cash flows. 
