CIK: 715957
Company Name: DOMINION RESOURCES INC VA 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-02-28


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) discusses our results of operations and general financial condition. MD&A should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. The terms Dominion, Company, we, our and us are used throughout this report and, depending on the context of their use, may represent any of the following: the legal entity, Dominion Resources, Inc., one or more of Dominion Resources, Inc. consolidated subsidiaries or operating segments or the entirety of Dominion Resources, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. C ONTENTS OF MD&A Our MD&A consists of the following information: Forward-Looking Statements Introduction Accounting Matters Results of Operations Segment Results of Operations Selected Information Energy Trading Activities Liquidity and Capital Resources Future Issues and Other Matters F ORWARD -L OOKING S TATEMENTS This report contains statements concerning our expectations, plans, objectives, future financial performance and other statements that are not historical facts. These statements are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In most cases, the reader can identify these forward-looking statements by such words as anticipate, estimate, forecast, expect, believe, should, could, plan, may, target or other similar words. We make forward-looking statements with full knowledge that risks and uncertainties exist that may cause actual results to differ materially from predicted results. Factors that may cause actual results to differ are often presented with the forward-looking statements themselves. Additionally, other factors may cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated in any forward-looking statement. These factors include but are not limited to: Unusual weather conditions and their effect on energy sales to customers and energy commodity prices; Extreme weather events, including hurricanes and winter storms, that can cause outages and property damage to our facilities; State and federal legislative and regulatory developments and changes to environmental and other laws and regulations, including those related to climate change, to which we are subject; Cost of environmental compliance, including those costs related to climate change; Risks associated with the operation of nuclear facilities; Fluctuations in energy-related commodity prices and the effect these could have on our earnings, liquidity position and the underlying value of our assets; Counterparty credit risk; Capital market conditions, including price risk due to marketable securities held as investments in nuclear decommissioning and benefit plan trusts; Fluctuations in interest rates; Changes in federal and state tax laws and regulations; Changes in rating agency requirements or credit ratings and their effect on availability and cost of capital; Changes in financial or regulatory accounting principles or policies imposed by governing bodies; Employee workforce factors including collective bargaining agreements and labor negotiations with union employees; The risks of operating businesses in regulated industries that are subject to changing regulatory structures; Receipt of approvals for and timing of closing dates for acquisitions and divestitures; Changes in rules for regional transmission organizations (RTOs) in which we participate, including changes in rate designs and new and evolving capacity models; Political and economic conditions, including the threat of domestic terrorism, inflation and deflation; The inability to complete planned construction projects within the terms and time frames initially anticipated; and Completing the divestiture of the Peoples Natural Gas Company (Peoples) and Hope Gas, Inc. (Hope), and the disposition of investments held by our financial services subsidiary, Dominion Capital, Inc. (DCI). Additionally, other risks that could cause actual results to differ from predicted results are set forth in Item 1A. Risk Factors. Our forward-looking statements are based on our beliefs and assumptions using information available at the time the statements are made. We caution the reader not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements because the assumptions, beliefs, expectations and projections about future events may, and often do, differ materially from actual results. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect developments occurring after the statement is made. I NTRODUCTION Dominion, headquartered in Richmond, Virginia, is one of the nation largest producers and transporters of energy. Our strategy is to be a leading provider of electricity, natural gas and related services to customers primarily in the eastern region of the United States (U.S.). Our portfolio of assets includes approximately: 26,500 megawatts (Mw) of generation capacity; 14,000 miles of interstate natural gas transmission, gathering and storage pipeline; 6,000 miles of electric transmission lines; 55,000 miles of electric distribution lines in Virginia and North Carolina; 28,000 miles of gas distribution pipeline, exclusive of service lines of two inches in diameter or less; 1.1 trillion cubic feet equivalent (Tcfe) of proved gas and oil reserves; and An underground natural gas storage system with over 975 billion cubic feet (bcf) of capacity. Prior to a fourth quarter 2007 segment realignment, we managed our daily operations through four primary operating 23 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued segments: Dominion Delivery, Dominion Energy, Dominion Generation and Dominion Exploration and Production (E&P). During the fourth quarter of 2007, we realigned our business units to reflect our strategic refocusing and began managing our daily operations through three primary operating segments: Dominion Virginia Power (DVP), Dominion Generation and Dominion Energy. We also report a Corporate and Other segment that includes our corporate, service company and other functions and the net impact of certain operations disposed of or to be disposed of. While we manage our daily operations through our operating segments as described below, our assets remain wholly-owned by our legal subsidiaries. The contributions to net income by our primary operating segments are determined based on a measure of profit that we believe represents the segments core earnings. As a result, certain specific items attributable to those segments are not included in profit measures evaluated by executive management in assessing the segment performance or allocating resources among the segments. Those specific items are reported in the Corporate and Other segment. DVP includes our regulated electric transmission, distribution and customer service operations, as well as our nonregulated retail energy marketing operations. Electric transmission and distribution operations serve residential, commercial, industrial and governmental customers in Virginia and northeastern North Carolina. Retail energy marketing operations include the marketing of gas, electricity and related products and services to residential and small commercial customers in the Northeast, mid-Atlantic and Midwest. Revenue provided by our electric transmission operations is based primarily on rates approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). The profitability of this business is dependent on its ability, through the rates it is permitted to charge, to recover costs and earn a reasonable return on its capital investments. Variability results from changes in rates, the demand for services, which is primarily weather dependent, and operating and maintenance expenditures. We are a member of PJM Interconnection, LLC (PJM), an RTO, and our electric transmission facilities are integrated into PJM wholesale electricity markets. Consistent with the increased authority given to the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) by the Energy Policy Act of 2005, we are committed to meeting NERC standards, modernizing our infrastructure and maintaining superior system reliability. We will continue to focus on safety, operational performance and execution of PJM Regional Transmission Expansion Plan (RTEP) as we move toward the future. Revenue provided by our electric distribution operations is based primarily on rates established by state regulatory authorities and state law. Actual revenues are driven primarily by weather, customer growth and usage per customer. Operationally, electric distribution continues to focus on improving service levels while striving to reduce costs and link capital investments to operational results. As part of this continued focus, we have implemented an asset management process to ensure that we are optimizing our investments to balance cost, performance and risk. We are also using technology to enhance customer service options. As we move toward the future, safety, operational performance and customer relationships will remain as key focal areas. In our electric transmission and distribution operations, we are seeing continued strong growth in new customers and increased usage per customer on a weather-normalized basis. Growth is particularly strong in the major metropolitan areas of Virginia. The combination of higher energy usage and efficient operations and maintenance spending has been critical to our performance. Operationally, we continue to enhance the customer experience through solid reliability performance and by completing the automation of all of our electric residential meters. Our retail energy marketing operations compete in nonregulated energy markets and have experienced strong growth during the past few years. The retail business requires limited capital investment and currently employs fewer than 100 people. The retail customer base is diversified across three product lines natural gas, electricity and home warranty services. In natural gas, we have a heavy concentration of customers in markets where utilities have a long-standing commitment to customer choice. In electricity, we pursue markets where utilities have divested generation and where customers are permitted and have opted to purchase from the market. Major growth drivers are customer additions, new markets/products and sales channels, and supply optimization. Dominion Energy includes our regulated Ohio natural gas distribution company, regulated gas transmission pipeline and storage operations, regulated liquefied natural gas (LNG) operations and our Appalachian natural gas E&P business. Dominion Energy also includes our producer services business, which aggregates gas supply, provides market-based services related to gas transportation and storage and engages in associated gas trading and marketing. The gas transmission pipeline and storage business serves Dominion gas distribution businesses and other customers in the Northeast, mid-Atlantic and Midwest. Included in our gas transmission pipeline and storage businesses is our gas gathering and extraction activity, which sells extracted products at market rates. Revenue provided by our regulated gas transmission and storage, and LNG operations is based primarily on rates established by FERC. The profitability of these businesses is dependent on our ability, through the rates we are permitted to charge, to recover costs and earn a reasonable return on our capital investments. Variability in earnings results from changes in rates and the demand for services, which can be dependent upon weather, changes in commodity prices, and changes in the cost of routine maintenance and repairs (including labor and benefits). Our gas distribution operations serve residential, commercial and industrial gas sales and transportation customers in Ohio. Revenue provided by our gas distribution operations is based primarily on rates established by the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (Ohio commission). The profitability of this business is dependent on its ability, through the rates we are permitted to charge, to recover costs and earn a reasonable return on our capital investments. Variability in earnings relates largely to changes in volumes of natural gas transported, which are primarily weather sensitive, and changes in the cost of routine maintenance and repairs (including labor and benefits). Our Appalachian natural gas E&P business generates income from the sale of natural gas and oil we produce from our reserves, including fixed-term overriding royalty interests formerly 24 Table of Contents associated with volumetric production payment (VPP) agreements as discussed in Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Variability in earnings relates to: changes in commodity prices, which are largely market-based; production volumes, which are impacted by numerous factors including drilling success and timing of development projects; and drilling costs which may be impacted by drilling rig availability and other external factors. We manage commodity price volatility by hedging a substantial portion of our expected production. These hedging activities may require cash deposits to satisfy collateral requirements. Earnings from Dominion Energy other nonregulated business, producer services, are subject to variability associated with changes in commodity prices. Producer services uses physical and financial arrangements to hedge this price risk. Dominion Generation includes the generation operations of our merchant fleet and our regulated electric utility, as well as energy marketing and price risk management activities for our generation assets. Our generation mix is diversified and includes coal, nuclear, gas, oil, renewables and purchased power. The generation facilities of our electric utility fleet are located in Virginia, West Virginia and North Carolina. The generation facilities of our merchant fleet are located in Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, West Virginia and Wisconsin. Dominion Generation earnings primarily result from the generation and sale of electricity. Due to 1999 Virginia deregulation legislation, as amended in 2004 and 2007, revenues for serving Virginia jurisdictional retail load are based on capped rates through 2008. Additionally, fuel costs for the utility fleet, including purchased power, were subject to fixed rate recovery provisions until July 1, 2007. Pursuant to the 2007 amendments to the fuel cost recovery statute, annual fuel rate adjustments, with deferred fuel accounting for over- or under-recoveries of fuel costs, were instituted beginning July 1, 2007 for our Virginia jurisdictional customers. As discussed in Status of Electric Regulation in Virginia under Future Issues and Other Matters , the Virginia General Assembly enacted legislation in April 2007 that returned the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations to a modified cost-of-service rate model, subject to rate caps in effect through December 31, 2008. During the remainder of the capped rate period, changes in our utility operating costs relative to costs used to establish capped rates, will likely impact our earnings. Variability in earnings provided by the merchant fleet relates to changes in market-based prices received for electricity and the demand for electricity, which is primarily dependent upon weather. We manage price volatility by hedging a substantial portion of our expected sales. Variability also results from changes in the cost of fuel consumed, labor and benefits and the timing, duration and costs of scheduled and unscheduled outages. Corporate and Other includes our corporate, service company and other functions (including unallocated debt), corporate-wide commodity risk management, the remaining assets of DCI, and the net impact of certain operations disposed of or to be disposed of, which are discussed in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Operations disposed of during 2007 included all of our non-Appalachian E&P operations, three natural gas-fired merchant generation peaking facilities (Peaker facilities) and certain DCI operations. Operations to be disposed of reflect two regulated gas distribution subsidiaries, Peoples and Hope, which we agreed to sell to Equitable Resources, Inc. (Equitable), in March 2006. This sale was subject to regulatory approvals in the states in which the companies operate as well as antitrust clearance under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act. However, in January 2008, Dominion and Equitable announced the termination of the agreement for the sale of Peoples and Hope, primarily due to the continued delay in achieving final regulatory approval. We are seeking other offers for the purchase of these utilities. In addition, Corporate and Other includes specific items attributable to our operating segments that are not included in profit measures evaluated by executive management in assessing the segments performance or in allocating resources among the segments. A CCOUNTING M ATTERS Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates We have identified the following accounting policies, including certain inherent estimates, that as a result of the judgments, uncertainties, uniqueness and complexities of the underlying accounting standards and operations involved, could result in material changes to our financial condition or results of operations under different conditions or using different assumptions. We have discussed the development, selection and disclosure of each of these policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. A CCOUNTING F OR D ERIVATIVE C ONTRACTS AT F AIR V ALUE We use derivative contracts such as futures, swaps, forwards, options and financial transmission rights (FTRs) to manage the commodity and financial markets risks of our business operations. Derivative contracts, with certain exceptions, are subject to fair value accounting and are reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Accounting requirements for derivatives and related hedging activities are complex and may be subject to further clarification by standard-setting bodies. Fair value is based on actively-quoted market prices, if available. In the absence of actively-quoted market prices, we seek indicative price information from external sources, including broker quotes and industry publications. If pricing information from external sources is not available, we must estimate prices based on available historical and near-term future price information and use of statistical methods, including regression analysis. For options and contracts with option-like characteristics where pricing information is not available from external sources, we generally use a modified Black-Scholes Model that considers time value, the volatility of the underlying commodities and other relevant assumptions when estimating fair value. We use other option models under special circumstances, including a Spread Approximation Model, when contracts include different commodities or commodity locations and a Swing Option Model, when contracts allow either the buyer or seller the ability to exercise within a range of quantities. For contracts with unique characteristics, we estimate fair value using a discounted cash flow 25 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued approach deemed appropriate under the circumstances and applied consistently from period to period. If pricing information is not available from external sources, judgment is required to develop the estimates of fair value. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a material effect on a contract estimated fair value. For cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions, we estimate the future cash flows of the forecasted transactions and evaluate the probability of occurrence and timing of such transactions. Changes in conditions or the occurrence of unforeseen events could require discontinuance of hedge accounting or could affect the timing of the reclassification of gains and/or losses on cash flow hedges from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (AOCI) into earnings. U SE OF E STIMATES IN G OODWILL I MPAIRMENT T ESTING As of December 31, 2007, we reported $3.5 billion of goodwill in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. A significant portion resulted from the acquisition of the former Consolidated Natural Gas Company (CNG) in 2000. In April of each year, we test our goodwill for potential impairment, and perform additional tests more frequently if impairment indicators are present and after a portion of goodwill has been allocated to a business which we plan to dispose of. The 2007, 2006 and 2005 annual tests did not result in the recognition of any goodwill impairment, as the estimated fair values of our reporting units exceeded their respective carrying amounts. As a result of the 2007 disposition of our non-Appalachian E&P operations, goodwill was allocated to such operations based on the relative fair values of the E&P operations being disposed of and the Appalachian portion being retained. The impairment test performed on the goodwill allocated to the retained Appalachian operations showed no impairment. Also, in connection with the 2007 segment realignment, the goodwill allocated to our three gas distribution subsidiaries was tested for impairment during the fourth quarter of 2007. This interim test did not result in the recognition of any goodwill impairment, as the estimated fair values of these businesses exceeded their respective carrying amounts. In general, we estimate the fair value of our reporting units by using a combination of discounted cash flows, and other valuation techniques that use multiples of earnings for peer group companies and analyses of recent business combinations involving peer group companies. For our non-Appalachian E&P operations, our regulated gas distribution subsidiaries held for sale and certain DCI operations, negotiated sales prices were used as fair value for the tests conducted in 2007. Fair value estimates are dependent on subjective factors such as our estimate of future cash flows, the selection of appropriate discount and growth rates, and the selection of peer group companies and recent transactions. These underlying assumptions and estimates are made as of a point in time; subsequent modifications, particularly changes in discount rates or growth rates inherent in our estimates of future cash flows, could result in a future impairment of goodwill. Although we have consistently applied the same methods in developing the assumptions and estimates that underlie the fair value calculations, such as estimates of future cash flows, and based those estimates on relevant information available at the time, such cash flow estimates are highly uncertain by nature and may vary sig- nificantly from actual results. If the estimates of future cash flows used in the most recent tests had been 10% lower, the resulting fair values would have still been greater than the carrying values of each of those reporting units tested, indicating that no impairment was present. U SE OF E STIMATES IN L ONG - LIVED A SSET I MPAIRMENT T ESTING Impairment testing for an individual or group of long-lived assets or for intangible assets with definite lives is required when circumstances indicate those assets may be impaired. When an asset carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted estimated future cash flows associated with the asset, the asset is considered impaired to the extent that the asset fair value is less than its carrying amount. Performing an impairment test on long-lived assets involves judgment in areas such as identifying circumstances that indicate an impairment may exist; identifying and grouping affected assets; and developing the undiscounted and discounted estimated future cash flows (used to estimate fair value in the absence of market-based value) associated with the asset, including probability weighting such cash flows to reflect expectations about possible variations in their amounts or timing and the selection of an appropriate discount rate. Although our cash flow estimates are based on relevant information available at the time the estimates are made, estimates of future cash flows are, by nature, highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. For example, estimates of future cash flows would contemplate factors, which may change over time, such as the expected use of the asset, including future production and sales levels, and expected fluctuations of prices of commodities sold and consumed. In 2006, we tested the partially-completed Dresden Energy merchant generation facility (Dresden) for impairment and concluded that its carrying amount, as well as the estimated cost to complete, was recoverable based on the probability of continued construction and use at that time. As part of our ongoing asset review to improve Dominion return on invested capital, we began the process of exploring the sale of Dresden in the second quarter of 2007. Non-binding indicative bids were received and based on our evaluation of these bids, we believed that it was likely that Dresden would be sold rather than completed and operated in our merchant fleet. This change in intended use represented a triggering event for us to evaluate whether we could recover the carrying amount of our investment in Dresden. This analysis indicated that the carrying amount of Dresden would not be recovered. As a result, in the second quarter of 2007, we recognized a $387 million ($252 million after-tax) impairment charge to reduce Dresden carrying amount to its estimated fair value in connection with the planned sale of Dresden, which closed in September 2007. In 2005, we tested gas and steam electric turbines held for future development with a carrying amount of $187 million for impairment and concluded that the carrying amount was recoverable based upon the probability of future development as a merchant generation project at that time. In the third quarter of 2007, we recognized an $18 million impairment charge ($12 million after-tax) for two of these gas turbines that were sold by our merchant generation operations to our utility generation operations based upon amounts to be recovered by our utility in jurisdictional rate base. These turbines will be used in the 26 Table of Contents Ladysmith expansion project discussed in Utility Generation Expansion under Future Issues and Other Matters . In conjunction with the results of a review of our portfolio of assets, Peaker facilities, with a combined carrying amount of $504 million, were marketed for sale in the third quarter of 2006. An impairment analysis, performed in the third quarter of 2006, indicated that the carrying amount of each of the Peaker facilities was recoverable as the expected undiscounted cash flows, probability weighted to reflect both continued use and possible sale scenarios, exceeded the carrying amount. In December 2006, we reached an agreement to sell the Peaker facilities and accordingly, we reduced their carrying amounts to fair value less cost to sell and classified them as assets held for sale in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. Also in the fourth quarter of 2006, in conjunction with a review of our assets, a decision was made to no longer pursue the development of a gas transmission pipeline project with capitalized construction costs of $28 million. The pipeline project was previously tested for impairment during 2005. The results of our analysis in 2005 indicated that this asset was not impaired based on the probability of continued construction and use at that time. Impairment charges totaling $280 million ($181 million after-tax) were recorded in December 2006 related to the Peaker facilities and the gas transmission pipeline project. A CCOUNTING FOR R EGULATED O PERATIONS The accounting for our regulated electric and gas operations differs from the accounting for nonregulated operations in that we are required to reflect the effect of rate regulation in our Consolidated Financial Statements. For regulated businesses subject to federal or state cost-of-service rate regulation, regulatory practices that assign costs to accounting periods may differ from accounting methods generally applied by nonregulated companies. When it is probable that regulators will permit the recovery of current costs through future rates charged to customers, we defer these costs as regulatory assets that otherwise would be expensed by nonregulated companies. Likewise, we recognize regulatory liabilities when it is probable that regulators will require customer refunds through future rates or when revenue is collected from customers for expenditures that have yet to be incurred. Generally, regulatory assets are amortized into expense and regulatory liabilities are amortized into income over the period authorized by the regulator. As discussed further in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, in April 2007, the Virginia General Assembly passed legislation that returned the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations to cost-of-service rate regulation. As a result, we reapplied the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation (SFAS No. 71), to those operations on April 4, 2007, the date the legislation was enacted. The reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations resulted in a $259 million ($158 million after tax) extraordinary charge and the reclassification of $195 million ($119 million after tax) of unrealized gains from AOCI related to nuclear decommissioning trust funds. This established a $454 million long-term regulatory liability for amounts previously collected from Virginia jurisdictional customers and placed in external trusts (including income, losses and changes in fair value thereon) for the future decommissioning of our utility nuclear generation stations, in excess of amounts recorded pursuant to SFAS No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations (SFAS No. 143). In connection with the reapplication or SFAS No. 71, we prospectively changed certain of our accounting policies for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations to those used by cost-of-service rate-regulated entities. Other than the extraordinary item previously discussed, the overall impact of these changes was not material to our results of operations or financial condition in 2007. We evaluate whether or not recovery of our regulatory assets through future rates is probable and make various assumptions in our analyses. The expectations of future recovery are generally based on orders issued by regulatory commissions or historical experience, as well as discussions with applicable regulatory authorities. If recovery of a regulatory asset is determined to be less than probable, it will be written off in the period such assessment is made. In 2006, we wrote off $166 million of our regulatory assets as a result of the planned sale of Peoples and Hope since the recovery of those assets was no longer probable. We currently believe the recovery of our remaining regulatory assets is probable. See Notes 2, 6 and 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. A SSET R ETIREMENT O BLIGATIONS We recognize liabilities for the expected cost of retiring tangible long-lived assets for which a legal obligation exists. These asset retirement obligations (AROs) are recognized at fair value as incurred, and are capitalized as part of the cost of the related long-lived assets. In the absence of quoted market prices, we estimate the fair value of our AROs using present value techniques, in which we make various assumptions including estimates of the amounts and timing of future cash flows associated with retirement activities, credit-adjusted risk free rates and cost escalation rates. AROs currently reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets were measured during a period of historically low interest rates. The impact on measurements of new AROs or remeasurements of existing AROs, using different rates in the future, may be significant. When we revise any assumptions used to calculate the fair value of existing AROs, we adjust the carrying amount of both the ARO liability and the related long-lived asset. We accrete the ARO liability to reflect the passage of time. In 2007, 2006 and 2005, we recognized $99 million, $109 million and $102 million, respectively, of accretion, and expect to incur $95 million in 2008. Upon reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations, we began recording accretion and depreciation associated with utility nuclear decommissioning AROs, formerly charged to expense, as an adjustment to the regulatory liability for nuclear decommissioning trust funds previously discussed, in order to match the recognition for rate-making purposes. A significant portion of our AROs relates to the future decommissioning of our nuclear facilities. At December 31, 2007, nuclear decommissioning AROs, which are reported in the Dominion Generation segment, totaled $1.5 billion, representing approximately 85% of our total AROs. Based on their significance, the following discussion of critical assumptions inherent in determining the fair value of AROs relates to those associated with our nuclear decommissioning obligations. 27 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued We utilize periodic site-specific base year cost studies in order to estimate the nature, cost and timing of planned decommissioning activities for our utility and merchant nuclear plants. We obtained updated cost studies for all of our nuclear plants in 2006 which generally reflected increases in base year costs. These cost studies were based on relevant information available at the time they were performed; however, estimates of future cash flows for extended periods of time are by nature highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. In addition, our cost estimates include cost escalation rates that are applied to the base year costs. The selection of these cost escalation rates is dependent on subjective factors which we consider to be a critical assumption. We determine cost escalation rates, which represent projected cost increases over time, due to both general inflation and increases in the cost of specific decommissioning activities, for each of our nuclear facilities. The use of alternative rates could have been material to the liabilities recognized. For example, had we increased the cost escalation rate by 0.5%, the amount recognized as of December 31, 2007 for our AROs related to nuclear decommissioning would have been $267 million higher. E MPLOYEE B ENEFIT P LANS We sponsor noncontributory defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans for eligible active employees, retirees and qualifying dependents. The projected costs of providing benefits under these plans are dependent, in part, on historical information such as employee demographics, the level of contributions made to the plans and earnings on plan assets. Assumptions about the future, including the expected rate of return on plan assets, discount rates applied to benefit obligations and the anticipated rate of increase in health care costs and participant compensation, also have a significant impact on employee benefit costs. The impact of changes in these factors, as well as differences between our assumptions and actual experience, is generally recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Income over the remaining average service period of plan participants, rather than immediately. The expected long-term rates of return on plan assets, discount rates and medical cost trend rates are critical assumptions. We determine the expected long-term rates of return on plan assets for pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans by using a combination of: Historical return analysis to determine expected future risk premiums; Forward-looking return expectations derived from the yield on long-term bonds and the price earnings ratios of major stock market indices; Expected inflation and risk-free interest rate assumptions; and Investment allocation of plan assets. The strategic target asset allocation for our pension fund is 34% U.S. equity securities, 12% non-U.S. equity securities, 22% debt securities, 7% real estate and 25% other, such as private equity investments. We develop assumptions, which are then compared to the forecasts of other independent investment advisors to ensure reasonableness. An internal committee selects the final assumptions. We calculated our pension cost using an expected return on plan assets assumption of 8.75% for 2007, 2006 and 2005. We calculated our 2007, 2006 and 2005 other postretirement benefit cost using an expected return on plan assets assumption of 8.00%. The rate used in calculating other postretirement benefit cost is lower than the rate used in calculating pension cost because of differences in the relative amounts of various types of investments held as plan assets. We determine discount rates from analyses of AA/Aa rated bonds with cash flows matching the expected payments to be made under our plans. The discount rates used to calculate pension cost and other postretirement benefit cost were 6.20% and 6.10%, respectively, in 2007 compared to 5.60% and 5.50%, respectively, in 2006, and 6.00% for both discount rates in 2005. Higher long-term bond yields were the primary reason for the increase in the discount rate from 2006 to 2007. We selected discount rates of 6.60% and 6.50% for determining our December 31, 2007 projected pension and postretirement benefit obligations, respectively. We establish the medical cost trend rate assumption based on analyses of various factors including the specific provisions of our medical plans, actual cost trends experienced and projected, and demographics of plan participants. Our medical cost trend rate assumption as of December 31, 2007 is 9.00% and is expected to gradually decrease to 5.00% in later years. The following table illustrates the effect on cost of changing the critical actuarial assumptions previously discussed, while holding all other assumptions constant: Increase in Net Periodic Cost Change in Actuarial Assumption Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits (millions, except percentages) Discount rate (0.25)% $ 13 $ 5 Rate of return on plan assets (0.25)% 12 2 Healthcare cost trend rate 1% N/A 20 In addition to the effects on cost, a 0.25% decrease in the discount rate would increase our projected pension benefit obligation by $117 million and would increase our accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $43 million at December 31, 2007. A CCOUNTING FOR G AS AND O IL O PERATIONS We follow the full cost method of accounting for gas and oil E&P activities prescribed by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Under the full cost method, all direct costs of property acquisition, exploration and development activities are capitalized and subsequently depleted using the units-of-production method. The depletable base of costs includes estimated future costs to be incurred in developing proved gas and oil reserves, as well as capitalized asset retirement costs, net of projected salvage values. Capitalized costs in the depletable base are subject to a ceiling test prescribed by the SEC. The test limits capitalized amounts to a ceiling the present value of estimated future net revenues to be derived from the production of proved gas and oil reserves, discounted at 10 percent, assuming period-end pricing adjusted for any cash flow hedges in place. We perform the ceiling test quarterly, on a country-by-country basis as applicable, and would recognize asset impairments to the extent that total capitalized costs exceed the ceiling. In addition, gains or losses on the sale or other disposition of gas and oil properties are not recognized, unless the gain or loss would significantly alter the relationship 28 Table of Contents between capitalized costs and proved reserves of natural gas and oil attributable to a country. In 2007, we recognized gains from the sales of our Canadian and U.S. non-Appalachian E&P businesses. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our estimate of proved reserves requires a large degree of judgment and is dependent on factors such as historical data, engineering estimates of proved reserve quantities, estimates of the amount and timing of future expenditures to develop the proved reserves, and estimates of future production from the proved reserves. Our estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2007 are based upon studies for each of our properties prepared by our staff engineers and audited by Ryder Scott Company, L.P. Calculations were prepared using standard geological and engineering methods generally accepted by the petroleum industry and in accordance with SEC guidelines. Given the volatility of natural gas and oil prices, it is possible that our estimate of discounted future net cash flows from proved natural gas and oil reserves that is used to calculate the ceiling could materially change in the near-term. The process to estimate reserves is imprecise, and estimates are subject to revision. If there is a significant variance in any of our estimates or assumptions in the future and revisions to the value of our proved reserves are necessary, related depletion expense and the calculation of the ceiling test would be affected and recognition of natural gas and oil property impairments could occur. See Notes 2 and 30 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. I NCOME T AXES Judgment and the use of estimates are required in developing the provision for income taxes and reporting of tax-related assets and liabilities. The interpretation of tax laws involves uncertainty, since tax authorities may interpret the laws differently. Ultimate resolution of income tax matters may result in favorable or unfavorable impacts to net income and cash flows and adjustments to tax-related assets and liabilities could be material. Prior to 2007, we established liabilities for tax-related contingencies when we believed it was probable that a liability had been incurred and the amount could be reasonably estimated in accordance with SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, and subsequently reviewed them in light of changing facts and circumstances. However, as discussed in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, effective January 1, 2007, we adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes (FIN 48). Taking into consideration the uncertainty and judgment involved in the determination and filing of income taxes, FIN 48 establishes standards for recognition and measurement, in financial statements, of positions taken, or expected to be taken, by an entity in its income tax returns. Positions taken by an entity in its income tax returns that are recognized in the financial statements must satisfy a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, assuming that the position will be examined by tax authorities with full knowledge of all relevant information. If we take or expect to take a tax return position that is not recognized in the financial statements, we disclose such amount as an unrecognized tax benefit. At December 31, 2007 we had $407 million of unrecognized tax benefits. For the majority of our unrecognized tax benefits, the ultimate deductibility is highly certain, but there is uncertainty about the timing of such deductibility. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are provided, representing future effects on income taxes for temporary differences between the bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting and tax purposes. We evaluate quarterly the probability of realizing deferred tax assets by reviewing a forecast of future taxable income and the availability of tax planning strategies that can be implemented, if necessary, to realize deferred tax assets. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income or successfully implement tax planning strategies may affect the realization of deferred tax assets. We establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all, or a portion of, a deferred tax asset will not be realized. At December 31, 2007, we had established $23 million of valuation allowances on our deferred tax assets associated with loss carryforwards. Other A CCOUNTING S TANDARDS During 2007, 2006 and 2005, we were required to adopt several new accounting standards, which are discussed in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards that will be adopted in the future. R ESULTS OF O PERATIONS Presented below is a summary of our consolidated results: Year Ended December 31, 2007 $ Change 2006 $ Change 2005 (millions, except EPS) Net Income $ 2,539 $ 1,159 $ 1,380 $ 347 $ 1,033 Diluted earnings per share (EPS) (1) 3.88 1.92 1.96 0.46 1.50 (1) All per share amounts have been adjusted to reflect a two-for-one stock split distributed in November 2007. Overview 2007 VS . 2006 Net income increased by 84% to $2.5 billion. Diluted EPS increased to $3.88 and includes $0.24 of share accretion resulting from the repurchase of shares with proceeds received from the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business. Favorable drivers include a gain on the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business, higher realized prices for our gas and oil production, higher margins at our merchant generation business and the reinstatement of annual fuel rate adjustments, effective July 1, 2007, for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations, with deferred fuel accounting for over- or under-recoveries of fuel costs. Unfavorable drivers include a decrease in gas and oil production due to the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business, an impairment charge related to the sale of Dresden, an extraordinary charge in connection with the reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations, charges related to the early extinguishment of outstanding debt associated with the completion of our debt tender offer in July 2007, a charge due to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil derivatives and subsequent changes in the fair value of these derivatives as a result of the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P 29 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued business, a charge for the termination of a long-term power sales agreement at our State Line power station (State Line) and the absence of business interruption insurance revenue received in 2006, associated with Hurricanes Katrina and Rita (2005 hurricanes). 2006 VS . 2005 Net income increased 34% to $1.4 billion. Favorable drivers included increased gas and oil production, higher margins at our merchant generation business, an increased contribution from our retail energy marketing operations, higher business interruption insurance proceeds received in 2006 than in 2005 and the absence of losses incurred in 2005 due to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil derivatives resulting from hurricane-related interruptions of gas and oil production in the Gulf of Mexico. These favorable drivers were partially offset by an impairment charge related to the Peaker facilities, milder weather in our gas and electric service territories, lower realized gas prices for our E&P operations and a reduction in gains from sales of emissions allowances held for consumption. Analysis of Consolidated Operations Presented below are selected amounts related to our results of operations: Year Ended December 31, 2007 $ Change 2006 $ Change 2005 (millions) Operating Revenue $ 15,674 $ (623 ) $ 16,297 $ (1,512 ) $ 17,809 Operating Expenses Electric fuel and energy purchases 3,511 275 3,236 (1,434 ) 4,670 Purchased electric capacity 439 (42 ) 481 (23 ) 504 Purchased gas 2,766 (171 ) 2,937 (1,004 ) 3,941 Other energy-related commodity purchases 252 (770 ) 1,022 (369 ) 1,391 Other operations and maintenance 4,854 1,676 3,178 198 2,980 Gain on sale of U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business (3,635 ) (3,635 ) Depreciation, depletion and amortization 1,368 (189 ) 1,557 198 1,359 Other taxes 552 (16 ) 568 (9 ) 577 Other income 102 (71 ) 173 10 163 Interest and related charges 1,175 147 1,028 84 944 Income tax expense 1,783 856 927 354 573 Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax (8 ) 142 (150 ) (156 ) 6 Extraordinary item, net of tax benefit (158 ) (158 ) An analysis of our results of operations for 2007 compared to 2006 and 2006 compared to 2005 follows. 2007 VS . 2006 Operating Revenue decreased 4% to $15.7 billion, primarily reflecting: A $535 million decrease in sales of gas and oil production primarily due to lower volumes due to the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business ($1.4 billion), partially offset by higher realized prices ($880 million); A $422 million decrease in revenue from sales of oil purchased by E&P operations, primarily due to the impact of netting sales and purchases of oil under buy/sell arrangements associated with the implementation of Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) Issue No. 04-13, Accounting for Purchases and Sales of Inventory with the Same Counterparty (EITF 04-13) in 2006. This decrease was largely offset by a corresponding decrease in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense; A $309 million decrease in nonutility coal sales, primarily from reduced sales volumes ($281 million) related to exiting certain sales activities and lower prices ($28 million). This decrease was offset by a corresponding decrease in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense ; A $273 million decrease reflecting the absence of business interruption insurance revenue received in 2006, associated with the 2005 hurricanes; A $222 million decrease in gas sales by our gas distribution operations reflecting the combined effects of: A $185 million decrease reflecting lower gas prices; and A $198 million decrease resulting from the migration of customers to energy choice programs; partially offset by A $161 million increase in volumes due to an increase in the number of heating degree days, primarily in the first quarter of 2007, and changes in customer usage patterns and other factors. The effect of this net decrease was more than offset by a corresponding decrease in Purchased gas expense ; A $77 million decrease in revenue from sales of gas purchased by E&P operations to facilitate gas transportation and other contracts primarily due to the implementation of EITF 04-13 and a reduction in quantities of purchased gas. This decrease was more than offset by a corresponding decrease in Purchased gas expense ; A $54 million decrease in the sales of emissions allowances held for resale. This decrease was largely offset by a corresponding decrease in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense ; and A $47 million decrease in sales of extracted products due to the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business; These decreases were partially offset by: A $593 million increase in revenue from our electric utility operations, largely resulting from: A $166 million increase due to the impact of a comparatively higher fuel rate in certain customer jurisdictions; A $162 million increase in sales to retail customers attributable to variations in rates resulting from changes in sales mix and other factors ($95 million) and new customer connections ($67 million) primarily in our residential and commercial customer classes; 30 Table of Contents A $131 million increase in sales to retail customers due to an increase in the number of cooling and heating degree days. As compared to the prior year, we experienced a 15% increase in cooling degree days and a 10% increase in heating degree days; An $80 million increase in sales to wholesale customers; and A $42 million increase resulting primarily from higher ancillary service revenue reflecting higher regulation and operating reserves revenue received from PJM. A $511 million increase for merchant generation operations, primarily reflecting higher realized prices for nuclear and fossil operations ($363 million), including higher capacity revenue associated with new capacity markets in ISO New England and PJM, and increased volumes for fossil operations ($148 million); and A $134 million increase in gas sales by retail energy marketing activities due to increased customer accounts ($188 million), partially offset by lower contracted sales prices ($54 million). This increase was largely offset by a corresponding increase in Purchased gas expense; An $88 million increase in gas transportation and storage revenue primarily attributable to our gas distribution operations due to increased volumes and higher prices; and A $68 million increase in electric sales by our retail energy marketing operations due to higher volumes ($31 million) and higher sales prices ($37 million). This increase was more than offset by a corresponding increase in Electric fuel and energy purchases expense . Operating Expenses and Other Items Electric fuel and energy purchases expense increased 8% to $3.5 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $93 million increase for utility generation operations. The underlying fuel costs, including those subject to deferral accounting, increased by approximately $501 million due to higher consumption of fossil fuel and purchased power resulting from an increase in the number of heating and cooling degree days, higher commodity costs and a change in generation mix. This increase was largely offset by a $408 million decrease primarily due to the deferral of fuel expenses that were in excess of current period fuel rate recovery; An $86 million increase for our merchant generation operations primarily due to higher commodity prices and increased fossil fuel consumption; and A $72 million increase related to our retail energy marketing operations, as discussed in Operating Revenue . Purchased gas expense decreased 6% to $2.8 billion, primarily due to the following factors: A $248 million decrease in costs attributable to gas distribution operations, as discussed in Operating Revenue ; and A $97 million decrease related to E&P operations, as discussed in Operating Revenue. These decreases were partially offset by: A $124 million increase associated with retail energy marketing activities, due to higher volumes ($168 million), partially offset by lower prices ($44 million), as discussed in Operating Revenue ; and A $50 million increase associated with our producer services business, due to the net impact of an increase in volumes and lower prices. Other energy-related commodity purchases expense decreased 75% to $252 million, primarily attributable to the following factors, which are discussed in Operating Revenue : A $409 million decrease related to E&P operations; A $310 million decrease in the cost of nonutility coal sales; and A $51 million decrease in the cost of sales of emissions allowances held for resale. Other operations and maintenance expense increased 53% to $4.9 billion, resulting primarily from: A $541 million charge predominantly due to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil derivatives and subsequent changes in the fair value of these derivatives as a result of the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business; A $387 million impairment charge related to the sale of Dresden; A $231 million charge related to the termination of a long-term power sales agreement at State Line; A $171 million charge primarily due to the termination of VPP agreements as a result of the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business. We have retained the repurchased fixed-term overriding royalty interests formerly associated with these agreements; A $124 million increase in salaries, wages and benefits expense primarily resulting from higher incentive-based compensation ($100 million) and higher salaries and wages ($83 million) partially offset by lower pension and medical benefits expense ($59 million); A $96 million increase in outage costs, primarily related to scheduled outages for both utility and merchant generation operations; A $54 million increase due to a decrease in gains from the sale of emissions allowances held for consumption; A $54 million increase resulting from litigation-related charges; A $48 million increase in bad debt expense for gas distribution operations, primarily related to low income energy assistance programs and an increase in sales volumes. These expenditures are recovered through rates and do not impact our net income; A $31 million increase primarily due to the inclusion of certain FTR proceeds in Electric fuel and energy purchases expense , beginning July 1, 2007, as a result of the reapplication of deferred fuel accounting for the Virginia jurisdiction. These FTR proceeds are used to offset congestion costs associated with PJM spot market activity incurred by our utility generation operations; and A $23 million increase related to outside services for tree trimming and brush removal and other expenses. These charges were partially offset by the absence of the following 2006 items: A $166 million charge related to the write-off of certain regulatory assets in connection with the planned sale of Peoples and Hope; and 31 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued A $60 million charge due to the elimination of hedge accounting for certain interest rate swaps associated with our junior subordinated notes payable to affiliated trusts. Gain on sale of U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business reflects a pre-tax gain of $3.6 billion resulting from the completion of the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense (DD&A) decreased 12% to $1.4 billion, principally due to decreased oil and gas production resulting from the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business ($297 million); partially offset by an increase in DD&A rates for our remaining Appalachian E&P business ($124 million). Other income decreased 41% to $102 million, resulting primarily from the recognition of decommissioning trust earnings as a regulatory liability due to the reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations, as well as an increase in charitable contributions. Interest and related charges increased 14% to $1.2 billion, resulting principally from charges related to the early extinguishment of outstanding debt associated with our debt tender offer completed in July 2007, partially offset by a reduction in interest expense resulting from the retirement of this and other debt. Income tax expense increased to $1.8 billion, primarily reflecting income tax expense on the gain realized from the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business. Extraordinary item reflects a $158 million after-tax charge in connection with the reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations. Loss from discontinued operations decreased to $8 million primarily reflecting the absence of a $164 million after-tax charge in 2006 related to the Peaker facilities, which were sold in March 2007. 2006 VS . 2005 Operating Revenue decreased 8% to $16.3 billion, primarily reflecting: A $1.0 billion decrease primarily attributable to lower volumes associated with requirements-based power sales contracts that were exited. The effect of this decrease was more than offset by a corresponding decrease in Electric fuel and energy purchases expense ; An $844 million decrease in our producer services business consisting of a decrease in both volumes and prices associated with gas aggregation, partially offset by favorable price changes related to gas marketing activities. The effect of this decrease was partially offset by a corresponding decrease in Purchased gas expense ; A $367 million decrease from gas distribution operations, primarily reflecting a $219 million decrease resulting from the loss of customers to Energy Choice programs and a $270 million decrease associated with milder weather and variations in rates resulting from changes in customer usage patterns, sales mix and other factors, partially offset by a $122 million increase related to the recovery of higher gas prices. The effect of this net decrease was partially offset by a corresponding decrease in Purchased gas expense ; A $308 million decrease in nonutility coal sales, primarily resulting from decreased volumes. This decrease was largely offset by a corresponding decrease in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense ; A $178 million decrease in sales of emissions allowances purchased for resale, reflecting lower prices ($115 million) and lower overall sales volume ($63 million). The effect of this decrease was largely offset by a corresponding decrease in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense ; and A $100 million decrease in revenue from sales of gas purchased by E&P operations to facilitate gas transportation and other contracts, primarily due to the impact of netting sales and purchases of gas under buy/sell arrangements associated with the implementation of EITF 04-13. These decreases were partially offset by: A $313 million increase from our merchant generation business, primarily reflecting higher revenue for nuclear operations as a result of higher realized prices and new business from the addition of Kewaunee nuclear power station (Kewaunee), which was acquired in July 2005. This increase was partially offset by lower sales volume for fossil plants driven largely by comparably milder weather and lower prices; A $235 million increase associated with hedging activities for our merchant generation assets. The effect of this increase was offset by a corresponding increase in Other operations and maintenance expense ; A $189 million increase in sales of gas and oil production, primarily due to higher volumes ($351 million), partially offset by lower prices ($162 million); A $184 million increase in gas sales by our retail energy marketing operations primarily resulting from increased customer counts ($141 million) and higher contracted sales prices ($43 million). This increase was largely offset by a corresponding increase in Purchased gas expense; A $165 million increase in sales of extracted products, primarily due to increased prices and a contractual change for a portion of our gas production processed by third parties. We now take title to and market the extracted products from this gas; An increase of $95 million resulting from higher business interruption insurance revenue received in 2006 related to the 2005 hurricanes ($274 million) versus business interruption insurance revenue received in 2005 ($179 million) related to Hurricane Ivan; and An $88 million increase due to a sale of gas inventory by our Ohio gas distribution subsidiary related to the implementation of the Standard Service Offer (SSO) pilot program as approved by the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio. The SSO was initiated to encourage and assist other suppliers to enter the gas procurement market. By the end of the transition period, we plan to exit the gas merchant function in Ohio and have all customers select an alternate gas supplier. The effect of this increase was offset by a comparable increase in Purchased gas expense . Operating Expenses and Other Items Electric fuel and energy purchases expense decreased 31% to $3.2 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $1.2 billion decrease associated with lower volumes associated with requirements-based power sales contracts, as discussed in Operating Revenue; A $162 million decrease for our utility generation operations, primarily due to lower commodity prices, including purchased power, and decreased consumption of fossil fuel, 32 Table of Contents reflecting the effects of milder weather on demand, partially offset by an increase in purchased power volumes; and A $104 million decrease from our merchant generation business, due primarily to lower commodity prices and decreased consumption of fossil fuel, reflecting the effects of milder weather on demand, partially offset by higher replacement power costs incurred due to an increase in scheduled outage days. Purchased gas expense decreased 25% to $2.9 billion, principally resulting from: An $815 million decrease associated with our producer services business, due to lower volumes and prices; A $192 million decrease related to gas distribution operations, due to a $252 million decrease associated with milder weather and the migration of additional customers to Energy Choice and a $222 million decrease due to lower average gas prices, partially offset by a $282 million increase related to the recovery of gas costs; A $120 million decrease related to E&P operations, as the result of lower volumes and the impact of netting sales and purchases of gas under buy/sell arrangements following the implementation of EITF 04-13, as discussed in Operating Revenue ; partially offset by A $139 million increase associated with retail energy marketing operations, primarily due to increased volumes. Other energy-related commodity purchases expense decreased 27% to $1.0 billion, primarily attributable to the following factors, all of which are discussed in Operating Revenue : A $237 million decrease in the cost of coal purchased for resale; and A $175 million decrease in emissions allowances purchased for resale; partially offset by A $47 million increase related to purchases of oil by E&P operations, reflecting higher market prices ($63 million), partially offset by lower volumes ($16 million) of oil purchases under buy/sell arrangements. Other operations and maintenance expense increased 7% to $3.2 billion, resulting from: A $235 million increase primarily related to hedging activities associated with our generation assets. The effect of this increase is offset by a corresponding increase in Operating Revenue ; A $166 million charge from the write-off of certain regulatory assets related to the planned sale of Peoples and Hope; A $97 million increase resulting primarily from higher salaries, wages and benefits expenses; A $93 million increase attributable to higher production handling, transportation and operating costs related to E&P operations; $91 million of impairment charges related to DCI investments; A $79 million increase resulting from Kewaunee, which was acquired in July 2005; A $65 million decrease in gains from the sale of emissions allowances held for consumption; A $60 million charge to eliminate the application of hedge accounting for certain interest rate swaps associated with our junior subordinated notes payable to affiliated trusts that sold trust preferred securities; A $41 million reduction in proceeds related to FTRs granted by PJM to our utility generation operations. These FTRs are used to offset congestion costs associated with PJM spot market activity, which are included in Electric fuel and energy purchases expense ; A $35 million increase in generation-related outage costs primarily due to an increase in the number of scheduled outages; A $29 million increase related to major storm damage and service restoration costs associated with our distribution operations, including costs resulting from tropical storm Ernesto in September 2006; A $27 million charge resulting from the cancellation of a pipeline project; These increases were partially offset by: A $96 million decrease in hedge ineffectiveness expense associated with our E&P operations, primarily due to a decrease in the fair value differential between the delivery location and commodity specifications of derivative contracts held by us as compared to our forecasted gas and oil sales and the increased use of basis swaps; A $62 million benefit resulting from favorable changes in the fair value of certain gas and oil derivatives that were de-designated as hedges following the 2005 hurricanes; A benefit resulting from the absence of the following items recognized in 2005: A $423 million loss related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil derivatives resulting from an interruption of gas and oil production in the Gulf of Mexico caused by the 2005 hurricanes; A $77 million charge resulting from the termination of a long-term power purchase agreement; A $59 million loss related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain oil derivatives primarily resulting from a delay in reaching anticipated production levels in the Gulf of Mexico, and subsequent changes in the fair value of those derivatives; and A $51 million charge related to credit exposure associated with the bankruptcy of Calpine Corporation; partially offset by A $24 million net benefit resulting from the establishment of certain regulatory assets and liabilities in connection with the settlement of a North Carolina rate case in the first quarter of 2005. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased 15% to $1.6 billion, largely due to the impact of increased gas and oil production, as well as higher E&P finding and development costs. Interest expense increased 9% to $1.0 billion principally reflecting the impact of additional borrowings and higher interest rates on variable rate debt. Loss from discontinued operations was $150 million as compared to income from discontinued operations of $6 million in 2005, primarily due to a $164 million charge related to the Peaker facilities, whose operations were reclassified to discontinued operations in December 2006. 33 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued Outlook Our 2007 results were positively impacted by the gain recognized from the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business. In 2008, we believe our remaining businesses will provide growth in earnings per share, including the impact of lower expected average shares outstanding. The following are factors that will impact our expected 2008 results: A full year of deferred fuel accounting for Virginia jurisdiction fuel costs as compared to six months in 2007; Higher margins for our merchant generation fleet; Increased production and higher realized prices for our Appalachian E&P operations and fixed-term overriding royalty interests formerly associated with VPP agreements, as discussed in Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements; Lower interest expense reflecting a full year benefit from our debt tender offer completed in July 2007; A decrease in outage costs reflecting a decrease in the number of scheduled outage days at certain of our electric utility generating facilities; and Continued growth in utility customers. The increase in 2008 is expected to be partially offset by: A potential decrease in regulated electric sales, as compared to 2007, assuming our utility service territory experiences a return to normal weather in 2008; and An increase in depreciation expense, partially attributable to revised depreciation rates for our utility generation assets resulting from a new depreciation study implemented in the fourth quarter of 2007. S EGMENT R ESULTS OF O PERATIONS Segment results include the impact of intersegment revenues and expenses, which may result in intersegment profit or loss. Presented below is a summary of contributions by our operating segments to net income: Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 2005 Net Income Diluted EPS Net Income Diluted EPS Net Income Diluted EPS (millions, except EPS) DVP $ 415 $ 0.64 $ 411 $ 0.59 $ 378 $ 0.55 Dominion Energy 387 0.59 347 0.49 362 0.53 Dominion Generation 756 1.15 537 0.76 416 0.60 Primary operating segments 1,558 2.38 1,295 1.84 1,156 1.68 Corporate and Other 981 1.50 85 0.12 (123 ) (0.18 ) Consolidated $ 2,539 $ 3.88 $ 1,380 $ 1.96 $ 1,033 $ 1.50 DVP Presented below are operating statistics related to DVP operations: Year Ended December 31, 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Electricity delivered (million mwhrs) (1) 84.7 6 % 79.8 (2 )% 81.4 Degree days: Cooling (2) 1,794 15 1,557 (9 ) 1,707 Heating (3) 3,500 10 3,178 (16 ) 3,784 Average electric distribution customer accounts (4) 2,361 1 2,327 2 2,286 Average retail energy marketing customer accounts (4) 1,551 15 1,354 17 1,162 mwhrs = megawatt hours (1) Includes electricity delivered through the retail choice program for our Virginia jurisdictional electric utility customers. (2) Cooling degree days (CDDs) are units measuring the extent to which the average daily temperature is greater than 65 degrees. CDDs are calculated as the difference between the average temperature for each day and 65 degrees. (3) Heating degree days (HDDs) are units measuring the extent to which the average daily temperature is less than 65 degrees. HDDs are calculated as the difference between the average temperature for each day and 65 degrees. (4) Thirteen-month average, in thousands. Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting DVP net income contribution: 2007 VS . 2006 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Regulated electric sales: Weather $ 22 $ 0.03 Customer growth 11 0.02 Major storm damage and service restoration (1) 9 0.01 Reliability and outside services expenses (18 ) (0.02 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (15 ) (0.02 ) Other (5 ) (0.01 ) Share accretion 0.04 Change in net income contribution $ 4 $ 0.05 (1) Primarily resulting from the absence in 2007 of expenses associated with tropical storm Ernesto in September 2006. 34 Table of Contents 2006 VS . 2005 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Retail energy marketing operations $ 57 $ 0.09 Interest expense (1) 10 0.01 Regulated electric sales: Weather (34 ) (0.05 ) Customer growth 13 0.02 Major storm damage and service restoration (2) (18 ) (0.03 ) North Carolina rate case settlement (6 ) (0.01 ) Other 11 0.02 Share dilution (0.01 ) Change in net income contribution $ 33 $ 0.04 (1) Principally reflects additional intercompany borrowings and higher interest rates on those borrowings. (2) Reflects an increase in major storm damage and service restoration expenses including expenses associated with tropical storm Ernesto in September 2006. Dominion Energy Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion Energy gas transmission and distribution operations: Year Ended December 31, 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Gas throughput (bcf): Gas sales (distribution) 50 (11 ) 56 (33 ) 84 Gas transportation (distribution) 210 9 193 2 190 Gas transportation (transmission) 719 11 650 (18 ) 794 Heating degree days 5,886 12 5,274 (13 ) 6,037 Average gas distribution customer accounts (1) : Gas sales 410 (15 ) 485 (25 ) 643 Gas transportation 800 9 732 27 576 bcf = billion cubic feet (1) Thirteen-month average, in thousands. Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion Energy Appalachian E&P operations: Year Ended December 31, 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Liquids production (1) (bcfe) 57.6 47 39.1 2 38.4 Average realized prices without hedging results: Liquids (per mcfe) $ 6.55 (8 ) $ 7.11 (14 ) $ 8.31 Average realized prices with hedging results: Liquids (per mcfe) 6.55 33 4.93 (2 ) 5.05 DD&A (per mcfe) 1.68 31 1.28 17 1.09 Average production (lifting) cost (per mcfe) (2) 1.28 8 1.19 1 1.18 bcfe = billion cubic feet equivalent mcfe = thousand cubic feet equivalent (1) Includes natural gas, natural gas liquids and oil. (2) The inclusion of volumes associated with reacquired overriding royalty interests arising from the VPP terminated in 2007 would have resulted in lifting costs of $1.00 in 2007. Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Energy net income contribution: 2007 VS . 2006 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Gas and oil production $ 66 $ 0.10 Gas and oil prices 33 0.05 Regulated gas sales weather 16 0.02 Producer services (1) (33 ) (0.05 ) DD&A gas and oil (27 ) (0.04 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (7 ) (0.01 ) Gas transmission operations (2) (6 ) (0.01 ) Other (2 ) Share accretion 0.04 Change in net income contribution $ 40 $ 0.10 (1) Primarily related to lower margins reflecting reduced market volatility, as compared to the post-2005 hurricane market conditions in 2006. (2) Gas transmission operations decreased primarily due to a decline in market center services, partially offset by lower system fuel costs and higher margins on extracted products. 2006 VS . 2005 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Interest expense (1) $ (18 ) $ (0.03 ) Gas and oil prices (17 ) (0.02 ) Regulated gas sales weather (16 ) (0.02 ) Gas transmission rate reduction (2) (13 ) (0.02 ) DD&A gas and oil (5 ) (0.01 ) Gas transmission operations (3) 31 0.04 Producer services (4) 23 0.03 Gas and oil production 13 0.02 Other (13 ) (0.02 ) Share dilution (0.01 ) Change in net income contribution $ (15 ) $ (0.04 ) (1) Primarily reflects additional intercompany borrowings and higher interest rates on those borrowings. (2) Due to lower natural gas transportation and storage revenue as a result of a 2005 rate settlement. (3) Primarily due to higher margins on extracted products and market center service opportunities. (4) Higher income resulting from the impact of favorable price changes related to price risk management and gas marketing activities associated with certain transportation and storage contracts. Included below are the volumes and weighted-average prices associated with hedges in place for our Appalachian E&P operations and fixed-term overriding royalty interests formerly associated with the VPP agreements as of December 31, 2007, by applicable time period. As of December 31, 2007, we have not hedged any of our anticipated production past 2009. Natural Gas Year Hedged production (bcf) Average hedge price (per mcf) 2008 51.2 $ 8.60 2009 14.6 8.25 35 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued Dominion Generation Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion Generation operations: Year Ended December 31, 2007 % Change 2006 % Change 2005 Electricity supplied (million mwhrs): Utility 84.7 6 % 79.7 (2 )% 81.4 Merchant 46.0 11 41.5 1 41.2 Degree days (electric utility service area): Cooling 1,794 15 1,557 (9 ) 1,707 Heating 3,500 10 3,178 (16 ) 3,784 Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Generation net income contribution: 2007 VS . 2006 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Merchant generation margin (1) $ 211 $ 0.30 Unrecovered Virginia fuel expenses (2) 120 0.17 Regulated electric sales: Weather 37 0.05 Customer growth 20 0.03 Ancillary service revenue 27 0.04 Outage costs (3) (61 ) (0.09 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (51 ) (0.07 ) Sales of emissions allowances (34 ) (0.05 ) Depreciation and amortization (4) (32 ) (0.05 ) Interest expense (9 ) (0.01 ) Other (9 ) (0.01 ) Share accretion 0.08 Change in net income contribution $ 219 $ 0.39 (1) Primarily reflects higher realized prices for our New England nuclear and fossil generating assets and higher volumes and capacity revenue for other fossil generation operations. Higher prices include the implementation of new capacity markets in ISO New England and PJM. (2) Primarily reflects the reapplication of deferred fuel accounting effective July 1, 2007 for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations; this benefit is partially offset by increased consumption of fossil fuel and higher purchased power costs during the first six months of 2007. (3) Primarily reflects higher scheduled outage costs for both utility and merchant generation operations. (4) Principally attributable to increased expense from capital additions and revised depreciation rates for our utility generation assets resulting from a new depreciation study implemented during the fourth quarter of 2007. 2006 VS . 2005 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Merchant generation margin (1) $ 215 $ 0.32 Unrecovered Virginia fuel expenses 40 0.06 Regulated electric sales: Customer growth 24 0.04 Weather (64 ) (0.09 ) Sales of emissions allowances (40 ) (0.06 ) Energy supply margin (2) (27 ) (0.04 ) Outage costs (3) (20 ) (0.03 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (13 ) (0.02 ) 2005 North Carolina rate case settlement (10 ) (0.01 ) Other 16 0.02 Share dilution (0.03 ) Change in net income contribution $ 121 $ 0.16 (1) Primarily reflects higher realized prices. (2) Primarily reflects a reduced benefit from FTRs in excess of congestion costs at our utility operations. (3) Primarily due to an increase in the duration of scheduled outage days for both utility and merchant generation operations. Corporate and Other Presented below are the Corporate and Other segment after-tax results: Year Ended December 31, 2007 2006 2005 (millions, except EPS amounts) Specific items attributable to operating segments $ (618 ) $ (10 ) $ (133 ) Discontinued operations (8 ) (150 ) 6 Net benefit from sale of U.S. non-Appalachian E&P businesses 1,426 (5 ) U.S. non-Appalachian E&P divested operations 252 625 163 Peoples and Hope 49 (72 ) 43 Other corporate operations (120 ) (303 ) (202 ) Total net benefit (expense) 981 85 (123 ) Earnings per share impact $ 1.50 $ 0.12 $ (0.18 ) S PECIFIC I TEMS A TTRIBUTABLE T O O PERATING S EGMENTS Corporate and Other includes specific items attributable to our primary operating segments that are not included in profit measures evaluated by executive management in assessing the segments performance or allocating resources among the segments. See Note 29 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of these items. D ISCONTINUED O PERATIONS The decrease in the loss from the discontinued operations for 2007 as compared to 2006, as well as the increase in the loss for 2006 as compared to 2005, reflects a $164 million after-tax charge in 2006 associated with the impairment of the Peaker facilities that were sold in 2007. N ET B ENEFIT F ROM S ALE OF U.S. NON -A PPALACHIAN E&P B USINESS The net benefit from the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business reflects the $2.1 billion after-tax gain recognized in 2007 on the sale, partially offset by charges related to the divestitures as 36 Table of Contents well as charges associated with the early retirement of debt with proceeds from the sale. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of these items. U.S. NON -A PPALACHIAN E&P D IVESTED O PERATIONS The lower contribution in 2007 as compared to 2006 is due primarily to a partial year of gas and oil production in 2007 as compared to 2006 and the absence of business interruption insurance revenue received in 2006, associated with the 2005 hurricanes. These decreases were partially offset by higher realized gas and oil prices. The higher contribution in 2006 as compared to 2005 primarily reflects the absence of a $357 million after-tax loss in 2005 related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting in August and September 2005 for certain gas and oil derivatives resulting from an interruption in gas and oil production in the Gulf of Mexico caused by 2005 hurricanes and subsequent changes in the fair value of those derivatives during the third quarter. P EOPLES AND H OPE The net loss in 2006 primarily reflects a $104 million after-tax charge resulting from the write-off of certain regulatory assets related to the planned sale of Peoples and Hope. O THER C ORPORATE O PERATIONS The net expenses associated with other corporate operations for 2007 decreased by $183 million as compared to 2006, primarily due to a reduction in interest expense following completion of the debt tender offer in July 2007, the absence of a charge in 2006 to eliminate the application of hedge accounting for certain interest rate swaps as described below and a reduction in charges associated with the impairment of DCI investments. In addition, income tax benefits were lower in 2006, resulting primarily from the recognition of deferred tax liabilities in connection with the planned sale of Peoples and Hope. The net expenses associated with other corporate operations for 2006 increased by $101 million as compared to 2005, primarily reflecting a $37 million after-tax charge to eliminate the application of hedge accounting for certain interest rate swaps associated with our junior subordinated notes payable to affiliated trusts and the $85 million impairment of a DCI investment in 2006. The recognition of deferred tax liabilities in 2006 was offset by a reduction in valuation allowances to reflect the expected utilization of federal and state loss carryforwards to offset income that was expected to be generated from the sale of Peoples and Hope. S ELECTED I NFORMATION E NERGY T RADING A CTIVITIES We engage in energy trading, marketing and hedging activities to complement our integrated energy businesses and facilitate our risk management activities. As part of these operations, we enter into contracts for purchases and sales of energy-related commodities, including natural gas, electricity, oil and coal. Settlements of contracts may require physical delivery of the underlying commodity or cash settlement. We also enter into contracts with the objective of benefiting from changes in prices. For example, after entering into a contract to purchase a commodity, we typically enter into a sales contract, or a combination of sales contracts, with quantities and delivery or settlement terms that are identical or very similar to those of the purchase contract. When the purchase and sales contracts are settled either by physical delivery of the underlying commodity or by net cash settlement, we may receive a net cash margin (a realized gain), or may pay a net cash margin (a realized loss). We continually monitor our contract positions, considering location and timing of delivery or settlement for each energy commodity in relation to market price activity. A summary of the changes in the unrealized gains and losses recognized for our energy-related derivative instruments held for trading purposes during 2007 follows: Amount (millions) Net unrealized gain at December 31, 2006 $ 42 Contracts realized or otherwise settled during the period (43 ) Net unrealized gain at inception of contracts initiated during the period Change in unrealized gains and losses 53 Changes in unrealized gains and losses attributable to changes in valuation techniques Net unrealized gain at December 31, 2007 $ 52 The balance of net unrealized gains and losses recognized for our energy-related derivative instruments held for trading purposes at December 31, 2007, is summarized in the following table based on the approach used to determine fair value: Maturity Based on Contract Settlement or Delivery Date(s) Source of Fair Value Less than 1 year 1-2 years 2-3 years 3-5 years In excess of 5 years Total (millions) Actively-quoted (1) $ 39 $ 6 $ 6 $ $ $ 51 Other external sources (2) 1 (2 ) 1 1 1 Total $ 40 $ 6 $ 4 $ 1 $ 1 $ 52 (1) Exchange-traded and over-the-counter contracts. (2) Values based on prices from over-the-counter broker activity and industry services and, where applicable, conventional option pricing models. L IQUIDITY AND C APITAL R ESOURCES We depend on both internal and external sources of liquidity to provide working capital and to fund capital requirements. Short-term cash requirements not met by cash provided by operations are generally satisfied with proceeds from short-term borrowings. Long-term cash needs are met through issuances of debt and/or equity securities. At December 31, 2007, we had $3.0 billion of unused capacity under our credit facilities. See additional discussion under Credit Facilities and Short-Term Debt . 37 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued A summary of our cash flows is presented below: 2007 2006 2005 (millions) Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year $ 142 $ 146 $ 361 Cash flows provided by (used in): Operating activities (246 ) 4,005 2,623 Investing activities 10,192 (3,494 ) (3,360 ) Financing activities (9,801 ) (515 ) 522 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents 145 (4 ) (215 ) Cash and cash equivalents at end of year (1) $ 287 $ 142 $ 146 (1) 2007 and 2006 amounts include $4 million of cash classified as held for sale in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Operating Cash Flows In 2007, net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $4.3 billion as compared to 2006. The decrease primarily reflects income taxes paid on the gain from the sale of a majority of our E&P business, as well as other cash costs associated with the sale, such as gas and oil derivative settlement costs. In addition, cash flow was lower in 2007 as it included only a partial year of cash flow from the E&P operations sold. While taxes and other costs of the sale are reflected in cash flow from operations, the gross proceeds from the sale are reported in cash flow from investing activities. Our operations are subject to risks and uncertainties that may negatively impact the timing or amounts of operating cash flows which are discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors. C REDIT R ISK Our exposure to potential concentrations of credit risk results primarily from our energy marketing and price risk management activities. Presented below is a summary of our credit exposure as of December 31, 2007 for these activities. Our gross credit exposure for each counterparty is calculated as outstanding receivables plus any unrealized on or off-balance sheet exposure, taking into account contractual netting rights. Gross Credit Exposure Credit Collateral Net Credit Exposure (millions) Investment grade (1) $ 596 $ 98 $ 498 Non-investment grade (2) 13 13 No external ratings: Internally rated investment grade (3) 173 5 168 Internally rated non-investment grade (4) 26 26 Total $ 808 $ 103 $ 705 (1) Designations as investment grade are based upon minimum credit ratings assigned by Moody Investors Service (Moody s) and Standard & Poor Ratings Services, a division of the McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (Standard & Poor s). The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 32% of the total net credit exposure. (2) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 2% of the total net credit exposure. (3) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 16% of the total net credit exposure. (4) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 1% of the total net credit exposure. Investing Cash Flows In 2007, net cash provided by investing activities was $10.2 billion as compared to net cash used in investing activities of $3.5 billion in 2006. This change primarily reflects proceeds received in 2007 from the sale of a majority of our E&P business. Financing Cash Flows and Liquidity We rely on banks and capital markets as significant sources of funding for capital requirements not satisfied by cash provided by the companies operations. As discussed in Credit Ratings , our ability to borrow funds or issue securities and the return demanded by investors are affected by the issuing company credit ratings. In addition, the raising of external capital is subject to certain regulatory approvals, including registration with the SEC and, in the case of Virginia Electric and Power Company (Virginia Power), approval by the Virginia State Corporation Commission (Virginia Commission). In December 2005, the SEC adopted the rules that currently govern the registration, communications and offering processes under the Securities Act of 1933. The rules provide for a streamlined shelf registration process to provide registrants with timely access to capital. Under these rules, Dominion and Virginia Power meet the definition of a well-known seasoned issuer. This allows the companies to use an automatic shelf registration statement to register any offering of securities, other than those for business combination transactions. In 2007, net cash used in financing activities increased by $9.3 billion as compared to 2006. The increase primarily reflects the use of proceeds from the sale of a majority of our E&P business to repurchase our common stock and repay debt. C REDIT F ACILITIES A ND S HORT -T ERM D EBT As a result of the merger of CNG with Dominion in June 2007, all of CNG former credit facilities have been assumed by Dominion. We use short-term debt, primarily commercial paper, to fund working capital requirements, as a bridge to long-term debt financing and as bridge financing for acquisitions, if applicable. The levels of borrowing may vary significantly during the course of the year, depending upon the timing and amount of cash requirements not satisfied by cash from operations. In addition, we utilize cash and letters of credit to fund collateral requirements under our commodities hedging program. Collateral requirements are impacted by commodity prices, hedging levels, our credit quality and the credit quality of our counterparties. Short-term financing is supported by a $3.0 billion five-year joint revolving credit facility with Virginia Power dated February 2006 that terminates in February 2011, and can also be used to support up to $1.5 billion of letters of credit. Short-term financing at Dominion is also supported by an amended and restated $1.7 billion five-year revolving credit facility and a $200 million five-year bilateral credit facility, dated February 2006 and December 2005, respectively, and are scheduled to terminate in August and December 2010, respectively. At December 31, 2007, we had committed lines of credit totaling $4.9 billion. These lines of credit support commercial paper borrowings, bank loans and letter of credit issuances. Our financial policy precludes issuing commercial paper in excess of our supporting lines of credit. At 38 Table of Contents December 31, 2007, we had the following commercial paper, bank loans and letters of credit outstanding, as well as capacity available under credit facilities: Facility Limit Outstanding Commercial Paper Outstanding Bank Loans Outstanding Letters of Credit Facility Capacity Available (millions) Five-year joint revolving credit facility $ 3,000 $ 757 $ $ 229 $ 2,014 Five-year Dominion credit facility 1,700 1,000 1 699 Five-year Dominion bilateral facility 200 200 Totals $ 4,900 $ 757 $ 1,000 $ 230 $ 2,913 In addition to the facilities above, we also entered into a $100 million bilateral credit facility in August 2004 that terminates in August 2009. At December 31, 2007, there were no letters of credit outstanding under this facility. In connection with our commodity hedging activities, we are required to provide collateral to counterparties under some circumstances. Under certain collateral arrangements, we may satisfy these requirements by electing to either deposit cash, post letters of credit or, in some cases, utilize other forms of security. From time to time, we vary the form of collateral provided to counterparties after weighing the costs and benefits of various factors associated with the different forms of collateral. These factors include short-term borrowing and short-term investment rates, the spread over these short-term rates at which we can issue commercial paper, balance sheet impacts, the costs and fees of alternative collateral postings with these and other counterparties and overall liquidity management objectives. L ONG -T ERM D EBT During 2007 we issued the following long-term debt: Type Principal Rate Maturity Issuing Company (millions) Senior notes $ 350 6.00 % 2017 Dominion Senior notes 600 6.00 % 2037 Virginia Power Senior notes 600 5.95 % 2017 Virginia Power Senior notes 600 5.10 % 2012 Virginia Power Senior notes 450 6.35 % 2037 Virginia Power Senior revolving notes 75 Variable 2017 DCI Total long-term debt issued $ 2,675 In January 2008, Virginia Power borrowed $30 million in connection with the Economic Development Authority of the City of Chesapeake Pollution Control Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 2008 A, which mature in 2032 and bear a coupon rate of 3.6%. The proceeds were used to refund the principal amount of the Industrial Development Authority of the City of Chesapeake Money Market Municipals Pollution Control Revenue, Series 1985 that would otherwise have matured in February 2008. In November 2007, Virginia Power borrowed $14 million in connection with the Economic Development Authority of the County of Chesterfield issuance of its Solid Waste and Sewage Disposal Revenue Bonds, Series 2007 A, which mature in 2031 and bear a coupon rate of 5.60%. The bonds were issued pursuant to a trust agreement whereby funds are withdrawn from the trust as improvements are made at our Chesterfield Power Station located in Chester, Virginia. We have withdrawn less than $1 million from the trust as of December 31, 2007. DCI consolidates a collateralized debt obligation (CDO) entity in accordance with FASB Interpretation No. 46 (revised December 2003), Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities (FIN 46R). In August 2007, the CDO entity issued an additional $75 million of senior revolving notes that mature in January 2017 and are nonrecourse to us. At December 31, 2007, outstanding borrowings under this credit facility totaled $75 million. During 2007, we repaid $5.5 billion of long-term debt and notes payable, which includes the completion of a debt tender offer repurchasing $2.5 billion of our debt securities in July 2007. Included in the debt repayments above is the redemption of all 8 million units of the $200 million 7.8% Dominion CNG Capital Trust I debentures due October 31, 2041. These securities were redeemed at a price of $25 per preferred security plus accrued and unpaid distributions. Also included is the redemption of approximately 240 thousand units of the $250 million 8.4% Dominion Capital Trust III debentures due January 15, 2031. These securities were redeemed at a price of $1,209 per preferred security plus accrued and unpaid distributions. I SSUANCE OF C OMMON S TOCK In 2007, we received cash proceeds of $226 million for 7.6 million shares issued in connection with the exercise of employee stock options. During 2007, we purchased our common stock on the open market with the proceeds received through Dominion Direct (a dividend reinvestment and open enrollment direct stock purchase plan) and employee savings plans, rather than having additional new common shares issued. In January 2008, we began issuing additional new common shares to be used for these programs. In 2008, we expect to receive proceeds from these programs of between $200 million to $250 million. R EPURCHASES OF C OMMON S TOCK In 2007, we repurchased 129.0 million shares of common stock for approximately $5.8 billion. This amount includes the completion of our equity tender offer in August 2007, in which we purchased approximately 115.5 million shares at a price of $45.50 per share for a total cost of approximately $5.3 billion, excluding fees and expenses related to the tender. In December 2006, we entered into a prepaid accelerated share repurchase agreement (ASR) with a financial institution as the counterparty. Under the ASR, we would receive between 11.2 million and 13.0 million shares in exchange for the prepayment. At the time of execution of the ASR, we made a prepayment of $500 million and the counterparty initially delivered approximately 10.1 million shares to us. The final number of shares to be delivered to the Company was determined by the volume weighted-average price of our common stock over the period commencing on December 12, 2006 and terminating on May 16, 2007. In May 2007, the counterparty delivered approximately 1.6 million additional shares to us in completion of the ASR. 39 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued At December 31, 2007, the remaining stock repurchase authorization provided by our Board of Directors is the lesser of 54 million shares or $2.7 billion of our outstanding common stock. Credit Ratings Credit ratings are intended to provide banks and capital market participants with a framework for comparing the credit quality of securities and are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. We believe that the current credit ratings of Dominion and Virginia Power (the Dominion Companies) provide sufficient access to the capital markets. However, disruptions in the banking and capital markets not specifically related to us may affect the Dominion Companies ability to access these funding sources or cause an increase in the return required by investors. Both quantitative (financial strength) and qualitative (business or operating characteristics) factors are considered by the credit rating agencies in establishing an individual company credit rating. Credit ratings should be evaluated independently and are subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. The credit ratings for the Dominion Companies are most affected by each company financial profile, mix of regulated and nonregulated businesses and respective cash flows, changes in methodologies used by the rating agencies and event risk, if applicable, such as major acquisitions or dispositions. Credit ratings for the Dominion Companies as of February 1, 2008 follow: Fitch Moody Standard & Poor Dominion Resources, Inc. Senior unsecured debt securities BBB+ Baa2 A- Junior subordinated debt securities BBB Baa3 BBB Enhanced junior subordinated notes BBB Baa3 BBB Commercial paper F2 P-2 A-2 Virginia Power Mortgage bonds A A3 A Senior unsecured (including tax-exempt) debt securities BBB+ Baa1 A- Junior subordinated debt securities BBB Baa2 BBB Preferred stock BBB Baa3 BBB Commercial paper F2 P-2 A-2 As of February 1, 2008, Fitch Ratings Ltd. (Fitch), Moody and Standard & Poor maintain a stable outlook for their ratings of the Dominion Companies. As a result of the merger of CNG with Dominion in June 2007, all of CNG former rights and obligations under its indentures have been assumed by Dominion. Subsequent to the merger, Moody lowered its rating of CNG Senior Unsecured debt from Baa1 to Baa2 to equal their rating of Dominion Senior Unsecured debt. In December 2007, Standard & Poor raised its corporate credit rating on the Dominion Companies to A- from BBB to reflect the companies lower risk profile. Standard & Poor also affirmed the A-2 commercial paper rating for both companies. Generally, a downgrade in an individual company credit rating would not restrict its ability to raise short-term and long-term financing as long as its credit rating remains investment grade, but it would increase the cost of borrowing. We work closely with Fitch, Moody and Standard & Poor with the objective of maintaining our current credit ratings. In order to maintain our current ratings, we may find it necessary to modify our business plans and such changes may adversely affect our growth and earnings per share. Debt Covenants As part of borrowing funds and issuing debt (both short-term and long-term) or preferred securities, the Dominion Companies must enter into enabling agreements. These agreements contain covenants that, in the event of default, could result in the acceleration of principal and interest payments; restrictions on distributions related to our capital stock, including dividends, redemptions, repurchases, liquidation payments or guarantee payments; and in some cases, the termination of credit commitments unless a waiver of such requirements is agreed to by the lenders/security holders. These provisions are customary, with each agreement specifying which covenants apply. These provisions are not necessarily unique to the Dominion Companies. Some of the typical covenants include: The timely payment of principal and interest; Information requirements, including submitting financial reports filed with the SEC to lenders; Performance obligations, audits/inspections, continuation of the basic nature of business, restrictions on certain matters related to merger or consolidation, restrictions on disposition of all or substantially all of our assets; Compliance with collateral minimums or requirements related to mortgage bonds; and Limitations on liens. We are required to pay minimal annual commitment fees to maintain our credit facilities. In addition, our credit agreements contain various terms and conditions that could affect our ability to borrow under these facilities. They include maximum debt to total capital ratios and cross-default provisions. As of December 31, 2007, the calculated total debt to total capital ratio for our companies, pursuant to the terms of the agreements, was as follows: Company Maximum Ratio Actual Ratio (1) Dominion Resources, Inc. 65% 58% Virginia Power 65% 47% (1) Indebtedness as defined by the bank agreements excludes junior subordinated notes payable reflected as long-term debt in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. These provisions apply separately to the Dominion Companies. If any one of the Dominion Companies or any of that specific company material subsidiaries fail to make payment on various debt obligations in excess of $35 million, the lenders could require that respective company to accelerate its repayment of any outstanding borrowings under the credit facility and the lenders could terminate their commitment to lend funds to that company. Accordingly, any default by Dominion will not affect the lender commitment to Virginia Power. However, any default by Virginia Power would affect the lenders commitment to Dominion under the joint credit agreement. In June 2006 and September 2006, we executed Replacement Capital Covenants (RCCs) in connection with our offering of 40 Table of Contents $300 million of 2006 Series A Enhanced Junior Subordinated Notes due 2066 (June hybrids) and $500 million of 2006 Series B Enhanced Junior Subordinated Notes due 2066 (September hybrids), respectively. Under the terms of the RCCs, we agree not to redeem or repurchase all or part of the June or September hybrids prior to June 30 or September 30, 2036, respectively, unless we issue qualifying securities to non-affiliates in a replacement offering in the 180 days prior to the redemption or repurchase date. The proceeds we receive from the replacement offering, adjusted by a predetermined factor, must exceed the redemption or repurchase price. Qualifying securities include common stock, preferred stock and other securities that generally rank equal to or junior to the hybrids and include distribution deferral and long-dated maturity features similar to the hybrids. For purposes of the RCCs, non-affiliates include individuals enrolled in our dividend reinvestment plan, direct stock purchase plan and employee benefit plans. We initially designated the 8.4% Capital Securities of Dominion Resources Capital Trust III as covered debt for purposes of the RCCs. Under the terms of the RCCs, we are required under certain circumstances to change the series of our debt designated as covered debt under the RCCs. Due to our acquisition of most of the designated securities in our debt tender offer in July 2007, they ceased to be eligible as covered debt for the RCCs. In the third quarter of 2007, we designated the September hybrids as covered debt under the June hybrids RCC and designated the June hybrids as covered debt under the September hybrids RCC. We monitor the covenants on a regular basis in order to ensure that events of default will not occur. As of December 31, 2007, there have been no events of default under our debt covenants. Other than the change in covered debt for the RCCs discussed above, as of December 31, 2007, there have been no changes to our debt covenants. Dividend Restrictions The Virginia Commission may prohibit any public service company, including Virginia Power, from declaring or paying a dividend to an affiliate, if found to be detrimental to the public interest. At December 31, 2007, the Virginia Commission had not restricted the payment of dividends by Virginia Power. Certain agreements associated with our credit facilities contain restrictions on the ratio of our debt to total capitalization. These limitations did not restrict our ability to pay dividends or receive dividends from our subsidiaries at December 31, 2007. See Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of potential restrictions on dividend payments by us and certain of our subsidiaries in connection with the deferral of distribution payments on trust preferred securities or deferral of interest payments on enhanced junior subordinated notes. Future Cash Payments for Contractual Obligations and Planned Capital Expenditures C ONTRACTUAL O BLIGATIONS We are party to numerous contracts and arrangements obligating us to make cash payments in future years. These contracts include financing arrangements such as debt agreements and leases, as well as contracts for the purchase of goods and services and financial derivatives. Presented below is a table summarizing cash payments that may result from contracts to which we are a party as of December 31, 2007. For purchase obligations and other liabilities, amounts are based upon contract terms, including fixed and minimum quantities to be purchased at fixed or market-based prices. Actual cash payments will be based upon actual quantities purchased and prices paid and will likely differ from amounts presented below. The table excludes all amounts classified as current liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, other than current maturities of long-term debt, interest payable and certain derivative instruments. The majority of our current liabilities will be paid in cash in 2008. 2008 2009 - 2010 2011 - 2012 2013 and thereafter Total (millions) Long-term debt (1) $ 1,478 $ 1,270 $ 1,980 $ 10,008 $ 14,736 Interest payments (2) 805 1,468 1,321 9,659 13,253 Leases 81 130 91 151 453 Purchase obligations (3) : Purchased electric capacity for utility operations 383 713 700 1,857 3,653 Fuel to be used for utility operations 794 814 566 435 2,609 Fuel to be used for nonregulated operations 39 133 178 195 545 Pipeline transportation and storage 151 157 84 86 478 Energy commodity purchases for resale (4) 517 44 28 589 Other (5) 327 106 31 49 513 Other long-term liabilities (6) : Financial derivative-commodities (4) 215 12 227 Other contractual obligations (7) 52 1 53 Total cash payments $ 4,842 $ 4,848 $ 4,979 $ 22,440 $ 37,109 (1) Based on stated maturity dates rather than the earlier redemption dates that could be elected by instrument holders. (2) Does not reflect our ability to defer distributions related to our junior subordinated notes payable or interest payments on enhanced junior subordinated notes. (3) Amounts exclude open purchase orders for services that are provided on demand, the timing of which cannot be determined. (4) Represents the summation of settlement amounts, by contracts, due from us if all physical or financial transactions among our counterparties and the Company were liquidated and terminated. (5) Includes capital and operations and maintenance commitments. (6) Excludes regulatory liabilities, AROs and employee benefit plan obligations, which are not contractually fixed as to timing and amount. See Notes 15, 16 and 23 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Due to uncertainty about the timing and amounts that will ultimately be paid, $246 million of income taxes payable associated with unrecognized tax benefits are excluded. Deferred income taxes are also excluded since cash payments are based primarily on taxable income for each discrete fiscal year. See Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. (7) Includes interest rate swap agreements. 41 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued P LANNED C APITAL E XPENDITURES Our planned capital expenditures are expected to total approximately $3.7 billion in 2008 and approximately $4.1 billion annually in both 2009 and 2010. These expenditures are expected to include construction and expansion of electric generation and LNG facilities and natural gas transmission and storage facilities, environmental upgrades, construction improvements and expansion of electric transmission and distribution assets, purchases of nuclear fuel and expenditures to explore for and develop natural gas and oil properties. We expect to fund our capital expenditures with cash from operations and a combination of securities issuances and short-term borrowings. Our planned capital expenditures include capital projects that are subject to approval by regulators and our Board of Directors. Based on available generation capacity and current estimates of growth in customer demand, our Virginia electric utility will need additional generation in the future. See Generation Expansion in Future Issues and Other Matters for a discussion of our Virginia electric utility expansion plans. We may choose to postpone or cancel certain planned capital expenditures in order to mitigate the need for future debt financings and equity issuances. Use of Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements G UARANTEES We primarily enter into guarantee arrangements on behalf of our consolidated subsidiaries. These arrangements are not subject to the recognition and measurement provisions of FASB Interpretation No. 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. See Note 24 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of these guarantees. At December 31, 2007, we had issued $41 million of guarantees to support third parties and equity method investees. In addition, in December 2006, we acquired a 50% interest in a joint venture with Shell to develop a wind-turbine facility in Grant County, West Virginia (NedPower). We have issued a limited-scope guarantee and indemnification for one-half of the project-level financing for phase one of the NedPower wind project. Under this guarantee, we would be required to repay one-half of NedPower debt, only if it is unable to do so, as a direct result of an unfavorable ruling associated with current litigation seeking to halt the project. The guarantee will terminate when a final non-appealable ruling in favor of the project is received. We do not expect an unfavorable ruling and no significant amounts have been recorded. Our exposure under the guarantee totaled $56 million as of December 31, 2007 and will increase to $103 million in 2008 based upon NedPower future expected borrowings to complete phase one. Shell WindEnergy Inc. has provided an identical guarantee for the other one-half of NedPower borrowings. L EASING A RRANGEMENT We lease the Fairless power station (Fairless) in Pennsylvania, which began commercial operations in June 2004. During construction, we acted as the construction agent for the lessor, controlled the design and construction of the facility and have since been reimbursed for all project costs ($898 million) advanced to the lessor. We make annual lease payments of $53 million. The lease expires in 2013 and at that time, we may renew the lease at negotiated amounts based on original project costs and current market conditions, subject to lessor approval; purchase Fairless at its original construction cost; or sell Fairless, on behalf of the lessor, to an independent third party. If Fairless is sold and the proceeds from the sale are less than its original construction cost, we would be required to make a payment to the lessor in an amount up to 70.75% of original project costs adjusted for certain other costs as specified in the lease. The lease agreement does not contain any provisions that involve credit rating or stock price trigger events. Benefits of this arrangement include: Certain tax benefits as we are considered the owner of the leased property for tax purposes. As a result, we are entitled to tax deductions for depreciation not recognized for financial accounting purposes; and As an operating lease for financial accounting purposes, the asset and related borrowings used to finance the construction of the asset are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Although this improves measures of leverage calculated using amounts reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements, credit rating agencies view lease obligations as debt equivalents in evaluating our credit profile. 42 Table of Contents F UTURE I SSUES AND O THER M ATTERS Common Stock Split and Dividend Increase In October 2007, our board of directors approved an increase in the number of shares of common stock the Company is authorized to issue from 500 million to 1 billion and in November 2007 we distributed a two-for-one stock split. All historical share and dividend information presented within this report reflects the impact of the common stock split. In a separate matter, our board of directors approved an increase in our quarterly common stock dividend rate. The quarterly dividend rate was increased to 39.5 cents per share, an 11% increase over our existing quarterly dividend rate of 35.5 cents per share. Stated as an annual rate, the board action increases the dividend rate from $1.42 per share to $1.58 per share. Status of Electric Regulation in Virginia 2007 V IRGINIA R ESTRUCTURING A CT AND F UEL F ACTOR A MENDMENTS On July 1, 2007, legislation amending the Virginia Electric Utility Restructuring Act (the Restructuring Act) and the fuel factor became effective, which significantly changes electricity regulation in Virginia. Prior to the Restructuring Act, our base rates in Virginia were capped at 1999 levels until December 31, 2010. The Restructuring Act ends capped rates two years early, on December 31, 2008. After capped rates end, retail choice will be eliminated for all but individual retail customers with a demand of more than 5 Mw and non-residential retail customers who obtain Virginia Commission approval to aggregate their load to reach the 5 Mw threshold. Individual retail customers will be permitted to purchase renewable energy from competitive suppliers if the incumbent electric utility does not offer a renewable energy tariff. Also after the end of capped rates, the Virginia Commission will set our base rates under a modified cost-of-service model. Among other features, the new model provides for the Virginia Commission to: Initiate a base rate case during the first six months of 2009, reviewing the 2008 test year, as a result of which the Virginia Commission: shall establish a return on equity (ROE) no lower than that reported by at least a majority of a group of utilities within the southeastern U.S., with certain limitations, as described in the legislation; may increase or decrease the ROE by up to 100 basis points based on generating plant performance, customer service and operating efficiency, if appropriate; shall increase base rates, if needed, to allow the Company the opportunity to recover its costs and earn a fair rate of return if we are found to have earnings more than 50 basis points below the established ROE; or may reduce rates prospectively upon completion of the 2009 review or, alternatively, order a credit to customers if we are found to have test year earnings of more than 50 basis points above the established ROE. After the initial rate case, review base rates biennially, as a result of which the Virginia Commission: shall establish an ROE no lower than that reported by at least a majority of a group of utilities within the southeastern U.S., with certain limitations, as described in the legislation; may increase or decrease the ROE by up to 100 basis points based on generating plant performance, customer service and operating efficiency, if appropriate; after 2010, authorize an increased ROE on overall rate base upon achieving the goals established for the renewable energy portfolio standard programs. Such increased ROE would be in lieu of any increased or decreased ROE from the preceding paragraph, unless there has been an increase to the ROE awarded under the preceding paragraph that is higher than the renewable energy portfolio standard increase; and shall increase base rates, if needed, to allow the Company the opportunity to recover its costs and earn a fair rate of return if we are found to have earned, during the test period, more than 50 basis points below the then currently established ROE; or may order a credit to customers if we are found to have earned, during the test period, more than 50 basis points above the then currently established ROE, and reduce rates if we are found to have such excess earnings during two consecutive biennial review periods. Authorize stand-alone rate adjustments for recovery of certain costs, including new generation projects, major generating unit modifications, environmental compliance projects, FERC-approved costs for transmission service and energy efficiency, conservation, and renewable energy programs; and Authorize an enhanced ROE on new capital expenditures as a financial incentive for construction of certain major generation projects. The legislation also continues statutory provisions directing us to file annual fuel cost recovery cases with the Virginia Commission beginning in 2007 and continuing thereafter, as discussed in Virginia Fuel Expenses . As discussed previously, the legislation provides for the Virginia Commission to initiate a base rate case during the first six months of 2009, as a result of which the Virginia Commission may reduce rates or alternatively, order a credit to customers if we are found to have earnings more than 50 basis points above the established ROE. We are unable to predict the outcome of future rate actions at this time, however an unfavorable outcome could adversely affect our results of operations. 43 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued V IRGINIA F UEL E XPENSES Under amendments to the Virginia fuel cost recovery statute passed in 2004, our fuel factor provisions were frozen until July 1, 2007. Fuel prices have increased considerably since 2004, which resulted in our fuel expenses being significantly in excess of our fuel cost recovery. Pursuant to the 2007 amendments to the fuel cost recovery statute, annual fuel rate adjustments, with deferred fuel accounting for over- or under-recoveries of fuel costs, were re-instituted on July 1, 2007. While the 2007 amendments did not allow us to collect any unrecovered fuel expenses that were incurred prior to July 1, 2007, once our fuel factor was adjusted, this mechanism ensures dollar-for-dollar recovery for prudently incurred fuel costs. In April 2007, we filed a Virginia fuel factor application with the Virginia Commission. The application showed a need for an annual increase in fuel expense recovery for the period July 1, 2007 through June 30, 2008 of approximately $662 million; however, the requested increase was limited to $219 million under the 2007 amendments to the fuel cost recovery statute. Under these amendments, our fuel factor increase as of July 1, 2007 was limited to an amount that results in the residential customer class not receiving an increase of more than 4% of total rates in effect as of June 30, 2007. The Virginia Commission approved the fuel factor increase for Virginia jurisdictional customers of approximately $219 million, effective July 1, 2007, with the balance of approximately $443 million to be deferred and subsequently recovered subject to Virginia Commission approval, without interest, during the period commencing July 1, 2008 and ending June 30, 2011. North Carolina Regulation In 2004, the North Carolina Utilities Commission (North Carolina Commission) commenced an investigation into our North Carolina base rates and subsequently ordered us to file a general rate case to show cause why our North Carolina jurisdictional base rates should not be reduced. The rate case was filed in September 2004, and in March 2005 the North Carolina Commission approved a settlement that included a prospective $12 million annual reduction in current base rates and a five-year base rate moratorium, effective as of April 2005. Fuel rates are still subject to change under the annual fuel cost adjustment proceedings. Dominion Transmission Inc. (DTI) Rates In May 2005, FERC approved a comprehensive rate settlement with our subsidiary, DTI, and its customers and interested state commissions. The settlement, which became effective July 1, 2005, revised our natural gas transmission rates and reduced fuel retention levels for storage service customers. As part of the settlement, DTI and all signatory parties agreed to a rate moratorium until 2010. In December 2007, DTI and the Independent Oil and Gas Association of West Virginia, Inc. reached a settlement agreement on DTI gathering and processing rates for the period January 1, 2009 through December 31, 2011. This settlement maintains the gas retainage fee structure that DTI has had since 2001. Under the settlement, the gathering retainage rate increases from 9.25% to 10.5% and the processing retainage rate in recognition of the increased market value of natural gas liquids decreases from 3.25% to 0.5%. This reduction in the combined retainage, from 12.5% to 11%, should provide a lower overall cost for most producers. Due to the increase in natural gas prices from three years ago, the consolidated impact of these rate changes is expected to increase DTI gathering and processing revenues. In addition, DTI will continue to retain all revenues from its liquids sales, thus maintaining its cash flow from this activity. In connection with the settlement, DTI also agreed to invest at least $20 million annually in Appalachian gathering-related assets. The new rates are subject to FERC approval. Dominion Cove Point Rates In June 2006, we filed a general rate proceeding for Dominion Cove Point LNG, LP (DCP). The rates established in this case took effect on January 1, 2007. This rate proceeding enabled DCP to update the cost of service underlying its rates, including recovery of costs associated with the 2002 to 2003 reactivation of the LNG import terminal. The FERC-approved settlement established a rate moratorium that ends in mid-2011. Regional Transmission Expansion Plan Each year, as part of PJM RTEP process, reliability projects are authorized. In June 2006, PJM authorized construction of numerous electric transmission upgrades through 2011. We are involved in two of the major construction projects. The first project is an approximately 270-mile 500-kilovolt (kV) transmission line from southwestern Pennsylvania to northern Virginia, of which we will construct approximately 65 miles in Virginia and a subsidiary of Allegheny Energy, Inc. (Trans-Allegheny Interstate Line Company) will construct the remainder. This project is expected to cost approximately $243 million and is expected to be completed in June 2011. The second project is an approximately 60-mile 500-kV transmission line that we will construct in southeastern Virginia. This project is estimated to cost $180 million and is expected to be completed in June 2011. These transmission upgrades are designed to improve the reliability of service to our customers and the region. The siting and construction of these transmission lines will be subject to applicable state and federal permits and approvals. In April 2007, we, along with Trans-Allegheny Interstate Line Company, filed an application with the Virginia Commission requesting approval of the proposed construction of the 65-mile transmission line in northern Virginia. In May 2007, we filed an application with the Virginia Commission requesting approval of the proposed construction of the 60-mile transmission line in southeastern Virginia. Evidentiary hearings on these applications commenced in February 2008. Utility Generation Expansion Based on available generation capacity and current estimates of growth in customer demand in our utility service area, we will need additional generation capacity over the next ten years. We have announced a comprehensive generation growth program, referred to as Powering Virginia , which involves the development, financing, construction and operation of new multi-fuel, multitechnology generation capacity to meet the growing demand in our core market in Virginia. As part of this program, the following projects are in various stages of development: 44 Table of Contents In April 2007, we filed an application with the Virginia Commission requesting approval to add two 150 Mw natural gas-fired electric generating units (Units 3 and 4) to our Ladysmith power station (Ladysmith) to supply electricity during periods of peak demand. The facility is expected to be in operation by August 2008, at an estimated cost of $135 million. The Virginia Commission approved the application in August 2007, and construction has commenced. In December 2007, we received approval from the North Carolina Commission for a related affiliate transaction. In November 2007, we filed an application with the Virginia Commission for approval to add a fifth combustion turbine (Unit 5) at Ladysmith at an estimated cost of $79 million. In July 2007, we filed an application with the Virginia Commission requesting approval to construct and operate a 585 Mw (nominal) carbon capture compatible, clean coal powered electric generation facility (Virginia City Hybrid Energy Center) to be located in Wise County, Virginia. We also requested approval to continue to accrue an allowance for funds used during construction until capped rates end and, beginning January 1, 2009, receive current recovery of financing costs including a return on common equity of 11.75% together with a 200 basis point enhancement through a rate adjustment clause. An evidentiary hearing was held in February 2008. An application for a permit to construct and operate the Virginia City Hybrid Energy Center, in compliance with federal and state air pollution laws, was filed in July 2006 with the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. Pending regulatory approval and necessary permits, the facility is expected to be in operation by 2012 at an estimated cost of approximately $1.8 billion. Also in February 2008, we announced the proposed conversion of our Bremo power station (Bremo) from coal to natural gas as part of our plan to build the Virginia City Hybrid Energy Center. The proposal is contingent upon the Virginia Hybrid Energy Center entering service and receiving approvals from the Virginia Commission and Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. The proposed conversion project is part of our overall effort to reduce air emissions. Subject to applicable regulatory approvals, the conversion would occur within two years of the Virginia City Hybrid Energy Center entering service. We are considering the construction of a third nuclear unit within the next twenty years at a site located at the North Anna power station (North Anna) which we own along with Old Dominion Electric Cooperative (ODEC). In November 2007, the NRC issued an Early Site Permit (ESP) for a site located at North Anna. Also in November 2007, we, along with ODEC filed an application with the NRC for a Combined Construction Permit and Operating License (COL), which would allow us to build and operate a new nuclear unit at North Anna. In January 2008, the NRC accepted our application for the COL and deemed it complete. We have a cooperative agreement with the Department of Energy to share equally the cost of the COL. We have not yet committed to building a new unit. In December 2007, we announced an agreement to purchase a power station development project in Buckingham County, Virginia that will generate about 600 Mw. The project already has air and water permits for a combined-cycle, natural gas-fired power station; however such permits may need to be modified. In addition, construction of the project is subject to approval by the Virginia Commission, including approval under state regulations relating to bidding for the purchase of electric capacity and energy from other power suppliers, and the receipt of other environmental permits. A gas pipeline will also be required to be constructed to provide gas supply to the power station. Pending a closing under the purchase agreement and the receipt of regulatory approval, we plan to build a combined cycle unit with operations expected to begin in summer 2011. Wind Power Acquisition In an effort to foster renewable generation development consistent with our environmental strategy, in January 2008, we acquired a 50% interest in a joint venture with BP Alternative Energy Inc. (BP) to develop a wind-turbine facility in Benton County, Indiana. The facility is expected to be built in two phases and generate a total of 750 Mw. We will jointly own 650 Mw with BP and BP will retain sole ownership of 100 Mw. We have committed to contribute approximately $340 million of cash at various dates through January 2009, which includes our initial investment and funding for the development of the first 300 Mw phase. Construction of the second 350 Mw phase could begin as early as 2009, with funding to be contributed to the joint venture to maintain 50/50 ownership between the partners. Our ultimate funding requirements may decrease to the extent that the joint venture obtains non-recourse construction and term financing. PJM Rate Design In May 2005, FERC issued an order finding that PJM existing transmission service rate design may not be just and reasonable, and ordered an investigation and hearings into the matter. In January 2008, FERC affirmed its earlier decision that the PJM transmission rate design for existing facilities had not become unjust and unreasonable. For recovery of costs of investments of new PJM-planned transmission facilities that operate at or above 500 kV, FERC established a regional rate design where all customers pay a uniform rate based on the costs of such investment. For recovery of costs of investment in new PJM-planned transmission facilities that operate below 500kV, FERC affirmed its earlier decision to allocate costs on a beneficiary pays approach. A notice of appeal of this decision was filed in February 2008 at the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. We cannot predict the outcome of the appeal. Ohio Rate Case In August 2007, The East Ohio Gas Company (Dominion East Ohio) filed an application to increase base rates. In this rate case, Dominion East Ohio requests approval of an increase in operating revenues of over $73 million to provide a rate of return on rate base of 8.72%. As part of its request, Dominion East Ohio is proposing to install automated meter reading devices for all of its 1.2 million customers over a 5-year period and to spend up to an additional $5.5 million per year over a three-year period on demand side management programs if the Ohio Commission approves a decoupling mechanism that would automatically adjust base rates in order to maintain base rate revenues per customer at the level approved in the rate case. In addition, Dominion East Ohio is proposing to expand its gross receipts tax rider to apply to all amounts billed for services, rather than just gas cost recoveries, thereby excluding gross receipts tax from base rates. 45 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued In February 2008, Dominion East Ohio filed an application seeking approval from the Ohio Commission to implement a 25-year program to replace approximately 19% of its 21,000-mile pipeline system and to recover the resulting costs. The application also requests Ohio Commission approval for Dominion East Ohio to assume responsibility for the service lines that run from the curb to the customer meter. Currently, customers own those service lines and are responsible for bearing the cost of installation and for any repairs or replacement that may be needed. The cost of the program in total will exceed $2.6 billion in 2007 dollars. The resulting expenditure of more than $100 million per year will more than double Dominion East Ohio current annual spending on its pipeline infrastructure. However, the cost to customers would be spread out over many decades due to the 25-year time frame of the replacement program and the period over which recovery in rates would be allowed. Dominion East Ohio also made a related filing asking the Ohio Commission to consolidate its review of the pipeline infrastructure replacement program with Dominion East Ohio current rate case application in order to give the Ohio Commission and other parties the opportunity to consider the two filings together. Environmental Matters We are subject to costs resulting from a number of federal, state and local laws and regulations designed to protect human health and the environment. These laws and regulations affect future planning and existing operations. They can result in increased capital, operating and other costs as a result of compliance, remediation, containment and monitoring obligations. To the extent environmental costs are incurred in connection with operations regulated by the Virginia Commission during the period ending December 31, 2008, in excess of the level currently included in Virginia jurisdictional rates, our results of operations could decrease. After that date, we are allowed to seek recovery through rates. E NVIRONMENTAL P ROTECTION AND M ONITORING E XPENDITURES We incurred approximately $181 million, $138 million and $205 million of expenses (including depreciation) during 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively, in connection with environmental protection and monitoring activities and expect these expenses to be approximately $218 million and $333 million in 2008 and 2009, respectively. In addition, capital expenditures related to environmental controls were $293 million, $332 million and $140 million for 2007, 2006 and 2005, respectively. These expenditures are expected to be approximately $194 million and $191 million for 2008 and 2009, respectively. C LEAN A IR A CT (CAA) C OMPLIANCE In March 2005, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Administrator signed both the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) and the Clean Air Mercury Rule (CAMR). These rules, when implemented, will require significant reductions in sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ), nitrogen oxide (NO X ) and mercury emissions from electric generating facilities. The SO 2 and NO X emission reduction requirements are imposed in two phases, with initial reduction levels targeted for 2009 (NO X ) and 2010 (SO 2 ), and a second phase of reductions targeted for 2015 (SO 2 and NO X ). The mercury emission reduction requirements are also in two phases, with initial reduction levels targeted for 2010 and a second phase of reductions targeted for 2018. The federal rules allow for the use of cap-and-trade programs. West Virginia has adopted final regulations for CAIR and CAMR. Virginia has adopted final regulations for CAIR with requirements more strict than the federal rule and will adopt final regulations for CAMR with requirements more strict than the federal rule. Illinois has finalized regulations to implement CAIR and CAMR with requirements more strict than the federal rule. Indiana has adopted CAIR and CAMR, with only minor changes. Massachusetts has finalized regulations to implement CAIR with requirements more strict than the federal rule. Separate from the CAA, CAIR and CAMR, Massachusetts has regulations specifically targeting reductions in NO X , SO 2 , and mercury emissions from our affected facilities in Massachusetts. These CAA regulatory and non-CAA state actions will require additional reductions in emissions from our fossil fuel-fired generating facilities and are already addressed in our current compliance planning. In June 2005, the EPA finalized amendments to the Regional Haze Rule, also known as the Clean Air Visibility Rule (CAVR). Although we anticipate that the emission reductions achieved through compliance with CAIR and CAMR will generally address CAVR, we do expect that additional emission reduction requirements will be imposed on several of our merchant facilities. Implementation of projects to comply with these SO 2 , NO X and mercury limitations, and other state emission control programs are ongoing and will be influenced by changes in the regulatory environment, availability of emission allowances and emission control technology. In response to these CAA and non-CAA state requirements, we estimate that we will make capital expenditures at our affected generating facilities of approximately $900 million during the period 2008 through 2012. In February 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia issued a ruling that vacates CAMR as promulgated by the EPA. At this time we cannot determine if this ruling will be subject to further appeals and how the EPA, and subsequently the states, may alter their approach to reducing mercury emissions. We also cannot estimate at this time the impact on our future capital expenditures. 46 Table of Contents R EGULATION OF G REENHOUSE G AS E MISSIONS We operate two coal/oil-fired generating power stations in Massachusetts that are already subject to the implementation of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emission regulations issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (MADEP). Additionally, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Connecticut have joined the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), a multi-state effort to reduce CO 2 emissions in the Northeast to be implemented through state specific regulations which are currently in development in these states. We own and operate a gas/oil-fired electric generating facility in Rhode Island that is subject to RGGI, in addition to the two coal/oil-fired stations in Massachusetts. Implementing regulations for RGGI in Massachusetts and Rhode Island have yet to be fully developed. While the cost of complying with the RGGI requirements for the period 2009 to 2011 could adversely affect our results of operations, we cannot provide a reasonable estimate of such cost until the results of the first RGGI allowance auction are conducted later in 2008 and an allowance market develops. Additionally, any such costs of compliance could potentially be mitigated by increases in power prices impacting our affected power stations in the Northeast. In April 2007, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the EPA has the authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions which could result in future EPA action. In June 2007, the President announced U.S. support for an effort to develop a new post-2012 framework on climate change involving the top ten to fifteen greenhouse gas emitting countries that would focus on establishing a long-term global goal to reduce greenhouse gas emissions with each country establishing its own mid-term targets and programs. In addition to possible federal action, some states in which we operate have already or may adopt greenhouse gas emission reduction programs. For example, Massachusetts has implemented regulations requiring reductions in CO 2 emissions. The Virginia Energy Plan, released by the Governor of Virginia in September 2007, includes a goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions statewide back to 2000 levels by 2025. The Governor formed a Commission on Climate Change to develop a plan to achieve this goal. Until this goal results in legislative or regulatory action, the outcome in terms of specific requirements and timing is uncertain. The cost of compliance with future greenhouse gas reduction programs could be significant. Given the highly uncertain outcome and timing of future action by the U.S. federal government and states on this issue, we cannot predict the financial impact of future greenhouse gas reduction programs on our operations or our customers at this time. C LEAN W ATER A CT C OMPLIANCE In July 2004, the EPA published regulations under the Clean Water Act Section 316b that govern existing utilities that employ a cooling water intake structure and that have flow levels exceeding a minimum threshold. The EPA rule presents several compliance options. However, in January 2007, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit issued a decision on an appeal of the regulations, remanding the rule to the EPA. In July 2007, the EPA suspended the regulations pending further rulemaking, consistent with the decision issued by the U. S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. In November 2007, a number of industries appealed the lower court decision to the U. S. Supreme Court. We have sixteen facilities that are likely to be subject to these regulations. We cannot predict the outcome of the judicial or EPA regulatory processes, nor can we determine with any certainty what specific controls may be required. In August 2006, the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (CTDEP) issued a notice of a Tentative Determination to renew our Millstone power station National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, which included a draft copy of the revised permit. In October 2007, CTDEP issued a report to the hearing officer for the tentative determination stating the agency intent to further revise the draft permit. In December 2007, the CTDEP issued a new draft permit. An administrative hearing will be held on the draft permit with a Final Determination expected to be issued by the CTDEP within the next year. Until the final permit is reissued, it is not possible to predict the financial impact that may result. In October 2003, the EPA and MADEP each issued new NPDES permits for the Brayton Point power station (Brayton Point). The new permits contained identical conditions that in effect require the installation of cooling towers to address concerns over the withdrawal and discharge of cooling water. Following various appeals, in December 2007, the EPA issued an administrative order to Brayton Point that contained a schedule for implementing the permit. On the same day, Brayton Point withdrew its appeal of the permit from the U.S. Court of Appeals. Brayton Point state appeal will be dismissed upon MADEP finalizing the process for implementing the parallel state permit. Currently, we estimate the total cost to install these cooling towers at approximately $500 million, of which $176 million is included in our planned capital expenditures through 2010. F UTURE E NVIRONMENTAL R EGULATIONS We expect that there may be federal legislative or regulatory action regarding the regulation of greenhouse gas emissions and regarding compliance with more stringent air emission standards in the future. With respect to greenhouse gas emissions, the outcome in terms of specific requirements and timing is uncertain but may include a greenhouse gas emissions cap-and-trade program or a carbon tax for electric generators and natural gas businesses. With respect to emission reductions, specific requirements under consideration would be phased in under periods of up to ten to fifteen years. If any of these new proposals are adopted, additional significant expenditures may be required. 47 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued E NVIRONMENTAL S TRATEGY Dominion is committed to being a good environmental steward. Our ongoing objective is to provide reliable, affordable energy for our customers while being environmentally responsible. Our integrated strategy to meet this objective consists of four major elements: Conservation and efficiency; Renewable generation development; Other generation development to maintain our fuel diversity, including clean coal, advanced nuclear energy, and natural gas; and Improvements in other energy infrastructure. Conservation plays a critical role in meeting the growing demand for electricity. Virginia re-regulation legislation enacted in 2007 provides for incentives for energy conservation and sets a goal to reduce electricity consumption by retail customers in 2022 by ten percent of the amount consumed in 2006 through the implementation of conservation programs. We announced plans in September 2007 for a series of pilot programs focused on energy conservation and demand response. The pilots will be offered to a selection of 4,550 customers in our central, eastern and northern Virginia service areas. To help ensure that the results are representative, customers will not be able to volunteer for the pilots nor participate in more than one pilot. We will report results from the pilots at least quarterly to the Virginia Commission staff to help evaluate their effectiveness. The pilots approved by the Virginia Commission include: 1,000 residential customers in each of four different energy-saving pilots. The pilots are designed to cycle central heating and air conditioning units during peak- energy demand times, inform customers about their real-time energy consumption patterns, promote programmable thermostats that allow customers to control their use of electricity, and educate customers about the value of reducing energy use during peak-use times. Free energy audits and energy efficiency kits to 150 existing residential customers, 100 new homes meeting energy efficiency guidelines set by the EPA, and 50 small commercial customers. In addition, 250 new homes will receive energy efficiency welcome kits that include compact fluorescent light bulbs. Incentives for commercial customers to reduce load during periods of peak demand by running their generators to produce up to 100 Mw of electricity. This would be in addition to existing Dominion options in which commercial and industrial customers have reduced demand by more than 300 Mw during peak-demand periods. Renewable energy is also an important component of a diverse and reliable energy mix. Both Virginia and North Carolina have passed legislation setting goals for renewable power. We are committed to meeting Virginia goal of 12 % renewable power by 2022 and North Carolina renewable portfolio standard of 12.5 % by 2021. We are actively assessing development opportunities in our service territories for renewable technologies. In November 2007, we issued a request for proposals (RFP) for renewable energy projects in Virginia, North Carolina or elsewhere in the PJM Interconnect region. The RFP seeks the purchase of renewable energy generation projects, as well as renewable energy credits. Our regulated utility currently provides approximately two percent of its generation from renewable sources. In addition, Dominion is a 50% owner of a wind energy facility in Grant County, West Virginia. When operational, our share of this project will produce 132 Mw of renewable energy. Dominion has also acquired a 50% interest in a joint venture with BP Alternative Energy, Inc. (BP) to develop a wind-turbine facility in Benton County, Indiana. The facility is expected to be built in two phases and generate a total of 750 Mw of which we will jointly own 650 Mw with BP. We also anticipate using up to 20% biomass (woodwaste) at the proposed Virginia City Hybrid Energy Center. We have announced a comprehensive generation growth program, referred to as Powering Virginia , which involves the development, financing, construction and operation of new multi-fuel, multi-technology generation capacity to meet the growing demand in our core market of Virginia. We expect that these investments collectively will provide the following benefits: expanded electricity production capability; increased technological and fuel diversity; and a reduction in the carbon dioxide emissions intensity of our generation fleet. A critical aspect of the Powering Virginia program is the extent to which we seek to reduce the carbon intensity of our generation fleet by developing generation facilities with zero CO 2 and low CO 2 emissions, as well as economically viable facilities that can be equipped for CO 2 separation and sequestration. There is no current economically viable technological solution to retro-fit existing fossil-fueled technology to capture and sequester greenhouse gas emissions. Given that new generation units have useful lives of up to 50 years, we will give full consideration to CO 2 and other greenhouse gas emissions when making long-term investment decisions. Finally, we plan to make a significant investment in improving the capabilities and reliability of our electric transmission and distribution system. These enhancements are primarily aimed at meeting our continued goal of providing reliable service. An additional benefit will be added capacity to efficiently deliver electricity from the renewable projects now being developed or to be developed in the future. 48 Table of Contents 
