CIK: 715957
Company Name: DOMINION RESOURCES INC VA 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-02-28


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) discusses the results of operations and general financial condition of Dominion. MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements. The term Dominion is used throughout MD&A and, depending on the context of its use, may represent any of the following: the legal entity, Dominion Resources, Inc.; one of Dominion Resources, Inc. consolidated subsidiaries; or the entirety of Dominion Resources, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. Contents of MD&A The reader will find the following information in this MD&A: Forward-Looking Statements Introduction Accounting Matters Results of Operations Segment Results of Operations Selected Information Energy Trading Activities Sources and Uses of Cash Future Issues and Other Matters Market Rate Sensitive Instruments and Risk Management Risk Factors and Cautionary Statements that May Affect Future Results Forward-Looking Statements This report contains statements concerning Dominion expectations, plans, objectives, future financial performance and other statements that are not historical facts. These statements are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In most cases, the reader can identify these forward-looking statements by words such as anticipate, estimate, forecast, expect, believe, should, could, plan, may or other similar words. Dominion makes forward-looking statements with full knowledge that risks and uncertainties exist that may cause actual results to differ materially from predicted results. Factors that may cause actual results to differ are often presented with the forward-looking statements themselves. Additionally, other risks that may cause actual results to differ from predicted results are set forth in Risk Factors and Cautionary Statements That May Affect Future Results. Dominion bases its forward-looking statements on management beliefs and assumptions using information available at the time the statements are made. Dominion cautions the reader not to place undue reliance on its forward-looking statements because the assumptions, beliefs, expectations and projections about future events may, and often do, differ materially from actual results. Dominion undertakes no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect developments occurring after the statement is made. Introduction Dominion is a diversified, fully integrated electric and gas holding company headquartered in Richmond, Virginia. Dominion concentrates its efforts largely in what Dominion refers to as the MAIN to Maine region. In the power industry, MAIN means the Mid-America Interconnected Network, which comprises all of Illinois and portions of the states of Missouri, Iowa, Wisconsin, Michigan and Minnesota. Under this strategy, Dominion focuses its efforts on the region stretching from MAIN, through its primary Mid-Atlantic service areas in Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Virginia and North Carolina, and up through New York and New England. The MAIN-to-Maine region is home to approximately 40% of the nation demand for energy. Operating in all aspects of the energy supply chain allows Dominion to optimize the value of its energy portfolio and enhance its return on invested capital. Dominion has the capability to discover and produce gas, store it, sell it or use it to generate power; it can generate electricity to sell to customers in its retail markets or in wholesale transactions. These capabilities give Dominion the ability to produce and sell energy in whatever form it finds most useful and economic. Dominion also operates North America largest natural gas storage system, which gives it the flexibility to provide supply when it is most economically advantageous to do so. Dominion businesses are managed through four primary operating segments: Dominion Generation, Dominion Energy, Dominion Delivery and Dominion Exploration & Production. The contributions to net income by Dominion primary operating segments are determined based on a measure of profit that executive management believes represents the segments core earnings. As a result, certain specific items attributable to those segments are not included in profit measures evaluated by executive management in assessing segment performance or allocating resources among the segments. Those specific items are reported in the Corporate and Other segment. Dominion Generation includes the generation operations of Dominion electric utility and merchant fleet. The generation mix is diversified and includes coal, nuclear, gas, oil, hydro and purchased power. Dominion strategy for its electric generation operations focuses on serving customers in the MAIN to Maine region. Its generation facilities are located in Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina, Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Pennsylvania and Ohio. In addition, Dominion completed the acquisition of three USGen New England Inc. (USGen) power stations located in Massachusetts and Rhode Island during January 2005 and expects to complete the acquisition of the Kewaunee nuclear power plant located in northeastern Wisconsin in the first half of 2005. Utility generation operations represent Dominion Generation primary source of revenue and cash flow. These operations are sensitive to external factors, primarily weather and fuel prices. Currently, revenue from utility operations largely reflects the capped rates charged to customers in Virginia, the majority of its utility customer base. Under Virginia current deregulation legislation, electric rates are capped through 2010. Under capped rates, changes in Dominion Generation operating costs, particularly with respect to fuel, relative to costs used to establish the capped rates, will impact Dominion earnings. Dominion Generation has reduced costs by terminating certain long-term power purchase agreements. D 2004 / Page 17 Table of Contents Prices received for electricity generated by its merchant fleet are market-based, subjecting Dominion Generation to risks associated with recovering capital expenditures and absorbing variability in fuel costs. Generally, Dominion Generation manages these risks by entering into both short-term and long-term fixed-price sales and purchase contracts. Variability in expenses for Dominion Generation relates primarily to the cost of fuel consumed, labor and benefits and the timing, duration and costs of scheduled and unscheduled outages. As discussed in further detail below, as a result of the reorganization of the Dominion Energy Clearinghouse (Clearinghouse), Dominion Generation 2004 and 2003 results now reflect revenues and expenses associated with coal and emissions trading and marketing activities performed by the Clearinghouse that were previously reported in the Dominion Energy segment. Dominion Energy includes the following operations: A regulated interstate gas transmission pipeline and storage system, serving Dominion gas distribution businesses and other customers in the Midwest, the Mid-Atlantic states and the Northeast; A regulated electric transmission system principally located in Virginia and northeastern North Carolina; A liquefied natural gas (LNG) import and storage facility in Maryland; Certain gas production operations located in the Appalachian basin; and Clearinghouse, which is responsible for energy trading, marketing, hedging, arbitrage and gas aggregation activities. Dominion Energy revenue and cash flows are derived from both regulated and nonregulated operations. Revenue and cash flow provided by regulated electric and gas transmission operations and the LNG facility are based primarily on rates established by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). Variability in revenue and cash flow provided by these businesses results primarily from changes in rates and the demand for services. Variability in expenses relates largely to operating and maintenance expenditures, including decisions regarding use of resources for operations and maintenance or capital-related activities. Revenue and cash flow for Dominion Energy nonregulated businesses are subject to variability associated with changes in commodity prices. Dominion Energy nonregulated businesses use physical and financial arrangements to hedge this price risk. Certain hedging and trading activities may require cash deposits to satisfy margin requirements. In addition, reported earnings for this segment reflect changes in the fair value of certain derivatives; these values may change significantly from period to period. Variability in expenses for these nonregulated businesses relates largely to labor and benefits and the costs of purchased commodities for resale and payments under financially-settled contracts. During the fourth quarter of 2004, Dominion performed an evaluation of its Clearinghouse trading and marketing operations, which resulted in a decision to exit certain energy trading activities and instead focus on the optimization of company assets. Beginning in 2005, all revenues and expenses from the Clearinghouse optimization of company assets will be reported as part of the results of the business segments operating the related assets, in order to better reflect the performance of the underlying assets. As a result of these changes, 2004 and 2003 results now reflect revenues and expenses associated with coal and emissions trading and marketing activities in the Dominion Generation segment. Dominion Delivery includes Dominion electric and gas distribution systems and customer service operations as well as retail energy marketing operations. Electric distribution operations serve residential, commercial, industrial and governmental customers in Virginia and northeastern North Carolina. Gas distribution operations serve residential, commercial and industrial gas sales and transportation customers in Ohio, Pennsylvania and West Virginia. Retail energy marketing operations include the marketing of gas, electricity and related products and services to residential and small commercial customers in the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic and Midwest. Revenue and cash flow provided by electric and gas distribution operations are based primarily on rates established by state regulatory authorities and state law. Variability in Dominion Delivery revenue and cash flow relates largely to changes in volumes, which are primarily weather sensitive. For local gas distribution operations, revenue may vary based upon changes in levels of rate recovery for the cost of gas sold to customers. Such costs and recoveries generally offset and do not materially impact net income. Revenue from retail energy marketing operations may vary in connection with changes in weather and commodity prices as well as the acquisition and potential loss of customers. Variability in expenses results from changes in the cost of purchased gas and routine maintenance and repairs (including labor and benefits as well as decisions regarding the use of resources for operations and maintenance or capital-related activities). For gas distribution operations, Dominion is permitted to seek recovery of the cost of gas sold to customers. Dominion Exploration & Production includes Dominion gas and oil exploration, development and production operations. These operations are located in several major producing basins in the lower 48 states, including the outer continental shelf and deepwater areas of the Gulf of Mexico, and Western Canada. Dominion Exploration & Production maintains an active and ongoing drilling program focused on low risk development drilling in several proven onshore regions of the United States and Western Canada, while also maintaining some exposure to higher risk exploration opportunities. Significant development drilling programs are currently underway in West Texas, the Appalachians and the Rocky Mountains where Dominion Exploration & Production holds sizable acreage positions and operational experience. While each region provides Dominion Exploration & Production with exploration opportunities, most exploratory drilling takes place in the Gulf Coast region, including the deepwater Gulf of Mexico. D 2004 / Page 18 Table of Contents Revenue and cash flow provided by exploration and production operations are based primarily on the production and sale of company-owned natural gas and oil reserves. Variability in Dominion Exploration & Production revenue and cash flow relates primarily to changes in commodity prices, which are market based, and volumes, which are impacted by numerous factors including drilling success, timing of development projects, as well as external factors such as the storm-related damage caused by Hurricane Ivan. Dominion manages commodity price volatility by hedging a substantial portion of its near term expected production. Variability in Dominion Exploration & Production expenses relates primarily to changes in operating costs and production taxes, which tend to increase or decrease with changes in gas and oil prices and the prevailing cost environment. Commodity price changes place upward or downward pressure on related exploration and production service industry costs, while severance and property taxes vary based on changes in revenue. A changing price environment impacts both operating costs and the cost of acquiring, finding and developing natural gas and oil reserves. Corporate and Other includes: Dominion corporate, service company and other operations, including unallocated debt; The remaining assets of Dominion Capital, Inc. (DCI), a financial services subsidiary, which are being divested in accordance with a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) order; The net impact of Dominion discontinued telecommunications operations that were sold in May 2004; and Specific items attributable to Dominion operating segments that are reported in Corporate and Other. Accounting Matters Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates Dominion has identified the following accounting policies, including certain inherent estimates, that as a result of the judgments, uncertainties, uniqueness and complexities of the underlying accounting standards and operations involved, could result in material changes to its financial condition or results of operations under different conditions or using different assumptions. Management has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of each of these with Dominion Audit Committee. Accounting for derivative contracts at fair value Dominion uses derivative contracts (primarily forward purchases and sales, swaps, options and futures) to buy and sell energy-related commodities and to manage its commodity and financial markets risks. Derivative contracts, with certain exceptions, are subject to fair value accounting and are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Accounting requirements for derivatives and related hedging activities are complex and may be subject to further clarification by standard-setting bodies. Fair value of derivatives is based on actively quoted market prices, if available. In the absence of actively quoted market prices, Dominion seeks indicative price information from external sources, including broker quotes and industry publications. If pricing information from external sources is not available, Dominion must estimate prices based on available historical and near-term future price information and use of statistical methods. For options and contracts with option-like characteristics where pricing information is not available from external sources, Dominion generally uses a modified Black-Scholes Model that considers time value, the volatility of the underlying commodities and other relevant assumptions. Dominion uses other option models when contracts involve different commodities or commodity locations and when contracts allow either the buyer or seller the ability to exercise within a range of quantities. For contracts with unique characteristics, Dominion estimates fair value using a discounted cash flow approach. If pricing information is not available from external sources, judgment is required to develop estimates of fair value. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a material effect on the contract estimated fair value. For cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions, Dominion must estimate the future cash flows represented by the forecasted transactions, as well as evaluate the probability of occurrence and timing of such transactions. Changes in conditions or the occurrence of unforeseen events could require discontinuance of hedge accounting or could affect the timing for reclassification of gains or losses on cash flow hedges from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (AOCI) into earnings. Use of estimates in goodwill impairment testing As of December 31, 2004, Dominion reported $4.3 billion of goodwill on its Consolidated Balance Sheet, a significant portion of which resulted from the acquisition of CNG in 2000. Substantially all of this goodwill is allocated to Dominion Generation, Transmission, Delivery and Exploration & Production reporting units. In April of each year, Dominion tests its goodwill for potential impairment, and performs additional tests more frequently if impairment indicators are present. The 2004 annual test did not result in the recognition of any impairment of goodwill, as the estimated fair values of Dominion reporting units exceeded their respective carrying amounts. During the fourth quarter of 2004, Dominion tested $72 million of goodwill allocated to the Clearinghouse reporting unit after management decided to exit certain energy trading activities and change the focus of the business, which resulted in a reduction of the unit expected future cash flows. This interim test indicated that no impairment existed and approximately $8 million of the unit goodwill was reallocated to other reporting units as of December 31, 2004 in connection with management reorganization of that business. In 2003 and 2002, impairment charges of $78 million and $13 million, respectively, were recognized as a result of interim tests conducted for certain DCI subsidiaries and Dominion telecommunications business. D 2004 / Page 19 Table of Contents Dominion estimates the fair value of its reporting units by using a combination of discounted cash flow analyses, based on its internal five-year strategic plan, and other valuation techniques that use multiples of earnings for peer group companies and analyses of recent business combinations involving peer group companies. These calculations are dependent on subjective factors such as management estimate of future cash flows, the selection of appropriate discount and growth rates, and the selection of peer group companies and recent transactions. These underlying assumptions and estimates are made as of a point in time; subsequent modifications, particularly changes in discount rates or growth rates inherent in management estimates of future cash flows, could result in a future impairment of goodwill. Although Dominion has consistently applied the same methods in developing the assumptions and estimates that underlie the fair value calculations, such as estimates of future cash flows, and based those estimates on relevant information available at the time, such cash flow estimates are highly uncertain by nature and may vary significantly from actual results. If the estimates of future cash flows used in the 2004 annual test had been 10% lower, the resulting fair values would have still been greater than the carrying values of each of those reporting units, indicating no impairment was present. Use of estimates in long-lived asset impairment testing Impairment testing for an individual or group of long-lived assets or intangible assets with definite lives is required when circumstances indicate those assets may be impaired. When an asset carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted estimated future cash flows associated with the asset, the asset is considered impaired to the extent that the asset fair value is less than its carrying amount. Performing an impairment test on long-lived assets involves management judgment in areas such as identifying circumstances indicating an impairment may exist, identifying and grouping affected assets and developing the undiscounted and discounted estimated future cash flows (used to estimate fair value in the absence of market-based value) associated with the asset, including the selection of an appropriate discount rate. Although cash flow estimates used by Dominion would be based on relevant information available at the time the estimates are made, estimates of future cash flows are, by nature, highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. For example, estimates of future cash flows would contemplate factors such as the expected use of the asset, including future production and sales levels, and expected fluctuations of prices of commodities sold and consumed. During 2004, Dominion did not test any significant long-lived assets or asset groups for impairment as no circumstances arose that indicated an impairment may exist. In 2003, reflecting a significant revision in long-term expectations for potential growth in telecommunications service revenue, Dominion approved a strategy to sell its interest in the telecommunications business. In connection with this change in strategy, Dominion tested the network assets to be sold for impairment, using the revised long-term expectations for potential growth. Dominion assets were determined to be substantially impaired and were written down to fair value. Dominion sold its telecommunications business in 2004. Asset retirement obligations Dominion recognizes liabilities for the expected cost of retiring tangible long-lived assets for which a legal obligation exists. These asset retirement obligations (AROs) are recognized at fair value as incurred, and are capitalized as part of the cost of the related tangible long-lived assets. In the absence of quoted market prices, Dominion estimates the fair value of its AROs using present value techniques, in which Dominion makes various assumptions including estimates of the amounts and timing of future cash flows associated with retirement activities, credit-adjusted risk free rates and cost escalation rates. AROs currently reported on Dominion Consolidated Balance Sheets were measured during a period of historically low interest rates. The impact on measurements of new AROs, using different rates in the future, may be significant. Dominion did not recognize any new, significant AROs in 2004. In the future, if Dominion revises any assumptions used to calculate the fair value of existing AROs, Dominion will adjust the carrying amount of both the ARO liability and related long-lived asset. Dominion records accretion expense, increasing the ARO liability, with the passage of time. In 2004 and 2003, Dominion recognized $91 million and $86 million, respectively, of accretion expense, and expects to incur $95 million in 2005. A significant portion of Dominion AROs relate to the future decommissioning of its nuclear facilities. At December 31, 2004, nuclear decommissioning AROs, which are reported in the Dominion Generation segment, totaled $1.4 billion, representing approximately 82% of Dominion total AROs. Based on their significance, the following discussion of critical assumptions inherent in determining the fair value of AROs relates to those associated with Dominion nuclear decommissioning obligations. Dominion obtains from third-party experts periodic site-specific base year cost studies in order to estimate the nature, cost and timing of planned decommissioning activities for its utility nuclear plants. Dominion uses internal cost studies for its merchant nuclear facility based on similar methods. These cost studies are based on relevant information available at the time they are performed; however, estimates of future cash flows for extended periods are by nature highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. In addition, these cost estimates are dependent on subjective factors, including the selection of cost escalation rates, which Dominion considers to be a critical assumption. Dominion determines cost escalation rates, which represent projected cost increases over time, due to both general inflation and increases in the cost of specific decommissioning activities, for each of its nuclear facilities. The weighted average cost escalation used by Dominion was 3.18%. The use of alternative rates would have been material to the liabilities recognized. For example, had Dominion increased the cost escalation rate by 0.5% to 3.68%, the amount recognized as of December 31, 2004 for its AROs related to nuclear decommissioning would have been $269 million higher. D 2004 / Page 20 Table of Contents Employee benefit plans Dominion sponsors noncontributory defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans for eligible active employees, retirees and qualifying dependents. The costs of providing benefits under these plans are dependent, in part, on historical information such as employee demographics, the level of contributions made to the plans and earnings on plan assets. Assumptions about the future, including the expected rate of return on plan assets, discount rates applied to benefit obligations and the anticipated rate of increase in health care costs and participant compensation, also have a significant impact on employee benefit costs. The impact on pension and other postretirement benefit plan obligations associated with changes in these factors is generally recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Income over the remaining average service period of plan participants rather than immediately. The selection of expected long-term rates of return on plan assets, discount rates and medical cost trend rates are critical assumptions. Dominion determines the expected long-term rates of return on plan assets for pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans by using a combination of: Historical return analysis to determine expected future risk premiums; Forward-looking return expectations derived from the yield on long-term bonds and the price earnings ratios of major stock market indices; Expected inflation and risk-free interest rate assumptions; and Investment allocation of plan assets. Dominion strategic target asset allocation for its pension fund is 45% U.S. equity securities, 8% non-U.S. equity securities, 22% debt securities and 25% other, such as real estate and private equity investments. Assisted by an independent actuary, management develops assumptions, which are then compared to the forecasts of other independent investment advisors to ensure reasonableness. An internal committee selects the final assumptions. Dominion calculated its pension cost using an expected return on plan assets assumption of 8.75% for 2004 and 2003, compared to 9.5% for 2002. Dominion calculated its 2004 other postretirement benefit cost using an expected return on plan assets assumption of 7.79%, compared to 7.78% and 7.82% for 2003 and 2002, respectively. The rate used in calculating other postretirement benefit cost is lower than the rate used in calculating pension cost because of differences in the relative amounts of various types of investments held as plan assets and because other postretirement benefit activity, unlike the pension activity, is partially taxable. Discount rates are determined from analyses performed by a third party actuarial firm of AA/Aa rated bonds with cash flows matching the expected payments to be made under Dominion plans. Due to declines in bond yields and interest rates, Dominion reduced the discount rate used to calculate 2004 pension and other postretirement benefit cost to 6.25% compared to the 6.75% and 7.25% discount rates that it used to calculate 2003 and 2002 pension and other postretirement benefit cost, respectively. The medical cost trend rate assumption is established based on analyses performed by a third party actuarial firm of various factors including the specific provisions of Dominion medical plans, actual cost trends experienced and projected, and demographics of plan participants. Dominion medical cost trend rate assumption as of December 31, 2004 is 9% and is expected to gradually decrease to 5% in later years. The following table illustrates the effect on cost of changing the critical actuarial assumptions discussed above, while holding all other assumptions constant: Increase in Net Periodic Cost Actuarial Assumption Change in Assumption Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits (millions) Discount rate (0.25 )% $ 13 $ 6 Rate of return on plan assets (0.25 )% 10 2 Healthcare cost trend rate 1 % N/A 22 In addition to the effects on cost, a 0.25% decrease in the discount rate would increase the projected pension benefit obligation by $122 million and would increase the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $45 million. Accounting for regulated operations Dominion accounting for its regulated electric and gas operations differs from the accounting for nonregulated operations in that Dominion is required to reflect the effect of rate regulation in its Consolidated Financial Statements. Specifically, Dominion regulated businesses record assets and liabilities that nonregulated companies would not report under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. When it is probable that regulators will allow for the recovery of current costs through future rates charged to customers, Dominion defers these costs that otherwise would be expensed by nonregulated companies and recognizes regulatory assets in its financial statements. Likewise, Dominion recognizes regulatory liabilities in its financial statements when it is probable that regulators will require reductions in revenue associated with customer credits through future rates and when revenue is collected from customers for expenditures that are not yet incurred. Management evaluates whether or not recovery of its regulatory assets through future regulated rates is probable and makes various assumptions in its analyses. The expectations of future recovery are generally based on orders issued by regulatory commissions or historical experience, as well as discussions with applicable regulatory authorities. If recovery of regulatory assets is determined to be less than probable, the regulatory asset will be written off and an expense will be recorded in the period such assessment is made. Management currently believes the recovery of its regulatory assets is probable. See Notes 2 and 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. D 2004 / Page 21 Table of Contents Accounting for gas and oil operations Dominion follows the full cost method of accounting for gas and oil exploration and production activities prescribed by the SEC. Under the full cost method, all direct costs of property acquisition, exploration and development activities are capitalized and subsequently depreciated using the units-of-production method. The depreciable base of costs includes estimated future costs to be incurred in developing proved gas and oil reserves, as well as capitalized asset retirement costs, net of projected salvage values. Capitalized costs in the depreciable base are subject to a ceiling test prescribed by the SEC. The test limits capitalized amounts to a ceiling the present value of estimated future net revenues to be derived from the production of proved gas and oil reserves assuming period-end pricing adjusted for cash flow hedges in place. Dominion performs the ceiling test quarterly, on a country-by-country basis, and would recognize asset impairments to the extent that total capitalized costs exceed the ceiling. In addition, gains or losses on the sale or other disposition of gas and oil properties are not recognized, unless the gain or loss would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves of natural gas and oil attributable to a country. Dominion estimate of proved reserves requires a large degree of judgment and is dependent on factors such as historical data, engineering estimates of proved reserve quantities, estimates of the amount and timing of future expenditures to develop the proved reserves, and estimates of future production from the proved reserves. Given the volatility of natural gas and oil prices, it is possible that Dominion estimate of discounted future net cash flows from proved natural gas and oil reserves that is used to calculate the ceiling could change in the near term. The process to estimate reserves is imprecise, and estimates are subject to revision. In the last five years, revisions to Dominion estimates of proved developed and undeveloped reserves have averaged approximately 3% of the previous year estimate. If there is a significant variance in any of its estimates or assumptions in the future and revisions to the value of its proved reserves are necessary, related depletion expense and the calculation of the ceiling test would be affected and recognition of natural gas and oil property impairments could occur. See Notes 2 and 28 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Income Taxes Judgment is required in developing Dominion provision for income taxes, including the determination of deferred tax assets and any related valuation allowance. Dominion evaluates the probability of realizing its deferred tax assets on a quarterly basis by reviewing its forecast of future taxable income and the availability of tax planning strategies that can be implemented, if necessary, to realize deferred tax assets. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income or successfully implement tax planning strategies might affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets. Newly Adopted Accounting Standards During 2004 and 2003, Dominion was required to adopt several new accounting standards, the requirements of which are discussed in Notes 2 and 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The accounting standards adopted during 2003 affect the comparability of Dominion Consolidated Statements of Income. The following discussion is presented to provide an understanding of the impacts of those standards on that comparability. FIN 46R The adoption of Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Interpretation No. 46 (revised December 2003), Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities, (FIN 46R) on December 31, 2003 with respect to special purpose entities, affected the comparability of Dominion 2004 Consolidated Statement of Income to prior years as follows: Dominion was required to consolidate certain variable interest lessor entities through which Dominion had financed and leased several new power generation projects, as well as its corporate headquarters and aircraft. As a result, the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2003 reflects an additional $644 million in net property, plant and equipment and deferred charges and $688 million of related debt. In 2004, Dominion Consolidated Statement of Income reflects depreciation expense on the net property, plant and equipment and interest expense on the debt associated with these entities, whereas in prior years it reflected as rent expense in other operations and maintenance expense, the lease payments to these entities. In addition, under FIN 46R, Dominion reports as long-term debt its junior subordinated notes held by five capital trusts, rather than the trust preferred securities issued by those trusts. As a result, in 2004 Dominion reported interest expense on the junior subordinated notes rather than preferred distribution expense on the trust preferred securities. SFAS No. 143 Adopting Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations , on January 1, 2003, affected the comparability of Dominion 2004 and 2003 Consolidated Statements of Income to the prior year as follows: Accretion of the AROs, including nuclear decommissioning, is reported in other operations and maintenance expense. Previously, expenses associated with the provision for nuclear decommissioning were reported in depreciation expense and in other income (loss); and Realized and unrealized earnings of trusts available for funding decommissioning activities at Dominion utility nuclear plants are recorded in other income (loss) and AOCI, as appropriate. Previously, as permitted by regulatory authorities, these earnings, along with an offsetting charge to expense, for the accretion of the decommissioning liability, were both reported in other income (loss). D 2004 / Page 22 Table of Contents EITF 02-3 and EITF 03-11 The adoption of Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) Issue No. 02-3, Issues Involved in Accounting for Derivative Contracts Held for Trading Purposes and Contracts Involved in Energy Trading and Risk Management Activities, and related EITF Issue No. 03-11, Reporting Realized Gains and Losses on Derivative Instruments That Are Subject to FASB Statement No. 133 and Not Held for Trading Purposes as Defined in Issue No. 02-3 , changed the timing of recognition in earnings for certain Clearinghouse energy-related contracts, as well as the financial statement presentation of gains and losses associated with energy-related contracts. The Consolidated Statement of Income for 2002 was not restated. Prior to 2003, all energy trading contracts, including non-derivative contracts, were recorded at fair value with changes in fair value and settlements reported in revenue on a net basis. Specifically, adopting EITF 02-3 and EITF 03-11 affected the comparability of Dominion 2004 and 2003 Consolidated Statements of Income to the prior year as follows: For derivative contracts not held for trading purposes that involve physical delivery of commodities, unrealized gains and losses and settlements on sales contracts are presented in revenue, while unrealized gains and losses and settlements on purchase contracts are reported in expenses; and Non-derivative energy-related contracts, previously subject to fair value accounting under prior accounting guidance, are recognized as revenue or expense on a gross basis at the time of contract performance, settlement or termination. Other Dominion enters into buy/sell and related agreements as a means to reposition its offshore Gulf of Mexico crude oil production to more liquid marketing locations onshore. Dominion typically enters into either a single or a series of buy/sell transactions in which it sells its crude oil production at the offshore field delivery point and buys similar quantities at Cushing, Oklahoma for sale to third parties. Dominion is able to enhance profitability by selling to a wide array of refiners and/or trading companies at Cushing, one of the largest crude oil markets in the world, versus restricting sales to a limited number of refinery purchasers in the Gulf of Mexico. These transactions require physical delivery of the crude oil and the risks and rewards of ownership are evidenced by title transfer, assumption of environmental risk, transportation scheduling and counter party nonperformance risk. Under the primary guidance of EITF Issue No. 99-19, Reporting Revenue Gross as a Principal versus Net as an Agent , Dominion presents the sales and purchases related to its crude oil buy/sell arrangements on a gross basis in its Consolidated Statements of Income. The EITF is currently discussing Issue No. 04-13, Accounting for Purchases and Sales of Inventory with the Same Counterparty , which specifically focuses on purchase and sale transactions made pursuant to crude oil buy/sell arrangements. The EITF is evaluating whether these types of transactions should be presented net in the Consolidated Statements of Income. While resolution of this issue may affect the income statement presentation of these revenues and expenses, there would be no impact on Dominion results of operations or cash flows. The portion of Dominion operating revenue related to buy/sell activity for the years 2004, 2003, and 2002 was 2.1%, 1.5%, and 1.6% respectively. Reported production volumes are not impacted, as only the initial sale of Dominion production is included in reported production volumes. It is estimated that approximately 55% of Dominion 2004 oil production was marketed through the use of one or more crude oil buy/sell agreements. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Results of Operations Presented below is a summary of contributions by operating segments to net income: Year Ended December 31, 2004 2003 2002 Net Income Diluted EPS Net Income Diluted EPS Net Income Diluted EPS (millions, except per share amounts) Dominion Generation $ 525 $ 1.59 $ 512 $ 1.60 $ 561 $ 1.98 Dominion Energy 190 0.57 346 1.09 268 0.95 Dominion Delivery 466 1.41 453 1.42 422 1.49 Dominion Exploration & Production 595 1.80 415 1.30 380 1.34 Primary operating segments 1,776 5.37 1,726 5.41 1,631 5.76 Corporate and Other (527 ) (1.59 ) (1,408 ) (4.41 ) (269 ) (0.94 ) Consolidated $ 1,249 $ 3.78 $ 318 $ 1.00 $ 1,362 $ 4.82 D 2004 / Page 23 Table of Contents Overview 2004 vs. 2003 Dominion earned $3.78 per diluted share on net income of $1.2 billion, an increase of $2.78 per diluted share and $931 million. The per share amount includes approximately $0.14 of share dilution, reflecting an increase in the average number of common shares outstanding during 2004. The combined net income contribution of Dominion primary operating segments increased $50 million during 2004. See Note 27 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about Dominion operating segments. The increase is primarily due to: A lower contribution from regulated electric generation operations primarily due to the elimination of fuel deferral accounting for the Virginia jurisdiction, which resulted in the recognition of fuel expenses in excess of amounts recovered in fixed fuel rates. These higher fuel costs were partially offset by a reduction in capacity expenses due to the termination of certain long-term power purchase agreements and increased revenue due to favorable weather and customer growth; Net realized gains (including investment income) associated with nuclear decommissioning trust fund investments as opposed to net realized losses (including investment income) during the prior year; A loss from energy trading and marketing activities, reflecting comparatively lower price volatility on natural gas option positions and the effect of unfavorable price changes on electric trading margins, partially offset by favorable margins in coal trading and marketing; A higher contribution from nonregulated retail energy marketing operations, primarily reflecting an increase in average customer accounts and higher electric and gas margins; and A higher contribution from exploration and production operations due to favorable changes in the fair value of certain oil options, higher average realized prices for gas and oil and the recognition of business interruption insurance revenue associated with the recovery of delayed gas and oil production due to Hurricane Ivan. Results were also affected by the recognition of revenue in connection with deliveries under volumetric production payment (VPP) agreements, partially offset by lower gas production, reflecting the sale of mineral rights under the VPP agreements. In addition to the higher contribution by the operating segments in 2004, the consolidated results include the impact of several specific items recognized in 2004 and reported in the Corporate and Other segment, including: A $112 million after-tax charge reflecting Dominion valuation of its interest in a long-term power tolling contract, which is subject to a planned divestiture in the first quarter of 2005, as a result of its exit from certain energy trading activities. The charge is based on Dominion evaluation of preliminary bids received from third parties, reflecting the expected amount of consideration that would be required by a third party for its assumption of Dominion interest in the contract; $61 million of after-tax losses related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain oil hedges resulting from an interruption of oil production in the Gulf of Mexico caused by Hurricane Ivan, and subsequent changes in the fair value of those hedges during the third quarter; $61 million of after-tax charges related to Dominion investment in and planned divestiture of DCI assets; $43 million of net after-tax charges resulting from the termination of certain long-term power purchase agreements; $13 million of after-tax losses associated with Dominion telecommunications business, which was sold during 2004; partially offset by A $28 million after-tax benefit associated with the disposition of CNG International (CNGI) investment in Australian pipeline assets that were sold during 2004. Additionally, the improved consolidated results reflect the impact of significant specific items recognized in 2003. These items were reported in the Corporate and Other segment and are discussed in further detail below. 2003 vs. 2002 Dominion earned $1.00 per diluted share on net income of $318 million, a decrease of $3.82 per diluted share and $1.0 billion. The per share decrease includes approximately $0.13 of share dilution, reflecting an increase in the average number of common shares outstanding during 2003. The combined net income contribution of Dominion primary operating segments increased $95 million in 2003. This increase largely reflects the benefits of higher natural gas prices during 2003 on sales of Dominion gas and oil production as well as margins associated with gas trading activities. This increased contribution by the operating segments was more than offset by significant specific charges recognized in 2003 and reported in the Corporate and Other segment, including: $750 million of after-tax losses associated with Dominion discontinued telecommunications business; $122 million of after-tax incremental expenses associated with Hurricane Isabel; $96 million of after-tax charges for DCI asset impairments; $69 million of after-tax charges for asset impairments related to certain investments held for sale; $104 million of after-tax charges associated with the termination of certain long-term power purchase agreements and the restructuring of power sales agreements; and $16 million of after-tax severance costs for workforce reductions. D 2004 / Page 24 Table of Contents Analysis of Consolidated Operations Presented below are selected amounts related to Dominion results of operations: Year Ended December 31, 2004 2003 2002 (millions) Operating Revenue Regulated electric sales $ 5,180 $ 4,876 $ 4,856 Regulated gas sales 1,422 1,258 876 Nonregulated electric sales 1,249 1,130 1,017 Nonregulated gas sales 2,082 1,718 778 Gas transportation and storage 802 740 705 Gas and oil production 1,636 1,503 1,334 Other 1,601 853 652 Operating Expenses Electric fuel and energy purchases, net 2,162 1,667 1,447 Purchased electric capacity 587 607 691 Purchased gas, net 2,927 2,175 1,159 Liquids, pipeline capacity and other purchases 1,007 468 159 Other operations and maintenance 2,748 2,908 2,190 Depreciation, depletion and amortization 1,305 1,216 1,258 Other taxes 519 476 429 Other income (loss) 186 (40 ) 103 Interest and related charges 939 975 945 Income tax expense 700 597 681 Loss from discontinued operations, net of taxes (15 ) (642 ) Cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles, net of taxes 11 An analysis of Dominion results of operations for 2004 compared to 2003 and 2003 compared to 2002 follows. 2004 vs. 2003 Operating Revenue Regulated electric sales revenue increased 6% to $5.2 billion, primarily reflecting: A $231 million increase due to the impact of a comparatively higher fuel rate on increased sales volumes. The rate increase resulted from the settlement of a fuel rate case in December 2003. This increase in regulated electric sales revenue was more than offset by an increase in Electric fuel and energy purchases, net expense ; A $24 million increase associated with favorable weather; A $49 million increase from customer growth associated with new customer connections; and An $18 million increase due to lost revenue in 2003 as a result of outages caused by Hurricane Isabel. Regulated gas sales revenue increased 13% to $1.4 billion, largely resulting from a $198 million increase due to higher rates for regulated gas distribution operations primarily related to the recovery of higher gas prices and a $20 million increase resulting from the return of customers from Energy Choice programs, partially offset by an $87 million decrease associated with milder weather and lower industrial sales. The effect of this net increase in regulated gas sales revenue was largely offset by a comparable increase in Purchased gas, net expense . Nonregulated electric sales revenue increased 11% to $1.2 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $181 million increase in revenue from nonregulated retail energy marketing operations reflecting increased volumes ($165 million) and higher prices ($16 million); A $97 million increase in revenue from merchant generation operations, largely due to the commencement of commercial operations at the 1,096 megawatt Fairless Energy power station (Fairless) in June 2004, partially offset by decreased revenue at certain other stations resulting from lower generation volumes; A $140 million decrease in revenue from energy trading and marketing activities reflecting decreased margins in electric trading due to unfavorable price movements; and A $19 million decrease due to the sale of CNGI generation assets in December 2003. Nonregulated gas sales revenue increased 21% to $2.1 billion, predominantly due to: A $279 million increase in revenue from producer services operations, reflecting higher prices ($157 million) and increased volumes ($122 million). This increase in nonregulated gas sales revenue was largely offset by a corresponding increase in Purchased gas, net expense; A $131 million increase in revenue from nonregulated retail energy marketing operations, reflecting increased volumes ($55 million) and higher prices ($76 million); A $61 million increase in revenue from sales of gas purchased by exploration and production operations to facilitate gas transportation and satisfy other agreements. This increase in nonregulated gas sales revenue was largely offset by a corresponding increase in Purchased gas, net expense; partially offset by A $108 million decrease in revenue from energy trading and marketing activities due to comparatively lower price volatility on natural gas option positions. D 2004 / Page 25 Table of Contents Gas transportation and storage revenue increased 8% to $802 million, primarily reflecting: A $29 million increase due to the August 2003 reactivation of the Cove Point LNG facility, which was acquired by Dominion in September 2002; and A $27 million increase in revenue from gas transmission operations primarily reflecting increased transportation, storage, gathering and extraction revenues. Gas and oil production revenue increased 9% to $1.6 billion as a result of: A $37 million increase in revenue from oil production, largely reflecting higher volumes; and A $180 million increase in revenue recognized related to deliveries under VPP transactions; partially offset by A $72 million decrease in revenue from gas production, primarily reflecting the sale of mineral rights under the VPP agreements. Other revenue increased 88% to $1.6 billion, largely due to: A $384 million increase in coal sales revenue resulting from higher coal prices and increased sales volumes; A $120 million increase in sales of emissions credits reflecting higher prices and increased sales volumes; and A $109 million increase in revenue from sales of purchased oil by exploration and production operations. These increases in other revenue were largely offset by corresponding increases in Liquids, pipeline capacity and other purchases expense . Other revenue for 2004 also includes $100 million from the recognition of business interruption insurance revenue associated with the recovery of delayed gas and oil production due to Hurricane Ivan. Operating Expenses and Other Items Electric fuel and energy purchases, net expense increased 30% to $2.2 billion, primarily reflecting: A $408 million increase related to regulated utility operations resulting from the combined effects of an increase in the fixed fuel rate and the elimination of fuel deferral accounting for the Virginia jurisdiction, which resulted in the recognition of fuel expenses in excess of amounts recovered in fixed fuel rates. The increase also reflects higher generation volumes in the current year; A $162 million increase related to nonregulated retail energy marketing operations reflecting increased volumes ($153 million) and higher prices ($9 million); An $88 million increase related to merchant generation operations, largely due to the commencement of commercial operations at Fairless, partially offset by decreased fuel expense at certain other stations resulting from lower generation volumes; partially offset by A $163 million decrease related to energy trading and marketing activities. Purchased gas, net expense increased 35% to $2.9 billion, principally resulting from: A $274 million increase associated with producer services operations, reflecting higher prices ($159 million) and increased volumes ($115 million), as discussed above in Nonregulated gas sales revenue ; A $130 million increase associated with regulated gas sales discussed above in Regulated gas sales revenue ; An $83 million increase associated with nonregulated retail energy marketing operations, reflecting increased volumes ($56 million) and higher prices ($27 million); A $66 million increase from gas transmission operations due to increased gathering and extraction activities and higher gas usage; and A $58 million increase related to purchases of gas by exploration and production operations to facilitate gas transportation and satisfy other agreements, as discussed above in Nonregulated gas sales revenue . Liquids, pipeline capacity and other purchases expense increased 115% to $1.0 billion, primarily reflecting a $348 million increase in the cost of coal purchased for resale, a $105 million increase in emission credits purchased and a $108 million increase related to purchases of oil by exploration and production operations, each of which are discussed in Other revenue . Other operations and maintenance expense decreased 6% to $2.7 billion, resulting from: A $113 million net benefit due to favorable changes in the fair value of certain oil options related to exploration and production operations. During 2004, Dominion effectively settled certain oil options not designated as hedges by entering into offsetting option positions that had the effect of preserving approximately $120 million in mark-to-market gains attributable to favorable changes in time value; and The impact of the following charges recognized in 2003: $197 million of incremental restoration expenses associated with Hurricane Isabel; $108 million of charges from asset and goodwill impairments associated with DCI financial services operations; $105 million of charges associated with the termination of certain long-term power purchase agreements; A $64 million charge for the restructuring of certain electric sales contracts recorded as derivative assets; A $60 million goodwill impairment associated with the purchase of the remaining interest in the telecommunications joint venture, Dominion Fiber Ventures, LLC (DFV), held by another party; A $28 million charge related to severance costs for workforce reductions; and A $22 million impairment related to CNGI generation assets that were sold in December 2003. These benefits were partially offset by the following charges and incremental expenses recognized in 2004: A $184 million charge related to the valuation of Dominion interest in a long-term power tolling contract; $96 million of losses related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain oil hedges resulting from an interruption of oil production in the Gulf of Mexico caused by Hurricane Ivan, and subsequent changes in the fair value of those hedges during the third quarter; $72 million of charges associated with the impairment of retained interests from mortgage securitizations and venture capital and other equity investments held by DCI; $71 million of net expenses associated with the termination of certain long-term power purchase agreements; D 2004 / Page 26 Table of Contents An approximate $60 million increase in costs related to gas and oil production activities; An $18 million increase in reliability expenses associated with utility operations primarily due to increased tree-trimming; A $13 million increase related to salaries, wages and benefits resulting from a $60 million increase in pension and medical benefits and a $46 million increase due to wage increases and other factors, partially offset by an $89 million decrease in incentive-based compensation expense due to failure to meet targeted earnings goals; and $10 million of expenses associated with the sale of natural gas and oil assets in British Columbia, Canada. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense (DD & A) increased 7% to $1.3 billion, largely due to incremental depreciation expense resulting from property additions, including those resulting from the consolidation of certain variable interest entities as a result of adopting FIN 46R at December 31, 2003. Other taxes increased 9% to $519 million, primarily due to higher gross receipts taxes and higher severance and property taxes associated with increased commodity prices. Other income increased to $186 million from a net loss of $40 million, primarily reflecting: A $61 million increase resulting from net realized gains (including investment income) associated with nuclear decommissioning trust fund investments as opposed to net realized losses (including investment income) during the prior year; A $23 million benefit associated with the disposition of CNGI investment in Australian pipeline assets that were sold during 2004; and The impact of the following charges recognized in 2003, which did not recur in 2004: $57 million of costs associated with the acquisition of DFV senior notes; $27 million for the reallocation of equity losses between Dominion and the minority interest owner of DFV; and A $62 million impairment of CNGI investment in Australian pipeline assets held for sale. Income taxes Dominion effective tax rate decreased 3.0% to 35.6% for 2004, reflecting an increase in the valuation allowance for 2003 with no comparable increase in 2004, partially offset by increases in 2004 in utility plant differences and other factors. Loss from discontinued operations decreased to $15 million from $642 million, primarily reflecting the sale of Dominion discontinued telecommunications operations during May 2004 and the impact of the following charges recognized in 2003: Impairment of network assets and related inventories of $566 million. Dominion did not recognize any deferred tax benefits related to the impairment charges, since realization of tax benefits is not anticipated at this time based on Dominion expected future tax profile. In addition, Dominion increased the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets recognized by its telecommunications investment, resulting in a $48 million increase in deferred income tax expense; and Telecommunications operating losses of $28 million. 2003 vs. 2002 Operating Revenue Regulated electric sales revenue increased less than 1% to $4.9 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $54 million increase from customer growth associated with new customer connections; A $42 million increase from higher fuel rate recoveries. Fuel rate recoveries were generally offset by a comparable increase in fuel expense and did not materially affect net income; and A $103 million decrease associated with milder weather. Regulated gas sales revenue increased 44% to $1.3 billion, primarily due to the combined impact of a $289 million increase due to higher rates for regulated gas distribution operations primarily related to the recovery of higher gas prices and a $79 million increase associated with comparably colder weather in the first and fourth quarters of 2003. The effect of this net increase in regulated gas sales revenue was largely offset by a comparable increase in Purchased gas, net expense . Nonregulated electric sales revenue increased 11% to $1.1 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $77 million increase in revenue from merchant generation operations, reflecting higher volumes ($59 million) and higher prices ($18 million). The increase in volumes can be attributed to fewer outage days at the Millstone Power Station in 2003 and a full year sales from generating units placed into service during 2002; A $76 million increase in revenue from nonregulated retail energy marketing operations, primarily as a result of customer growth, including the acquisition of new customers previously served by other energy companies during 2003; and A $43 million decrease in revenue from energy trading and marketing activities due to unfavorable changes in the fair value of derivative contracts held for trading purposes and the impact of adopting EITF 02-3, partially offset by increased margins. Nonregulated gas sales revenue increased 121% to $1.7 billion, primarily reflecting: An $82 million increase in revenue from retail energy marketing operations, reflecting higher prices ($78 million) and higher volumes ($4 million); A $659 million increase in revenue from producer services operations, reflecting higher prices ($467 million) and higher volumes ($192 million); and A $208 million increase in revenue from energy trading and marketing activities due to higher margins, favorable changes in the fair value of derivative contracts held for trading purposes and the impact of adopting EITF 02-3. Gas and oil production revenue increased 13% to $1.5 billion primarily due to higher average realized prices for gas and oil. It also includes $43 million of revenue recognized related to deliveries under a volumetric production payment transaction. Other revenue increased 31% to $853 million, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $49 million increase in coal sales revenue; D 2004 / Page 27 Table of Contents A $115 million increase, resulting from a change in the classification of coal purchases from other revenue to expense under EITF 02-3 beginning in 2003; $94 million of emissions credit sales that began in 2003; A $26 million increase in sales of extracted products; and An $81 million decrease in revenue associated with Dominion financial services operations, reflecting the winding-down under Dominion divestiture strategy. Operating Expenses and Other Items Electric fuel and energy purchases expense increased 15% to $1.7 billion, primarily reflecting: A $154 million increase associated with energy trading and marketing activities and nonregulated retail energy marketing operations, primarily resulting from higher volumes purchased and the reclassification of certain purchase contracts due to the implementation of EITF 02-3; and A $68 million increase related to regulated utility operations, including $42 million associated with rate recovery in 2003 revenue and the recognition of $14 million of previously deferred fuel costs not recovered under the 2003 settlement of the Virginia jurisdictional fuel rate case. Purchased electric capacity expense decreased 12% to $607 million, reflecting scheduled rate reductions on certain non-utility generation supply contracts ($54 million) and lower purchases of capacity for utility operations ($30 million), resulting from the termination of several long-term supply contracts. Purchased gas expense increased 88% to $2.2 billion, primarily reflecting: A $647 million increase associated with producer services operations, reflecting higher prices ($459 million) and higher volumes ($188 million); and A $363 million increase associated with regulated gas operations discussed above in Regulated gas sales revenue . Liquids, pipeline capacity and other purchases expense increased 194% to $468 million, reflecting primarily the reclassification of certain purchase contracts for transportation, storage, coal and emissions allowances due to the adoption of EITF 02-3. Other operations and maintenance expense rose 33% to $2.9 billion, primarily reflecting the following specific items: $197 million of incremental restoration expenses associated with Hurricane Isabel; $108 million of asset and goodwill impairments associated with DCI financial services operations; $105 million of expenses associated with the termination of certain long-term power purchase contracts used in electric utility operations; A $64 million charge for the restructuring of certain electric sales contracts recorded as derivative assets; A $60 million goodwill impairment associated with the purchase of the remaining interest in the telecommunications joint venture held by another party; $86 million of accretion expense for AROs; An $87 million increase in expense resulting from a decrease in net pension credits and an increase in other postretirement benefit costs; partially offset by A $15 million decrease in expenses associated with nuclear outages for refueling. Other taxes increased 11% to $476 million, primarily due to higher severance taxes and gross receipts taxes, as well as the effect of a favorable resolution of sales and use tax issues in 2002. Such benefits were not recognized in 2003. Other income decreased 138% to a net loss of $40 million, which included the following items: $57 million of costs associated with the acquisition of DFV senior notes; $27 million for the reallocation of equity losses between Dominion and the minority interest owner of DFV; $62 million for the impairment of certain equity-method investments; and A $32 million increase in net realized losses (including investment income) associated with nuclear decommissioning trust fund investments. Partially offsetting these reductions to other income was an increase of $28 million, reflecting equity losses on Dominion investment in DFV in 2002; DFV was consolidated beginning in the first quarter of 2003. In 2003, the operating losses of DFV subsidiary, Dominion Telecom, Inc., were classified in discontinued operations. Income taxes Dominion effective tax rate increased 5.3% to 38.6% for 2003. The increase primarily resulted from the expiration of nonconventional fuel credits beginning in 2003, an increase in the valuation allowance related to the impairment of goodwill associated with the telecommunications investment and federal loss carryforwards at CNGI and DCI that are not expected to be utilized, partially offset by a reduction in Canadian tax rates applied to deferred tax balances. Loss from discontinued operations reflects the results of operations of Dominion telecommunications business, which is classified as held for sale. The loss includes the following: Impairment of network assets and related inventories of $566 million. Dominion did not recognize any deferred tax benefits related to the impairment charges, since realization of tax benefits is not anticipated at this time based on Dominion expected future tax profile. In addition, Dominion increased the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets recognized by its telecommunications investment, resulting in a $48 million increase in deferred income tax expense; and Telecommunications operating losses of $28 million. Cumulative effect of changes in accounting principles During 2003 Dominion was required to adopt several new accounting standards, resulting in a net after-tax gain of $11 million which included the following: A $180 million after-tax gain (SFAS No. 143), partially offset by; A $67 million after-tax loss (EITF 02-3); A $75 million after-tax loss (Statement 133 Implementation Issue No. C20); and A $27 million after-tax loss (FIN 46R). D 2004 / Page 28 Table of Contents Outlook Dominion Dominion believes its operating businesses will provide growth in net income on a per share basis, including the impact of higher expected average shares outstanding, in 2005. Growth factors include: Continued growth in utility customers; Reduced electric capacity expenses, resulting from the termination of long-term power purchase agreements; Oil production growth, reflecting a full year of Devils Tower and Front Runner operations; A contribution from the operations of three USGen power stations acquired in January 2005; Higher contribution from Cove Point operations due to expansion of the facility; and A contribution from the Kewaunee nuclear power plant, expected to be acquired in the first half of 2005. The growth factors will be partially offset by: Higher expected Virginia jurisdictional fuel expenses; A lower contribution from Millstone resulting from an additional refueling outage; Higher expected operating expenses for gas and oil production; An increase in incentive-based compensation expense if earnings targets are met; and Increased interest expense. Based on these projections, Dominion estimates that cash flow from operations will increase in 2005, as compared to 2004. Management believes this increase will provide sufficient cash flow to maintain or grow Dominion current dividend to common shareholders. Segment Results of Operations Dominion Generation Dominion Generation includes the generation operations of Dominion electric utility and merchant fleet as well as coal and emissions trading and marketing activities. 2004 2003 2002 (millions, except EPS) Net income contribution $ 525 $ 512 $ 561 EPS contribution $ 1.59 $ 1.60 $ 1.98 Electricity supplied (million mwhrs) 112 105 101 mwhrs = megawatt hours Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Generation operating results: 2004 vs. 2003 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Fuel expenses in excess of rate recovery $ (115 ) $ (0.36 ) Regulated electric sales: Weather 10 0.03 Customer growth 20 0.06 Nuclear decommissioning trust performance 38 0.12 Coal trading and marketing 31 0.10 Capacity expenses 36 0.11 Other (7 ) (0.02 ) Share dilution (0.05 ) Change in net income contribution $ 13 $ (0.01 ) Dominion Generation net income contribution increased $13 million, primarily reflecting: Higher fuel expenses incurred by the regulated utility operations due to the elimination of fuel deferral accounting which resulted in the recognition of fuel expenses in excess of amounts recovered in fixed fuel rates. The increase in fuel expenses also reflects higher generation volumes; Higher regulated electric sales due to customer growth in the electric franchise service area, primarily reflecting an increase in new residential customers, comparably favorable weather, lost revenue in 2003 due to outages associated with Hurricane Isabel, and the impact of the economy and other factors; Net realized gains (including investment income) associated with nuclear decommissioning trust fund investments as opposed to net realized losses (including investment income) during the prior year; A higher contribution from coal trading and marketing primarily due to higher coal prices and increased sales volumes; and Reduced purchased power capacity expenses due to the termination of long-term power purchase agreements in connection with the purchase of the related nonutility generating facilities. 2003 vs. 2002 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Revenue reallocation $ (57 ) $ (0.20 ) Regulated electric sales: Weather (42 ) (0.15 ) Customer growth 23 0.08 Merchant generation margins 18 0.06 Capacity expenses 29 0.10 Fuel settlement (9 ) (0.03 ) Utility outages (13 ) (0.04 ) Other 2 0.01 Share dilution (0.21 ) Change in net income contribution $ (49 ) $ (0.38 ) Dominion Generation net income contribution decreased $49 million, primarily reflecting: A change in the allocation of electric utility base rate revenue beginning in 2003 among Dominion Generation, Dominion Energy and Dominion Delivery; A decrease in regulated electric sales due to comparably milder summer weather, resulting from a decrease in cooling degree days in 2003, partially offset by an increase in heating degree days in 2003; An increase in regulated electric sales due to customer growth in the electric franchise service area, primarily reflecting an increase in new residential customers; A higher contribution from merchant generation operations due to fewer outage days at the Millstone Power Station in 2003 and a full year contribution from gas-fired generating units placed into service during 2002; Scheduled decreases in capacity expenses under certain power purchase agreements; Recognition of previously deferred fuel costs in connection with the 2003 Virginia fuel rate settlement; and Increased utility outage expenses, reflecting the refueling activities at nuclear facilities in 2003. D 2004 / Page 29 Table of Contents Dominion Energy Dominion Energy includes Dominion electric transmission, natural gas transmission pipeline and storage businesses, an LNG facility, certain natural gas production, energy trading and marketing operations and producer services which includes aggregation of gas supply and related wholesale activities. 2004 2003 2002 (millions, except EPS) Net income contribution $ 190 $ 346 $ 268 EPS contribution $ 0.57 $ 1.09 $ 0.95 Gas transportation throughput (bcf) 704 614 597 bcf = billion cubic feet Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Energy operating results: 2004 vs. 2003 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Energy trading and marketing $ (116 ) $ (0.37 ) Economic hedges (12 ) (0.04 ) Electric transmission revenue (15 ) (0.05 ) Other (13 ) (0.04 ) Share dilution (0.02 ) Change in net income contribution $ (156 ) $ (0.52 ) Dominion Energy net income contribution decreased $156 million, primarily reflecting: A loss from energy trading and marketing activities, reflecting comparatively lower price volatility on natural gas option positions and the effect of unfavorable price changes on electric trading margins; A decrease attributable to unfavorable price movements in 2004 on the economic hedges of Dominion Exploration & Production gas production described in Selected Information Energy Trading Activities ; Lower electric transmission revenue primarily due to decreased wheeling revenue resulting from lower contractual volumes and unfavorable market conditions; and Other factors including losses from asset and price risk management activities related to intersegment marketing. 2003 vs. 2002 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Energy trading and marketing $ 12 $ 0.05 Economic hedges 33 0.12 Electric transmission margins 11 0.04 Cove Point operations 9 0.03 Revenue reallocation 7 0.02 Other 6 0.02 Share dilution (0.14 ) Change in net income contribution $ 78 $ 0.14 Dominion Energy net income increased $78 million, primarily reflecting: An increase in the contribution of energy trading and marketing activities, reflecting an increase in margins on settled contracts, partially offset by a decrease in net mark-to-market gains on derivative contracts; An increase attributable to a reduction in net losses on the economic hedges of Dominion Exploration & Production gas production described in Selected Information Energy Trading Activities ; An increase in electric transmission margins due to customer growth and other factors, partially offset by the impact of unfavorable weather; A contribution from the Cove Point LNG facility due to its reactivation in August 2003; and A change in the allocation of electric base rate revenue among Dominion Generation, Dominion Energy and Dominion Delivery effective January 1, 2003; Dominion Delivery Dominion Delivery includes Dominion regulated electric and gas distribution and customer service business, as well as nonregulated retail energy marketing operations. 2004 2003 2002 (millions, except EPS) Net income contribution $ 466 $ 453 $ 422 EPS contribution $ 1.41 $ 1.42 $ 1.49 Electricity delivered (million mwhrs) 78 75 75 Gas throughput (bcf) 371 373 364 Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Delivery operating results: 2004 vs. 2003 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Weather $ (5 ) $ (0.02 ) Customer growth utility operations 9 0.03 Nonregulated retail energy marketing operations 32 0.10 Reliability expenses (11 ) (0.03 ) Other (12 ) (0.04 ) Share dilution (0.05 ) Change in net income contribution $ 13 $ (0.01 ) Dominion Delivery net income contribution increased $13 million, primarily reflecting: A decrease in regulated gas sales due to comparably milder winter weather in regulated gas service territories; partially offset by an increase in regulated electric sales resulting from comparably favorable weather in regulated electric service territories; Customer growth in the electric and gas franchise service areas, primarily reflecting new residential electric customers; A higher contribution from nonregulated retail energy marketing operations, primarily reflecting an increase in average customer accounts and higher electric and gas margins; D 2004 / Page 30 Table of Contents Higher reliability expenses, primarily due to increased tree trimming; and Other factors, including a decrease in net pension credits. 2003 vs. 2002 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Revenue reallocation $ 50 $ 0.18 Customer growth utility operations 10 0.03 Weather (5 ) (0.02 ) Income taxes (9 ) (0.03 ) Other (15 ) (0.05 ) Share dilution (0.18 ) Change in net income contribution $ 31 $ (0.07 ) Dominion Delivery net income contribution increased $31 million, primarily reflecting: A change in the allocation of electric base rate revenue among Dominion Generation, Dominion Energy and Dominion Delivery effective January 1, 2003; Customer growth in the electric and gas franchise service areas, primarily reflecting new residential electric customers; A decrease in regulated electric sales due to comparably milder weather in electric utility service territories, offset by an increase in regulated gas sales due to comparably colder weather in gas utility service territories; A decrease in net pension credits and an increase in other postretirement benefit costs; and The deferral of 2003 bad debt expenses as a regulatory asset, pending future recovery under a bad debt rider approved by the Public Utility Commission of Ohio, effective January 1, 2003. Dominion Exploration & Production Dominion Exploration & Production manages Dominion gas and oil exploration, development and production business. 2004 2003 2002 (millions, except EPS) Net income contribution $ 595 $ 415 $ 380 EPS contribution $ 1.80 $ 1.30 $ 1.34 Gas production (bcf) 359 384 385 Oil production (million bbls) 10 9 10 Average realized prices with hedging results: (1) Gas (per mcf) (2) $ 4.09 $ 3.95 $ 3.40 Oil (per bbl) 24.98 24.29 23.28 Average prices without hedging results: Gas (per mcf) (2) 5.65 4.99 3.03 Oil (per bbl) 39.07 29.82 24.44 DD&A (per mcfe) $ 1.30 $ 1.20 $ 1.12 Average production (lifting) cost (per mcfe) (3) 0.92 0.80 0.60 bbl = barrel mcf = thousand cubic feet mcfe = thousand cubic feet equivalent (1) Excludes the effects of the economic hedges discussed under Selected Information Energy Trading Activities . (2) Excludes $223 million and $43 million of revenue recognized in 2004 and 2003, respectively, under the VPP agreements described in Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. (3) The exclusion of volumes produced and delivered under the VPP agreements accounted for approximately 75% of the increase from 2003 to 2004 and 8% of the increase from 2002 to 2003. Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Exploration & Production operating results: 2004 vs. 2003 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) VPP revenue $ 114 $ 0.36 Business interruption insurance 61 0.19 Gas and oil production (55 ) (0.17 ) Gas and oil prices 49 0.15 Operations and maintenance 26 0.08 DD&A production 13 0.04 DD&A rate (30 ) (0.09 ) Other 2 0.01 Share dilution (0.07 ) Change in net income contribution $ 180 $ 0.50 Dominion Exploration & Production net income contribution increased $180 million, primarily reflecting: Recognition of revenue in connection with deliveries under the VPP agreements; The recognition of business interruption insurance revenue associated with the recovery of delayed gas and oil production due to Hurricane Ivan; Lower gas production reflecting the sale of mineral rights under the VPP agreements; Higher oil production reflecting production related to the deepwater Gulf of Mexico Devils Tower project; Higher average realized prices for gas and oil; Lower operations and maintenance expenses, primarily due to favorable changes in the fair value of certain oil options, partially offset by an increase in production costs; and A higher rate for depreciation, depletion and amortization, primarily reflecting higher industry finding and development costs, increased acquisition costs and the effect of the reduction in reserves attributable to the VPP transactions. 2003 vs. 2002 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Gas and oil prices $ 133 $ 0.47 Gas and oil production (18 ) (0.06 ) VPP revenue 27 0.10 DD&A rate (22 ) (0.08 ) DD&A production 3 0.01 Operations and maintenance (41 ) (0.15 ) Severance taxes (18 ) (0.06 ) Income taxes (20 ) (0.07 ) Other (9 ) (0.03 ) Share dilution (0.17 ) Change in net income contribution $ 35 $ (0.04 ) Dominion Exploration & Production net income contribution increased $35 million, primarily reflecting: Higher average realized prices for gas and oil; Lower oil production, reflecting declines in Gulf of Mexico shelf and deepwater production. Lower gas production, reflecting the D 2004 / Page 31 Table of Contents sale of mineral rights under a VPP agreement and declines in Rocky Mountain and Michigan production, was largely offset by increased Gulf of Mexico gas production; A higher rate for depreciation, depletion and amortization in 2003, primarily reflecting increased acquisition, finding and development costs; Higher operations and maintenance expenses which increased in connection with overall higher commodity prices in 2003, that caused an increase in the demand for equipment, labor and services; Higher severance taxes, resulting from higher gas and oil revenue associated with higher commodity prices; and Higher income taxes, primarily reflecting the expiration of Section 29 production tax credits beginning in 2003, partially offset by a reduction in tax rates applied to deferred taxes associated with Canadian operations. Corporate and Other Presented below are the Corporate and Other segment after-tax results: 2004 2003 2002 (millions, except EPS amounts) Specific items attributable to operating segments $ (224 ) $ (220 ) $ 7 DCI operations (82 ) (96 ) 14 Telecommunications operations (1) (13 ) (750 ) (26 ) Other corporate operations (208 ) (342 ) (264 ) Total net expense (527 ) (1,408 ) (269 ) Earnings per share impact $ (1.59 ) $ (4.41 ) $ (0.94 ) (1) $15 million and $642 million are classified as discontinued operations in 2004 and 2003, respectively. Specific Items Attributable to Operating Segments 2004 During 2004, Dominion reported net expenses of $224 million in the Corporate and Other segment attributable to its operating segments. The net expenses in 2004 primarily related to the impact of the following: A $184 million charge ($112 million after-tax) related to the valuation of Dominion interest in a long-term power tolling contract, attributable to Dominion Generation; $96 million of losses ($61 million after-tax) related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain oil hedges, resulting from an interruption of oil production in the Gulf of Mexico caused by Hurricane Ivan, and subsequent changes in the fair value of those hedges during the third quarter, attributable to Dominion Exploration & Production; and $71 million of charges ($43 million after-tax) resulting from the termination of certain long-term power purchase contracts, attributable to Dominion Generation. Specific Items Attributable to Operating Segments 2003 During 2003, Dominion reported net expenses of $220 million in the Corporate and Other segment attributable to its operating segments. The net expenses in 2003 primarily related to the impact of the following: $21 million net after-tax gain representing the cumulative effect of adopting new accounting principles, as described in Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, including: SFAS No. 143: a $180 million after-tax gain attributable to: Dominion Generation ($188 million after-tax gain); Dominion Exploration & Production ($7 million after-tax loss); and Dominion Delivery ($1 million after-tax loss); EITF 02-3: a $67 million after-tax loss attributable to Dominion Energy; Statement 133 Implementation Issue No. C20: a $75 million after-tax loss attributable to Dominion Generation; and FIN 46R: a $17 million after-tax loss attributable to Dominion Generation; $197 million of operations and maintenance expense ($122 million after-tax), representing incremental restoration expenses associated with Hurricane Isabel, attributable primarily to Dominion Delivery; A $105 million charge ($65 million after-tax) for the termination of power purchase contracts attributable to Dominion Generation; A $64 million charge ($39 million after-tax) for the restructuring and termination of certain electric sales contracts attributable to Dominion Generation; and $26 million of severance costs ($15 million after-tax) for workforce reductions during the first quarter of 2003, attributable to: Dominion Generation ($8 million after-tax); Dominion Energy ($2 million after-tax); Dominion Delivery ($4 million after-tax); and Dominion Exploration & Production ($1 million after-tax). DCI Operations DCI recognized a net loss of $82 million in 2004; a decrease of $14 million as compared to 2003. The decrease primarily resulted from a $20 million reduction in after-tax charges associated with asset impairments. DCI recognized a net loss of $96 million in 2003, compared to net income of $14 million in 2002. The loss resulted primarily from the recognition of the following charges recognized in 2003: $108 million ($70 million after-tax) of impairments related to retained interests from securitizations, goodwill and other investments, and the sale of financial assets; and a $26 million valuation allowance established on certain deferred tax assets. Telecommunications Operations Dominion loss from its discontinued telecommunications business decreased $737 million to $13 million in 2004, primarily as a result of its sale in May 2004 and the impact of certain charges recognized during 2003 which are discussed below. Dominion loss from its telecommunications business increased $724 million to $750 million in 2003, primarily reflecting: $566 million associated with the impairment of network assets and related inventories. Dominion did not recognize any deferred tax benefits related to the impairment charges, since realization of tax benefits is not anticipated at this time based on Dominion expected future tax profile; A $48 million increase in deferred tax expense as a result of the increase in the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets; D 2004 / Page 32 Table of Contents Dominion purchase of the remaining equity interest in DFV held by another party for $62 million in December 2003, $60 million of which was recorded as goodwill and impaired; $57 million ($35 million after-tax) for the costs associated with Dominion acquisition of DFV senior notes; and $41 million of after-tax operating losses. Other Corporate Operations The net expenses associated with other corporate operations for 2004 decreased by $134 million as compared to 2003, predominantly due to a $28 million after-tax benefit associated with the disposition of CNGI investment in Australian pipeline assets that were sold during 2004, lower interest expense and the impact in 2003 of the charges discussed below. The net expenses associated with other corporate operations for 2003 increased by $78 million as compared to 2002, primarily reflecting: A $22 million ($14 million after-tax) impairment related to CNGI generation assets that were sold in December 2003; A $62 million ($55 million after-tax) impairment of CNGI investment in Australian pipeline assets held for sale; and A $16 million ($10 million after-tax) loss representing the cumulative effect of adopting FIN 46R. Selected Information Energy Trading Activities As previously described, Dominion manages its energy trading, hedging and marketing activities through the Clearinghouse. Dominion believes these operations complement its integrated energy businesses and facilitate its risk management activities. As part of these operations, the Clearinghouse enters into contracts for purchases and sales of energy-related commodities, including coal, natural gas, electricity, oil and emissions credits. Settlements of contracts may require physical delivery of the underlying commodity or cash settlement. The Clearinghouse enters into contracts with the objective of benefiting from changes in prices. For example, after entering into a contract to purchase a commodity, the Clearinghouse typically enters into a sales contract, or a combination of sales contracts, with quantities and delivery or settlement terms that are identical or very similar to those of the purchase contract. When the purchase and sales contracts are settled either by physical delivery of the underlying commodity or by net cash settlement, the Clearinghouse may receive a net cash margin (a realized gain), or may pay a net cash margin (a realized loss). Clearinghouse management continually monitors its contract positions, considering location and timing of delivery or settlement for each energy commodity in relation to market price activity. In addition, the Clearinghouse held a portfolio of financial derivative instruments to manage Dominion price risk associated with a portion of its anticipated sales of 2004 natural gas production that had not been considered in the hedging activities of the Dominion Exploration & Production segment (economic hedges). In 2004, Dominion Energy recognized a net loss of $22 million on the economic hedges. As anticipated, Dominion Exploration & Production sold sufficient volumes of natural gas in 2004 at market prices, which, when combined with the settlement of the economic hedges, resulted in a range of prices for those sales contemplated by the risk management strategy. During the fourth quarter of 2004, Dominion performed an evaluation of its Clearinghouse trading and marketing operations, which resulted in a decision to exit certain energy trading activities and instead focus on the optimization of company assets. Beginning in 2005, all revenues and expenses from the Clearinghouse optimization of company assets will be reported as part of the results of the business segments operating the related assets. A summary of the changes in the unrealized gains and losses recognized for Dominion energy-related derivative instruments held for trading purposes, including the economic hedges, during 2004 follows: Amount (millions) Net unrealized gain at December 31, 2003 $ 33 Contracts realized or otherwise settled during the period 15 Net unrealized gain at inception of contracts initiated during the period Changes in valuation techniques Other changes in fair value 98 Net unrealized gain at December 31, 2004 $ 146 The balance of net unrealized gains and losses recognized for Dominion energy-related derivative instruments held for trading purposes, including the economic hedges at December 31, 2004, is summarized in the following table based on the approach used to determine fair value and contract settlement or delivery dates: Maturity Based on Contract Settlement or Delivery Date(s) Source of Fair Value Less than 1 year 1-2 years 2-3 years 3-5 years In Excess of 5 years Total (millions) Actively quoted (1) $ 105 $ 15 $ 5 $ 125 Other external sources (2) 14 5 $ 2 21 Models and other valuation methods Total $ 105 $ 29 $ 10 $ 2 $ 146 (1) Exchange-traded and over-the-counter contracts. (2) Values based on prices from over-the-counter broker activity and industry services and, where applicable, conventional option pricing models. Sources and Uses of Cash Dominion and its subsidiaries depend on both internal and external sources of liquidity to provide working capital and to fund capital requirements. Short-term cash requirements not met by cash provided by operations are generally satisfied with proceeds from short-term borrowings. Long-term cash needs are met through sales of securities and additional long-term financing. At December 31, 2004, Dominion had cash and cash equivalents of $389 million with $2.4 billion of unused capacity under its credit facilities. For long-term financing needs, amounts available for debt or equity offerings under currently effective shelf registrations totaled $2.5 billion at February 1, 2005. D 2004 / Page 33 Table of Contents Operating Cash Flows As presented on Dominion Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, net cash flows from operating activities were $2.8 billion, $2.4 billion and $2.4 billion for the years ended December 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Dominion management believes that its operations provide a stable source of cash flow sufficient to contribute to planned levels of capital expenditures and maintain or grow the dividend on common shares. Dominion operations are subject to risks and uncertainties that may negatively impact the timing or amounts of operating cash flow, including: Cost-recovery shortfalls due to capped base and fuel rates in effect in Virginia for its regulated electric utility; The collection of business interruption insurance proceeds associated with the recovery of delayed gas and oil production due to Hurricane Ivan; Unusual weather and its effect on energy sales to customers and energy commodity prices; Extreme weather events that could disrupt gas and oil production or cause catastrophic damage to Dominion electric distribution and transmission systems; Exposure to unanticipated changes in prices for energy commodities purchased or sold, including the effect on derivative instruments that may require the use of funds to post margin deposits with counterparties; Effectiveness of Dominion risk management activities and underlying assessment of market conditions and related factors, including energy commodity prices, basis, liquidity, volatility, counterparty credit risk, availability of generation and transmission capacity, currency exchange rates and interest rates; The cost of replacement electric energy in the event of longer-than-expected or unscheduled generation outages; Contractual or regulatory restrictions on transfers of funds among Dominion and its subsidiaries; and Timeliness of recovery for costs subject to cost-of-service utility rate regulation. Credit Risk Dominion exposure to potential concentrations of credit risk results primarily from its energy trading, marketing and hedging activities and sales of gas and oil production. Presented below is a summary of Dominion gross and net credit exposure as of December 31, 2004 for these activities. Dominion calculates its gross credit exposure for each counterparty as the unrealized fair value of derivative contracts plus any outstanding receivables (net of payables, where netting agreements exist), prior to the application of collateral. Gross Credit Exposure Credit Collateral Net Credit Exposure (millions) Investment grade (1) $ 784 $ 23 $ 761 Non-investment grade (2) 36 36 No external ratings: Internally rated investment grade (3) 299 299 Internally rated non-investment grade (4) 150 150 Total $ 1,269 $ 23 $ 1,246 (1) Designations as investment grade are based upon minimum credit ratings assigned by Moody Investors Service (Moody s) and Standard & Poor Rating Group, a division of the McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (Standard & Poor s) . The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 16% of the total gross credit exposure. (2) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 2% of the total gross credit exposure. (3) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 14% of the total gross credit exposure. (4) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 3% of the total gross credit exposure. Investing Cash Flows During 2004, 2003 and 2002, investing activities resulted in net cash outflows of $1.3 billion, $3.4 billion, and $4.0 billion respectively. Significant investing activities for 2004 included: $1.5 billion of capital expenditures for the construction and expansion of generation facilities, environmental upgrades, purchase of nuclear fuel, and construction and improvements of gas and electric transmission and distribution assets; $1.3 billion of capital expenditures for the purchase and development of gas and oil producing properties, drilling and equipment costs and undeveloped lease acquisitions; $729 million of proceeds from sales of gas and oil mineral rights and properties; $490 million for the purchase of securities and $466 million for the sale of securities, primarily related to investments held in nuclear decommissioning trusts; and $132 million in advances and $806 million in reimbursements related to the Fairless generation project in Pennsylvania. Financing Cash Flows and Liquidity Dominion, Virginia Electric and Power Company (Virginia Power) and Consolidated Natural Gas Company (CNG) (collectively the Dominion Companies) rely on bank and capital markets as a significant source of funding for capital requirements not satisfied by cash provided by the companies operations. As discussed further in the Credit Ratings section below, the Dominion Companies ability to borrow funds or issue securities and the return demanded by investors are affected by the issuing company credit ratings. In addition, the raising of external capital is subject to certain regulatory approvals, including authorization by the SEC and, in the case of Virginia Power, the Virginia State Corporation Commission (Virginia Commission). During 2004, net cash used in financing activities was $1.3 billion. During 2003 and 2002, net cash flows from financing activities were $853 million and $1.3 billion, respectively. During 2004, the Dominion Companies issued long-term debt (net of exchanged debt) and common stock totaling approximately $1.7 billion. The proceeds were used primarily to repay debt. Credit Facilities and Short-Term Debt The Dominion Companies use short-term debt, primarily commercial paper, to fund working capital requirements, as a bridge to long-term debt financing and as bridge financing for acquisitions, if applicable. The levels of borrowing may vary significantly during the course of the year, depending upon the timing and amount of cash requirements not satisfied by cash from operations. At December 31, 2004, the Dominion Companies had committed lines of credit totaling $3.75 billion. Although there were no loans outstanding, these lines of credit support commercial paper borrowings and letter of credit issuances. At December 31, D 2004 / Page 34 Table of Contents 2004, the Dominion Companies had the following commercial paper and letters of credit outstanding and capacity available under credit facilities: Facility Limit Outstanding Commercial Paper Outstanding Letters of Credit Facility Capacity Available (millions) Three-year revolving credit facility (1) $ 1,500 Three-year revolving credit facility (2) 750 Total joint credit facilities 2,250 $ 573 $ 183 $ 1,494 Three-year CNG credit facility (3) 1,500 555 945 Totals $ 3,750 $ 573 $ 738 $ 2,439 (1) The $1.5 billion three-year revolving credit facility was entered into in May 2004 and terminates in May 2007. This credit facility can also be used to support up to $500 million of letters of credit. (2) The $750 million three-year revolving credit facility was entered into in May 2002 and can also be used to support up to $200 million of letters of credit. Dominion expects to renew this facility prior to its maturity in May 2005. (3) The $1.5 billion three-year credit facility is used to support the issuance of letters of credit and commercial paper by CNG to fund collateral requirements under its gas and oil hedging program. The facility was entered into in August 2004 and terminates in August 2007. In addition to the facilities above, in June and August of 2004, CNG entered into two $100 million letter of credit agreements that terminate in June 2007 and August 2009, respectively. Additionally, in October 2004, CNG entered into three letter of credit agreements totaling $700 million that terminate in April 2005 and are not expected to be renewed. These five agreements support letter of credit issuances, providing collateral required on derivative financial contracts used by CNG in its risk management strategies for gas and oil production. At December 31, 2004, outstanding letters of credit under these agreements totaled $900 million. Dominion financial policy precludes issuing commercial paper in excess of its supporting lines of credit. At December 31, 2004, the total amount of commercial paper outstanding was $573 million and the total amount of letter of credit issuances was $738 million, leaving approximately $2.4 billion available for issuance. The Dominion Companies are required to pay minimal annual commitment fees to maintain the credit facilities. In addition, these credit agreements contain various terms and conditions that could affect the Dominion Companies ability to borrow under these facilities. They include maximum debt to total capital ratios, material adverse change clauses and cross-default provisions. All of the credit facilities include a defined maximum total debt to total capital ratio. As of December 31, 2004, the calculated ratio for the Dominion Companies, pursuant to the terms of the agreements, was as follows: Company Maximum Ratio Actual Ratio (1) Dominion Resources, Inc. 65% 55% Virginia Power 60% 50% CNG 60% 51% (1) Indebtedness as defined by the bank agreements excludes certain junior subordinated notes payable to affiliated trusts and mandatorily convertible securities that are reflected on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. These provisions apply separately to Dominion Resources, Inc., Virginia Power and CNG. If any one of the Dominion Companies or any of that specific company material subsidiaries fail to make payment on various debt obligations in excess of $25 million, the lenders could require that respective company to accelerate its repayment of any outstanding borrowings under the credit facility and the lenders could terminate their commitment to lend funds to that company. Accordingly, any defaults on indebtedness by CNG or any of its material subsidiaries would not affect the lenders commitment to Virginia Power. Similarly, any defaults on indebtedness by Virginia Power or any of its material subsidiaries would not affect the lenders commitment to CNG. However, any default by either CNG or Virginia Power would also affect in like manner the lenders commitment to Dominion Resources, Inc. under the joint credit agreements. Although the joint credit agreements contain material adverse change clauses, the participating lenders, under those specific provisions, cannot refuse to advance funds to any of the Dominion Companies for the repurchase of its outstanding commercial paper. Long-Term Debt During 2004, Dominion Resources, Inc. and its subsidiaries issued the following long-term debt: Type Principal Rate Maturity Issuing Company (millions) Senior notes $ 200 5.20% 2016 Dominion Resources, Inc. Senior notes 100 Variable 2006 Dominion Resources, Inc. Senior notes 400 5.00% 2014 CNG Senior notes 177 4.92% 2009 Dominion Canada Finance Corporation Total long-term debt issued $ 877 During 2004, Dominion Resources, Inc. and its subsidiaries repaid $1.3 billion of long-term debt securities. In 2004, Dominion exchanged $219 million of outstanding contingent convertible senior notes for new notes with a conversion feature that requires that the principal amount of each note be repaid in cash upon conversion. In 2004, in connection with the acquisition of certain generating facilities, Virginia Power assumed $109 million of private placement bonds and $104 million of pollution control bonds. Virginia Power exchanged $106 million of its 2004 Series A 7.25% senior notes due 2017 for $106 million of the private placement bonds. The senior notes have the same financial terms as the private placement bonds, but are registered securities. Common Stock During 2004, Dominion issued 14 million shares of common stock and received proceeds of $839 million. Of this amount, 7 million shares and proceeds of $413 million resulted from the settlement of stock purchase contracts associated with Dominion 2000 issuance of equity-linked debt securities. The remainder of the shares issued and proceeds received were through Dominion Direct (a dividend reinvestment and open enrollment direct stock purchase plan), employee savings plans and the exercise of employee stock options. In 2005, Dominion Direct and the Dominion employee savings plans will purchase Dominion common stock on the open market with the proceeds received through these programs, rather than having additional new common shares issued. D 2004 / Page 35 Table of Contents In July 1998, Dominion was authorized by its Board of Directors to repurchase up to the lesser of 16.5 million shares, or $650 million of its outstanding common stock. As of December 31, 2004, Dominion had repurchased approximately 12 million shares for $537 million, with its last repurchase occurring in 2002. In February 2005, in order to recognize the significant increase in the size of the company and the market value of its common stock since the time of the previous authorization, Dominion Board of Directors superseded this authority, with new authority, to repurchase up to the lesser of 25 million shares or $2.0 billion of Dominion outstanding common stock. Forward Equity Transaction In September 2004, Dominion entered into a forward equity sale agreement (forward agreement) with Merrill Lynch International (MLI), as forward purchaser, relating to 10 million shares of Dominion common stock. The forward agreement provides for the sale of two tranches of Dominion common stock, each with stated maturity dates and settlement prices. In connection with the forward agreement, MLI borrowed an equal number of shares of Dominion common stock from stock lenders and, at Dominion request, sold the borrowed shares to J.P. Morgan Securities Inc. (JPM) under a purchase agreement among Dominion, MLI and JPM. JPM subsequently offered the borrowed shares to the public. Dominion accounted for the forward agreement as equity at its initial fair value but did not receive any proceeds from the sale of the borrowed shares. The use of a forward agreement allows Dominion to avoid equity market uncertainty by pricing a stock offering under then existing market conditions, while mitigating share dilution by postponing the issuance of stock until funds are needed. Except in specified circumstances or events that would require physical share settlement, Dominion may elect to settle the forward agreement by means of a physical share, cash or net share settlement and may also elect to settle the agreement in whole, or in part, earlier than the stated maturity date at fixed settlement prices. Under either a physical share or net share settlement, the maximum number of shares deliverable by Dominion under the terms of the forward agreement was limited to the 10 million shares specified in the two tranches. Assuming gross share settlement of all shares under the forward agreement, Dominion would have received aggregate proceeds of approximately $644 million, based on maturity forward prices of $64.62 per share for the 2 million shares included in the first tranche and $64.34 per share for the 8 million shares included in the second tranche. However, Dominion elected to cash settle the first tranche in December 2004 and made a payment to MLI for $5.8 million, representing the difference between Dominion share price and the applicable forward sale price, multiplied by the 2 million shares. Dominion recorded the settlement payment as a reduction to common stock in its Consolidated Balance Sheet. Additionally, Dominion elected to cash settle 3 million shares of the second tranche in February 2005 and made a payment to MLI for $17.4 million. The remaining 5 million shares of the second tranche must be settled by May 17, 2005. If gross share settlement were elected for the remainder of the second tranche at its maturity date, Dominion would receive aggregate proceeds of approximately $322 million and would deliver 5 million of its common shares. In the event any or all of the proceeds are not needed, Dominion has the option to either cash settle or net share settle the remainder of the second tranche of the forward agreement in whole, or in part, and may elect settlement earlier than the stated maturity date. If Dominion elects to cash or net share settle any portion of the remainder of the second tranche, the payment is based on the difference between Dominion share price and the applicable forward sale price for the second tranche, multiplied by the number of shares being settled. If, at December 31, 2004, Dominion had elected a cash settlement of the 8 million shares in the second tranche, Dominion would have owed MLI $28 million, of which, $18 million would have represented settlement of the 5 million shares remaining in the second tranche after the February 2005 settlement. If, at the time of cash settlement, Dominion current share price were lower than the forward sale price, Dominion would receive a payment from MLI. For every dollar increase (decrease) in the value of Dominion stock, the value of the settlement of the shares remaining in the second tranche from MLI perspective would increase (decrease) by $5 million. Dominion expects to use proceeds received from physical share settlements under the remainder of the second tranche of the forward agreement to fund part of the cost of acquiring the Kewaunee nuclear power plant in Wisconsin for $220 million (which is expected to close in the first half of 2005) and the acquisition of three electric generating stations from USGen for $642 million (which closed on January 1, 2005). Amounts Available under Shelf Registrations At February 1, 2005, Dominion Resources, Inc., Virginia Power, and CNG had approximately $941 million, $670 million, and $900 million, respectively, of available capacity under currently effective shelf registrations. Securities that may be issued under these shelf registrations, depending upon the registrant, include senior notes (including medium-term notes), subordinated notes, first and refunding mortgage bonds, trust preferred securities, preferred stock and common stock. In addition, Dominion Resources, Inc., under a separate shelf registration has 6.9 million shares of common stock available exclusively for delivery against stock purchase contracts associated with outstanding equity-linked debt securites. In December 2004, the SEC granted Dominion request for financing authorization under the 1935 Act through December 31, 2007. This authority replaced the previous financing authority granted by the SEC, which expired December 31, 2004. Credit Ratings Credit ratings are intended to provide banks and capital market participants with a framework for comparing the credit quality of securities and are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. Management believes that the current credit ratings of the Dominion Companies provide sufficient access to the capital markets. However, disruptions in the banking and capital markets not specifically related to Dominion may affect the Dominion Companies ability to access these funding sources or cause an increase in the return required by investors. Both quantitative (financial strength) and qualitative (business or operating characteristics) factors are considered by the credit rating agencies in establishing an individual company credit rating. Credit ratings should be evaluated independently and are D 2004 / Page 36 Table of Contents subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. The credit ratings for the Dominion Companies are most affected by each company financial profile, mix of regulated and nonregulated businesses and respective cash flows, changes in methodologies used by the rating agencies and event risk, if applicable, such as major acquisitions. Credit ratings for the Dominion Companies as of February 1, 2005 follow: Standard & Poor Moody Dominion Resources, Inc. Senior unsecured debt securities BBB+ Baa1 Preferred securities of affiliated trusts BBB- Baa2 Commercial paper A-2 P-2 Virginia Power Mortgage bonds A- A2 Senior unsecured (including tax-exempt) debt securities BBB+ A3 Preferred securities of affiliated trust BBB- Baa1 Preferred stock BBB- Baa2 Commercial paper A-2 P-1 CNG Senior unsecured debt securities BBB+ A3 Preferred securities of affiliated trust BBB- Baa1 Commercial paper A-2 P-2 As of February 1, 2005, Moody maintains a negative outlook for its ratings of CNG and Standard & Poor maintains a negative outlook for its ratings of Dominion Resources, Inc., Virginia Power and CNG. Generally, a downgrade in an individual company credit rating would not restrict its ability to raise short-term and long-term financing so long as its credit rating remains investment grade, but it would increase the cost of borrowing. Dominion works closely with both Standard & Poor and Moody with the objective of maintaining its current credit ratings. As discussed in Risk Factors and Cautionary Statements That May Affect Future Results, in order to maintain its current ratings, Dominion may find it necessary to modify its business plans and such changes may adversely affect its growth and earnings per share. Debt Covenants As part of borrowing funds and issuing debt (both short-term and long-term) or preferred securities, the Dominion Companies must enter into enabling agreements. These agreements contain covenants that, in the event of default, could result in the acceleration of principal and interest payments; restrictions on distributions related to its capital stock, including dividends, redemptions, repurchases, liquidation payments or guarantee payments; and in some cases, the termination of credit commitments unless a waiver of such requirements is agreed to by the lenders/security holders. These provisions are customary, with each agreement specifying which covenants apply. These provisions are not necessarily unique to the Dominion Companies. Some of the typical covenants include: The timely payment of principal and interest; Information requirements, including submitting financial reports filed with the SEC to lenders; Performance obligations, audits/inspections, continuation of the basic nature of business, restrictions on certain matters related to merger or consolidation, restrictions on disposition of substantial assets; Compliance with collateral minimums or requirements related to mortgage bonds; and Limitations on liens. Dominion monitors the covenants on a regular basis in order to ensure that events of default will not occur. As of December 31, 2004, there were no events of default under the Dominion Companies covenants. D 2004 / Page 37 Table of Contents Future Cash Payments for Contractual Obligations and Planned Capital Expenditures Dominion is party to numerous contracts and arrangements obligating Dominion to make cash payments in future years. These contracts include financing arrangements such as debt agreements and leases, as well as contracts for the purchase of goods and services and financial derivatives. Presented below is a table summarizing cash payments that may result from contracts to which Dominion is a party as of December 31, 2004. For purchase obligations and other liabilities, amounts are based upon contract terms, including fixed and minimum quantities to be purchased at fixed or market-based prices. Actual cash payments will be based upon actual quantities purchased and prices paid and will likely differ from amounts presented below. The table excludes all amounts classified as current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, other than current maturities of long-term debt and interest payable. The majority of current liabilities will be paid in cash in 2005. Less than 1 Year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Total (millions) Long-term debt (1) $ 1,368 $ 3,948 $ 1,807 $ 9,810 $ 16,933 Interest payments (2) 974 1,682 1,346 7,339 11,341 Leases 133 225 184 365 907 Purchase obligations (3) : Purchased electric capacity for utility operations 509 968 858 3,103 5,438 Fuel used for utility operations 691 673 245 51 1,660 Fuel used for nonregulated operations 48 76 70 194 Production handling 56 105 61 27 249 Pipeline transportation and storage 82 118 85 95 380 Energy commodity purchases for resale (4) 527 131 3 661 Other 352 254 35 5 646 Other long-term liabilities (5) : Financial derivatives- commodities (4) 1,084 858 1 1,943 Other contractual obligations 25 32 14 32 103 Total cash payments $ 5,849 $ 9,070 $ 4,709 $ 20,827 $ 40,455 (1) Based on stated maturity dates rather than the earlier redemption dates that could be elected by instrument holders. (2) Does not reflect Dominion's ability to defer distributions related to its junior subordinated notes payable to affiliated trusts. (3) Amounts exclude open purchase orders for services that are provided on demand, the timing of which cannot be determined. (4) Represents the summation of settlement amounts, by contracts, due from Dominion if all physical or financial transactions among Dominion and its counterparties were liquidated and terminated. (5) Excludes regulatory liabilities, AROs and employee benefit plan obligations that are not contractually fixed as to timing and amount. See Notes 14, 15 and 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Deferred income taxes are also excluded since cash payments are based primarily on taxable income for each discrete fiscal year. Dominion planned capital expenditures during 2005 are expected to total approximately $3.6 billion, which includes the cost of acquiring USGen and certain non-utility generating facilities. For 2006, planned capital expenditures are expected to be approximately $3.0 billion. These expenditures include construction and expansion of generation facilities, environmental upgrades, construction improvements and expansion of gas and electric transmission and distribution assets, purchases of nuclear fuel and expenditures to explore for and develop natural gas and oil properties. Dominion expects to fund its capital expenditures with cash from operations and a combination of sales of securities and short-term borrowings. Dominion may choose to postpone or cancel certain planned capital expenditures in order to mitigate the need for future debt financings. Use of Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements Leasing Arrangements Dominion has an agreement with a voting interest entity (lessor) to lease the Fairless power station in Pennsylvania, which began commercial operations in June 2004. During construction, Dominion acted as the construction agent for the lessor, controlled the design and construction of the facility and has since been reimbursed for all project costs advanced to the lessor. Project costs totaled $898 million at December 31, 2004. Dominion will make annual lease payments of $53 million. The lease expires in 2013 and at that time, Dominion may renew the lease at negotiated amounts based on original project costs and current market conditions, subject to lessor approval; purchase Fairless at its original construction cost; or sell Fairless, on behalf of the lessor, to an independent third party. If Fairless is sold and the proceeds from the sale are less than its original construction cost, Dominion would be required to make a payment to the lessor in an amount up to 70.75% of original project costs adjusted for certain other costs as specified in the lease. The lease agreement does not contain any provisions that involve credit rating or stock price trigger events. Benefits of this arrangement include: Certain tax benefits as Dominion is considered the owner of the leased property for tax purposes. As a result, it is entitled to tax deductions for depreciation not recognized for financial accounting purposes; and As an operating lease for financial accounting purposes, the asset and related borrowings used to finance the construction of the asset are not included on Dominion Consolidated Balance Sheets. Although this improves measures of leverage calculated using amounts reported in Dominion Consolidated Financial Statements, credit rating agencies view lease obligations as debt equivalents in evaluating Dominion credit profile. Securitizations of Mortgages and Loans As of December 31, 2004, Dominion held $335 million of retained interests from securitizations of mortgage and commercial loans completed in prior years. Dominion did not securitize or originate any loans in 2004. Investors in the securitization trusts have no recourse to Dominion other assets for failure of debtors to repay principal and interest on the underlying loans when due. Therefore, Dominion exposure to any future losses from this activity is limited to its investment in retained interests. D 2004 / Page 38 Table of Contents Forward Equity Transaction As described in Financing Cash Flows and Liquidity Forward Equity Transaction , in September 2004, Dominion entered into a forward equity sale agreement relating to 10 million shares of Dominion common stock. The use of a forward agreement allows Dominion to avoid equity market uncertainty by pricing a stock offering under then current market conditions, while mitigating share dilution by postponing the issuance of stock until funds are needed. If Dominion decides it does not need any or all of the proceeds, it has the option to cash settle or net share settle the forward sale agreement in whole, or in part. Future Issues and Other Matters Status of Electric Deregulation in Virginia The Virginia Electric Utility Restructuring Act (Virginia Restructuring Act) was enacted in 1999 and established a plan to restructure the electric utility industry in Virginia. The Virginia Restructuring Act addressed among other things: capped base rates, regional transmission organization (RTO) participation, retail choice, the recovery of stranded costs and the functional separation of a utility electric generation from its electric transmission and distribution operations. Retail choice has been available to all of Dominion Virginia regulated electric customers since January 1, 2003. Dominion has also separated its generation, distribution and transmission functions through the creation of divisions. Virginia codes of conduct ensure that Dominion generation and other divisions operate independently and prevent cross-subsidies between the generation and other divisions. Since the passage of the Virginia Restructuring Act, the competitive environment has not developed in Virginia as anticipated. In April 2004, the Governor of Virginia signed into law amendments to the Virginia Restructuring Act and the Virginia fuel factor statute. The amendments extend capped base rates by three and one-half years, to December 31, 2010, unless modified or terminated earlier under the Virginia Restructuring Act. In addition to extending capped rates, the amendments: Lock in Dominion fuel factor provisions until the earlier of July 1, 2007 or the termination of capped rates; Provide for a one-time adjustment of Dominion fuel factor, effective July 1, 2007 through December 31, 2010 (unless capped rates are terminated earlier under the Virginia Restructuring Act), with no adjustment for previously incurred over-recovery or under-recovery, thus eliminating deferred fuel accounting for the Virginia jurisdiction; and End wires charges on the earlier of July 1, 2007 or the termination of capped rates, consistent with the Virginia Restructuring Act original timetable. The risk of fuel factor-related cost recovery shortfalls may adversely impact Dominion cost structure during the transition period, and Dominion could realize the negative economic impact of any such adverse event. Conversely, Dominion may experience a positive economic impact to the extent that it can reduce its fuel factor-related costs for its electric utility generation-related operations. Dominion anticipates that its unhedged natural gas and oil production will act as a natural internal hedge for electric generation. If gas and oil prices rise, it is expected that Dominion exploration and production operations will earn greater profits that will help offset higher fuel costs and lower profits in Dominion electric generation operations. Conversely, if gas and oil prices fall, it is expected that Dominion electric generation operations will incur lower fuel costs and earn higher profits that will offset lower profits in Dominion exploration and production operations. Dominion also anticipates that the fixed fuel rate will lessen the impact of seasonally mild weather on its electric generation operations. During periods of mild weather it is expected that electric generation operations will burn less high-cost fuel because customers will use less electricity, thereby offsetting decreased revenues. Alternatively, in periods of extreme weather, Dominion higher fuel costs from running costlier plants are expected to be mitigated by additional revenue as customers use more electricity. Other amendments to the Virginia Restructuring Act were also enacted with respect to a minimum stay exemption program, a wires charges exemption program and allowing the development of a coal-fired generating plant in southwest Virginia for serving default service needs. Under the minimum stay exemption program, large customers with a load of 500 kW or greater would be exempt from the twelve-month minimum stay obligation under capped rates if they return to supply service from the incumbent utility at market-based pricing after they have switched to supply service with a competitive service provider. The wires charge exemption program would allow large industrial and commercial customers, as well as aggregated customers in all rate classes, to avoid paying wires charges by agreeing to market-based pricing upon return to the incumbent electric utility. In January 2005, Dominion filed compliance plans for both of these programs. RTO In September 2002, Dominion and PJM Interconnection, LLC (PJM) entered into an agreement that provides for, subject to regulatory approval and certain provisions, Dominion to become a member of PJM, transfer functional control of its electric transmission facilities to PJM for inclusion in a new PJM South Region and integrate its control area into the PJM energy markets. The agreement also allocates costs of implementation of the agreement among the parties. In October 2004, the FERC issued an order conditionally approving Dominion application to join PJM. In its order, FERC determined that: (i) Dominion proposed transmission rate treatment must conform to a regional transmission rate design, and (ii) Dominion must assess all available evidence and determine whether the requested deferral of expenditures related to the establishment and operation of an RTO should be recorded as a regulatory asset until the end of the Virginia retail rate cap period. In a separate order issued in September 2004, FERC granted authority to Dominion subsidiaries with market based rate authority to charge market based rates for sales of electric energy and capacity to loads located within Dominion service territory upon its integration into PJM. Dominion has made filings with both the Virginia Commission and North Carolina Utilities Commission (North Carolina D 2004 / Page 39 Table of Contents Commission) requesting authorization to become a member of PJM. In October 2004, Dominion filed a settlement agreement with the Virginia Commission resolving most of the issues raised by interested parties in the proceeding, and hearings were held to address the remaining issues. The Virginia Commission approved Dominion application to join PJM in November 2004 subject to the terms and conditions of the settlement agreement. The North Carolina Commission evidentiary hearing was held in January 2005. Dominion cannot predict the outcome of this matter at this time. North Carolina Rate Matter In connection with the North Carolina Commission approval of the CNG acquisition, Dominion agreed not to request an increase in North Carolina retail electric base rates before 2006, except for certain events that would have a significant financial impact on Dominion electric utility operations. Fuel rates are still subject to change under the annual fuel cost adjustment proceedings. However, in April 2004, the North Carolina Commission commenced an investigation into Dominion North Carolina base rates and subsequently ordered Dominion to file a general rate case to show cause why its North Carolina base rates should not be reduced. The rate case was filed in September 2004 and in February 2005, Dominion reached a tentative settlement with parties in the case that is subject to North Carolina Commission approval before becoming effective. Dominion Transmission, Inc. (DTI) Rate Matter At the request of the Public Service Commission of the State of New York (PSCNY), DTI has engaged in negotiations with PSCNY regarding the potential for a prospective reduction of DTI transportation and storage service rates to address concerns about the level of DTI earnings. As a result of these negotiations, DTI and PSCNY have reached an agreement in principle that establishes parameters for a potential rate settlement, which must be finalized by DTI and its customers. DTI is negotiating with its customers to reach a possible settlement agreement. The settlement parameters envision reduced rates to DTI customers and a five-year moratorium on future changes to DTI transportation and storage service rates. If DTI is able to reach an agreement with its customers in the first quarter of 2005, FERC approval of a filed settlement could be obtained in the second quarter of 2005. Recovery of Stranded Costs Stranded costs are those generation-related costs incurred or commitments made by utilities under cost-based regulation that may not reasonably be expected to be recovered in a competitive market. At December 31, 2004, Dominion exposure to potentially stranded costs included long-term power purchase contracts that could ultimately be determined to be above market; generating plants that could possibly become uneconomical in a deregulated environment; and unfunded obligations for nuclear plant decommissioning and postretirement benefits not yet recognized in the financial statements. Dominion believes capped electric retail rates and, where applicable, wires charges will provide an opportunity to recover a portion of its potentially stranded costs, depending on market prices of electricity and other factors. Recovery of Dominion potentially stranded costs remains subject to numerous risks even in the capped-rate environment. These include, among others, exposure to long-term power purchase commitment losses, future environmental compliance requirements, changes in tax laws, nuclear decommissioning costs, inflation, increased capital costs and recovery of certain other items. The enactment of deregulation legislation in 1999 not only caused the discontinuance of SFAS No. 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation , for Dominion Virginia jurisdictional utility generation-related operations but also caused Dominion to review its utility generation assets for impairment and long-term power purchase contracts for potential losses at that time. Significant assumptions considered in that review included possible future market prices for fuel and electricity, load growth, generating unit availability and future capacity additions in Dominion market, capital expenditures, including those related to environmental improvements, and decommissioning activities. Based on those analyses, no recognition of plant impairments or contract losses was appropriate at that time. In response to future events resulting from the development of a competitive market structure in Virginia and the expiration or termination of capped rates and wires charges, Dominion may have to reevaluate its utility generation assets for impairment and long-term power purchase contracts for potential losses. Assumptions about future market prices for electricity represent a critical factor that affects the results of such evaluations. Since 1999, market prices for electricity have fluctuated significantly and will continue to be subject to volatility. Any such review in the future, which would be highly dependent on assumptions considered appropriate at the time, could possibly result in the recognition of plant impairment or contract losses that would be material to Dominion results of operations or its financial position. Changes to Cost Structure In April 2004, the Governor of Virginia signed into law amendments to the Virginia Restructuring Act and the Virginia fuel factor statute. The amendments extend capped base rates until December 31, 2010, unless capped rates are terminated earlier under the Virginia Restructuring Act. The generation-related cash flows provided by the Virginia Restructuring Act are intended to compensate Dominion for continuing to provide generation services and to allow Dominion to incur costs to restructure such operations during the transition period. As a result, during the transition period, Dominion earnings may increase to the extent that it can reduce operating costs for its utility generation-related operations. Conversely, the same risks affecting the recovery of Dominion stranded costs, discussed above, may also adversely impact its cost structure during the transition period. Accordingly, Dominion could realize the negative economic impact of any such adverse event. In addition to managing the cost of its generation-related operations, Dominion may also seek opportunities to sell available electric energy and capacity to customers beyond its electric utility service territory. Using cash flows from operations during the transition period, Dominion may further alter its cost structure or choose to make additional investment in its business. The capped rates were derived from rates established as part of the 1998 Virginia rate settlement and do not provide for specific recovery of particular generation-related expenditures, except for D 2004 / Page 40 Table of Contents certain regulatory assets. To the extent that Dominion manages its operations to reduce its overall operating costs below those levels included in the capped rates, Dominion earnings may increase. Since the enactment of the Virginia Restructuring Act, Dominion has been reviewing its cost structure to identify opportunities to reduce the annual operating expenses of its generation-related operations. In the period 2001 through 2004, Dominion negotiated the termination of several long-term power purchase agreements that is expected to reduce capacity payments in 2005 by $179 million. Common Stock Dividend Increase In July 2004, Dominion announced that its fourth-quarter dividend payable December 20, 2004, would be increased by 2 cents per share to 66.5 cents per share. In February 2005, the quarterly dividend rate increased again from 66.5 cents per share to 67 cents per share for an annual rate in 2005 of $2.68 per share. Dominion expected cash flow and earnings should enable it to make future annual increases when its board of directors deems it financially prudent. Common stock dividends are declared on a quarterly basis by the board of directors. Statoil ASA (Statoil) Agreement In June 2004, Dominion executed 20-year contracts with Statoil for the increased capacity planned for its Cove Point LNG facility and related gas transmission services. Under the terms of the agreements, Statoil will purchase firm LNG tanker discharge services and related transportation service from Cove Point, as well as downstream firm transportation and storage services from DTI. Plans call for increasing the Cove Point storage tank capacity to 14.6 bcf and the plant deliverability by 0.8 bcf per day to a total of 1.8 bcf per day. To provide the transmission services, Dominion also plans to expand its pipeline originating at Cove Point to deliver more natural gas to interstate pipeline connections in the Mid-Atlantic region as well as to build a pipeline and two compressor stations in central Pennsylvania. These projects are subject to regulatory approval and are expected to be placed in service in 2008. Environmental Matters Dominion is subject to costs resulting from a number of federal, state and local laws and regulations designed to protect human health and the environment. These laws and regulations affect future planning and existing operations. They can result in increased capital, operating and other costs as a result of compliance, remediation, containment and monitoring obligations. Historically, Dominion recovered such costs arising from regulated electric operations through utility rates. However, to the extent that environmental costs are incurred in connection with operations regulated by the Virginia Commission, during the period ending December 31, 2010, in excess of the level currently included in the Virginia jurisdictional electric retail rates, Dominion results of operations will decrease. After that date, recovery through regulated rates may be sought for only those environmental costs related to regulated electric transmission and distribution operations and recovery, if any, through the generation component of rates will be dependent upon the market price of electricity. Dominion also may seek recovery through regulated rates for environmental expenditures related to regulated gas transmission and distribution operations. Environmental Protection and Monitoring Expenditures Dominion incurred approximately $132 million, $113 million and $123 million of expenses (including depreciation) during 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively, in connection with environmental protection and monitoring activities, and expects these expenses to be approximately $203 million in 2005 and $215 million in 2006. In addition, capital expenditures related to environmental controls were $94 million, $210 million and $280 million for 2004, 2003 and 2002, respectively. These expenditures are expected to be approximately $123 million for 2005 and $207 million for 2006. The 2005 and 2006 amounts include planned expenditures for the newly acquired USGen electric generating facilities. Clean Air Act Compliance The Clean Air Act requires Dominion to reduce its emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ) and nitrogen oxide (NO X ), which are gaseous by-products of fossil fuel combustion. The Clean Air Act SO 2 and NO X reduction programs include: The issuance of a limited number of SO 2 emission allowances. Each allowance permits the emission of one ton of SO 2 into the atmosphere. The allowances may be transacted with a third party; and NO X emission limitations applicable during the ozone season months of May through September and on an annual average basis. Implementation of projects to comply with SO 2 and NO X limitations are ongoing and will be influenced by changes in the regulatory environment, availability of allowances, various state and federal control programs and emission control technology. In response to these requirements, Dominion estimates it will make capital expenditures at its affected generating facilities (including the newly acquired electric generating facilities from USGen) of approximately $700 million during the period 2005 through 2009 for SO 2 and NO x emission control equipment. Other EPA Matters In relation to a Notice of Violation received by Virginia Power in 2000 from the EPA, Dominion entered into a Consent Decree settlement in 2003 and committed to improve air quality. Dominion has already incurred certain capital expenditures for environmental improvements at its coal-fired stations in Virginia and West Virginia. Dominion continues to commit to additional measures in its current financial plans and capital budget to satisfy the requirements of the Consent Decree. Other As part of its review of Dominion request related to the reissuance of a pollution discharge elimination permit for the Millstone Power Station, the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection is evaluating the ecological impacts of the cooling water intake system. Until the permit is reissued, it is not possible to predict the financial impact that may result. In October 2003, the EPA and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection jointly issued a new National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit for the USGen, Brayton Point Power Station. The new permit contained conditions that in effect D 2004 / Page 41 Table of Contents require the installation of cooling towers to address concerns over the withdrawal and discharge of cooling water. In November 2003, an appeal was filed with the EPA Environmental Appeals Board and the Division of Administrative Law Appeals in Massachusetts. Until the appeals process is completed, the outcome cannot be predicted. Future Environmental Regulations In January 2004, the EPA proposed additional regulations addressing pollution transport from electric generating plants as well as the regulation of mercury and nickel emissions. These regulatory actions, in addition to revised regulations to address regional haze, are expected to be finalized in 2005 and could require additional reductions in emissions from Dominion fossil fuel-fired generating facilities. If these new emission reduction requirements are imposed, significant additional expenditures may be required. The U.S. Congress is considering various legislative proposals that would require generating facilities to comply with more stringent air emissions standards. Emission reduction requirements under consideration would be phased in under a variety of periods of up to 15 years. If these new proposals are adopted, additional significant expenditures may be required. In 1997, the United States signed an international Protocol to limit man-made greenhouse emissions under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. However, the Protocol will not become binding unless approved by the U.S. Senate. Currently, the Bush Administration has indicated that it will not pursue ratification of the Protocol and has set a voluntary goal of reducing the nation greenhouse gas emission intensity by 18% over the next 10 years. Several legislative proposals that include provisions seeking to impose mandatory reductions of greenhouse gas emissions are under consideration in the United States Congress. Several Northeast states have already or are considering the imposition of mandatory carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) reductions through the development of a regional cap-and-trade program. The cost of compliance with the Protocol or other mandatory greenhouse gas reduction obligations could be significant. Given the highly uncertain outcome and timing of future action, if any, by the U.S. federal government on this issue, Dominion cannot predict the financial impact of future climate change actions on its operations at this time. Other Matters USGen Power Stations In January 2005, Dominion closed on its purchase of three electric power generation facilities from USGen for $642 million. The acquisition was part of a bankruptcy court-approved divestiture of generation assets by USGen. The plants include the 1,521-megawatt Brayton Point Station in Somerset, Massachusetts; the 743-megawatt Salem Harbor Station in Salem, Massachusetts; and the 426- megawatt Manchester Street Station in Providence, Rhode Island. These assets will be included in the Dominion Generation operating segment. Dominion did not acquire any of the facilities debt in the transaction and plans to finance the acquisition with a combination of debt and equity. Kewaunee Nuclear Power Plant During the fourth quarter of 2003, Dominion announced an agreement with Wisconsin Public Service Corporation, a subsidiary of WPS Resources Corporation (WPS), and Wisconsin Power & Light Company (WP&L), a subsidiary of Alliant Energy Corporation, to purchase the Kewaunee nuclear power plant , located in northeastern Wisconsin. Under terms of the agreement, the aggregate purchase price is $220 million in cash, including $35 million for nuclear fuel. Dominion will sell 100% of the facility output to WPS (59%) and WP&L (41%) under a power purchase agreement that expires in 2013. In November 2004, the Public Service Commission of Wisconsin voted to deny the sale. The transaction had received all other applicable regulatory approvals. During January 2005, the commission granted Dominion request for a rehearing of the case. If approved by the commission, the transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2005. If approved, Kewaunee would be included in the Dominion Generation operating segment. Restructuring of Contract with Non-Utility Generator In February 2005, Dominion paid $42 million in cash and assumed $62 million of debt in connection with the termination of a long-term power purchase agreement and acquisition of the related generating facility used by Panda-Rosemary LP, a non-utility generator, to provide electricity to Dominion. The transaction is part of an ongoing program that seeks to achieve competitive cost structures at Dominion utility generation business and is expected to reduce annual capacity payments by $18 million. The purchase price for the acquisition was allocated to the assets and liabilities acquired based on their estimated fair values as of the date of acquisition. In connection with the termination of the agreement, Dominion expects to record an after-tax charge of approximately $46 million. Long-Term Power Tolling Contract In the fourth quarter of 2004, Dominion recorded a $112 million after-tax charge related to its interest in a long-term power tolling contract with a 551 megawatt combined cycle facility located in Batesville, Mississippi. Dominion decided to divest its interest in the long-term power tolling contract in connection with its reconsideration of the scope of certain activities of the Clearinghouse, including those conducted on behalf of Dominion business segments, and its ongoing strategy to focus on business activities within the MAIN to Maine region. The charge is based on Dominion evaluation of preliminary bids received from third parties, reflecting the expected amount of consideration that would be required by a third party for its assumption of Dominion interest in the contract in the first quarter of 2005. Future Acquisitions In 2005, Dominion expects to focus on managing its existing assets rather than acquiring new assets through mergers or acquisitions. Exceptions would include acquiring a Midwest, Northeast or Mid-Atlantic nuclear station; replacing gas and oil reserves through acquisitions if more cost effective than drilling; or continuing to buy out uneconomic long-term power purchase agreements. D 2004 / Page 42 Table of Contents Market Rate Sensitive Instruments and Risk Management Dominion financial instruments, commodity contracts and related derivative financial instruments are exposed to potential losses due to adverse changes in interest rates, equity security prices, foreign currency exchange rates and commodity prices. Interest rate risk generally is related to Dominion outstanding debt. Commodity price risk is present in Dominion electric operations, gas and oil production and procurement operations, and energy marketing and trading operations due to the exposure to market shifts in prices received and paid for natural gas, electricity and other commodities. Dominion uses derivative commodity contracts to manage price risk exposures for these operations. In addition, Dominion is exposed to equity price risk through various portfolios of equity securities. The following sensitivity analysis estimates the potential loss of future earnings or fair value from market risk sensitive instruments over a selected time period due to a 10% unfavorable change in commodity prices, interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates. Commodity Price Risk Trading Activities As part of its strategy to market energy and to manage related risks, Dominion manages a portfolio of commodity-based derivative instruments held for trading purposes. These contracts are sensitive to changes in the prices of natural gas, electricity and certain other commodities. Dominion uses established policies and procedures to manage the risks associated with these price fluctuations and uses derivative instruments, such as futures, forwards, swaps and options, to mitigate risk by creating offsetting market positions. A hypothetical 10% unfavorable change in commodity prices would have resulted in a decrease of approximately $23 million and $56 million in the fair value of Dominion commodity-based financial derivative instruments held for trading purposes as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Commodity Price Risk Non-Trading Activities Dominion manages the price risk associated with purchases and sales of natural gas, oil and electricity by using derivative commodity instruments including futures, forwards, options and swaps. For sensitivity analysis purposes, the fair value of Dominion non-trading derivative commodity instruments is determined based on models that consider the market prices of commodities in future periods, the volatility of the market prices in each period, as well as the time value factors of the derivative instruments. Market prices and volatility are principally determined based on quoted prices on the futures exchange. A hypothetical 10% unfavorable change in market prices of Dominion non-trading commodity-based financial derivative instruments would have resulted in a decrease in fair value of approximately $576 million and $424 million as of December 31, 2004 and December 31, 2003, respectively. The impact of a change in energy commodity prices on Dominion non-trading derivative commodity-based financial derivative instruments at a point in time is not necessarily representative of the results that will be realized when such contracts are ultimately settled. Net losses from derivative commodity instruments used for hedging purposes, to the extent realized, are substantially offset by recognition of the hedged transaction, such as revenue from sales. Interest Rate Risk Dominion manages its interest rate risk exposure predominantly by maintaining a balance of fixed and variable rate debt. Dominion also enters into interest rate sensitive derivatives, including interest rate swaps and interest rate lock agreements. For financial instruments outstanding at December 31, 2004, a hypothetical 10% increase in market interest rates would decrease annual earnings by approximately $10 million. A hypothetical 10% increase in market interest rates, as determined at December 31, 2003, would have resulted in a decrease in annual earnings of approximately $6 million. In addition, Dominion, through subsidiaries, retains ownership of mortgage investments, including subordinated bonds and interest-only residual assets retained from securitizations of mortgage loans originated and purchased in prior years. Note 26 to the Consolidated Financial Statements discusses the impact of changes in value of these investments. Foreign Currency Exchange Risk Dominion Canadian natural gas and oil exploration and production activities are relatively self-contained within Canada. As a result, Dominion exposure to foreign currency exchange risk for these activities is limited primarily to the effects of translation adjustments that arise from including that operation in its Consolidated Financial Statements. Dominion management monitors this exposure and believes it is not material. In addition, Dominion manages its foreign exchange risk exposure associated with anticipated future purchases of nuclear fuel processing services denominated in foreign currencies by utilizing currency forward contracts. As a result of holding these contracts as hedges, Dominion exposure to foreign currency risk is minimal. A hypothetical 10% unfavorable change in relevant foreign exchange rates would have resulted in a decrease of approximately $13 million and $19 million in the fair value of currency forward contracts held by Dominion at December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Investment Price Risk Dominion is subject to investment price risk due to marketable securities held as investments in decommissioning trust funds. In accordance with current accounting standards, these marketable securities are reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Dominion recognized a net realized gain (net of investment income) on nuclear decommissioning trust investments of $51 million in 2004 and a net realized loss (net of investment income) of $10 million in 2003. Dominion recorded, in AOCI, net unrealized gains on decommissioning trust investments of $84 million and $263 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. Dominion also sponsors employee pension and other postretirement benefit plans that hold investments in trusts to fund benefit payments. To the extent that the values of investments held in these trusts decline, the effect will be reflected in Dominion recognition of the periodic cost of such employee benefit plans and the determination of the amount of cash to be contributed to the employee benefit plans. Dominion pension plans experienced net realized and unrealized gains of $453 million and $627 million in 2004 and 2003, respectively. D 2004 / Page 43 Table of Contents Risk Management Policies Dominion has operating procedures in place that are administered by experienced management to help ensure that proper internal controls are maintained. In addition, Dominion has established an independent function at the corporate level to monitor compliance with the risk management policies of all subsidiaries. Dominion maintains credit policies that include the evaluation of a prospective counterparty financial condition, collateral requirements where deemed necessary, and the use of standardized agreements that facilitate the netting of cash flows associated with a single counterparty. In addition, Dominion also monitors the financial condition of existing counterparties on an ongoing basis. Based on credit policies and the December 31, 2004 provision for credit losses, management believes that it is unlikely that a material adverse effect on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows would occur as a result of counterparty nonperformance. Risk Factors and Cautionary Statements That May Affect Future Results Factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated in any forward-looking statement include weather conditions; governmental regulations; cost of environmental compliance; inherent risk in the operation of nuclear facilities; fluctuations in energy-related commodities prices and the effect these could have on Dominion earnings, liquidity position and the underlying value of its assets; trading counterparty credit risk; capital market conditions, including price risk due to marketable securities held as investments in trusts and benefit plans; fluctuations in interest rates; changes in rating agency requirements or ratings; changes in accounting standards; collective bargaining agreements and labor negotiations; the risks of operating businesses in regulated industries that are subject to changing regulatory structures; changes to regulated gas and electric rates recovered by Dominion; receipt of approvals for and the timing of the closing dates for pending acquisitions; realization of expected business interruption insurance proceeds; the transfer of control over electric transmission facilities to a regional transmission organization; board approval of future dividends; political and economic conditions (including inflation and deflation); and completing the divestiture of investments held by DCI. Other more specific risk factors are as follows: Dominion operations are weather sensitive. Dominion results of operations can be affected by changes in the weather. Weather conditions directly influence the demand for electricity and natural gas and affect the price of energy commodities. In addition, severe weather, including hurricanes, winter storms and droughts, can be destructive, causing outages, production delays and property damage that require Dominion to incur additional expenses. Dominion is subject to complex government regulation that could adversely affect its operations. Dominion operations are subject to extensive federal, state and local regulation and may require numerous permits, approvals and certificates from various governmental agencies. Dominion must also comply with environmental legislation and associated regulations. Management believes the necessary approvals have been obtained for Dominion existing operations and that its business is conducted in accordance with applicable laws. However, new laws or regulations, or the revision or reinterpretation of existing laws or regulations, may require Dominion to incur additional expenses. Costs of environmental compliance, liabilities and litigation could exceed Dominion estimates which could adversely affect its results of operations. Compliance with federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations may result in increased capital, operating and other costs, including remediation and containment expenses and monitoring obligations. In addition, Dominion may be a responsible party for environmental clean-up at a site identified by a regulatory body. Management cannot predict with certainty the amount and timing of all future expenditures related to environmental matters because of the difficulty of estimating clean-up and compliance costs, and the possibility that changes will be made to the current environmental laws and regulations. There is also uncertainty in quantifying liabilities under environmental laws that impose joint and several liability on all potentially responsible parties. Dominion is exposed to cost-recovery shortfalls because of capped base rates and amendments to the fuel factor statute in effect in Virginia for its regulated electric utility. Under the Virginia Restructuring Act, as amended in April 2004, Dominion base rates (excluding, generally, a fuel factor with limited adjustment provisions, and certain other allowable adjustments) remain unchanged until December 31, 2010 unless modified or terminated consistent with the Virginia Restructuring Act. Although the Virginia Restructuring Act allows for the recovery of certain generation-related costs during the capped rates periods, Dominion remains exposed to numerous risks of cost-recovery shortfalls. These include exposure to potentially stranded costs, future environmental compliance requirements, tax law changes, costs related to hurricanes or other weather events, inflation, the cost of obtaining replacement power during unplanned plant outages and increased capital costs. In addition, under the 2004 amendments to the Virginia fuel factor statute, Dominion current Virginia fuel factor provisions are locked-in until the earlier of July 1, 2007 or the termination of capped rates by order of the Virginia State Corporation Commission. The amendments provide for a one-time adjustment of Dominion fuel factor, effective July 1, 2007 through December 31, 2010, with no adjustment for previously incurred over-recovery or under-recovery, thus eliminating deferred fuel accounting. As a result of the locked-in fuel factor and the uncertainty of what the one-time adjustment will be, Dominion is exposed to fuel price risk. This risk includes exposure to increased costs of fuel, including the energy portion of certain purchased power costs. Under the Virginia Restructuring Act, the generation portion of Dominion electric utility operations is open to competition and resulting uncertainty. Under the Virginia Restructuring Act, the generation portion of Dominion electric utility operations in Virginia is open to competition and is no longer subject to cost-based regulation. To date, the competitive market has been slow to develop. Consequently, it is difficult to predict the pace at which the competitive environment will evolve and the D 2004 / Page 44 Table of Contents extent to which Dominion will face increased competition and be able to operate profitably within this competitive environment. Dominion merchant power business is operating in a challenging market which could adversely affect its results of operations and future growth. The success of Dominion approximately 9,700-megawatt merchant power business depends upon favorable market conditions as well as its ability to find buyers willing to enter into power purchase agreements at prices sufficient to cover operating costs. Dominion attempts to manage these risks by entering into both short-term and long-term fixed price sales and purchase contracts. However, depressed spot and forward wholesale power prices, high fuel and commodity costs and excess capacity in the industry could result in lower than expected revenues in Dominion merchant power business. There are inherent risks in the operation of nuclear facilities. Dominion operates nuclear facilities that are subject to inherent risks. These include the threat of terrorist attack and ability to dispose of spent nuclear fuel, the disposal of which is subject to complex federal and state regulatory constraints. These risks also include the cost of and Dominion ability to maintain adequate reserves for decommissioning, costs of plant maintenance and exposure to potential liabilities arising out of the operation of these facilities. Dominion maintains decommissioning trusts and external insurance coverage to manage the financial exposure to these risks. However, it is possible that costs arising from claims could exceed the amount of any insurance coverage. The use of derivative instruments could result in financial losses and liquidity constraints. Dominion uses derivative instruments, including futures, forwards, options and swaps, to manage its commodity and financial market risks. In addition, Dominion purchases and sells commodity-based contracts in the natural gas, electricity and oil markets for trading purposes. In the future, Dominion could recognize financial losses on these contracts as a result of volatility in the market values of the underlying commodities or if a counterparty fails to perform under a contract. In the absence of actively quoted market prices and pricing information from external sources, the valuation of these contracts involves management judgment or use of estimates. As a result, changes in the underlying assumptions or use of alternative valuation methods could affect the reported fair value of these contracts. In addition, Dominion uses financial derivatives to hedge future sales of its gas and oil production. These hedge arrangements generally include margin requirements that require Dominion to deposit funds or post letters of credit with counterparties to cover the fair value of covered contracts in excess of agreed upon credit limits. When commodity prices rise to levels substantially higher than the levels where it has hedged future sales, Dominion may be required to use a material portion of its available liquidity to cover these margin requirements. In some circumstances, this could have a compounding effect on Dominion financial liquidity and results. For additional information concerning derivatives and commodity-based trading contracts, see Market Rate Sensitive Instruments and Risk Management and Notes 2 and 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Dominion is exposed to market risks beyond its control in its energy clearinghouse operations which could adversely affect its results of operations and future growth. Dominion energy clearinghouse and risk management operations are subject to multiple market risks including market liquidity, counterparty credit strength and price volatility. Many industry participants have experienced severe business downturns resulting in some companies exiting or curtailing their participation in the energy trading markets. This has led to a reduction in the number of trading partners and lower industry trading revenues. Declining creditworthiness of some of Dominion trading counterparties may limit the level of its trading activities with these parties and increase the risk that these parties may not perform under a contract. Dominion exploration and production business is dependent on factors that cannot be predicted or controlled and that could damage facilities, disrupt production or reduce the book value of its assets. Factors that may affect Dominion financial results include weather that damages or causes the shutdown of its gas and oil producing facilities, fluctuations in natural gas and crude oil prices, results of future drilling and well completion activities and Dominion ability to acquire additional land positions in competitive lease areas, as well as inherent operational risks that could disrupt production. Short-term market declines in the prices of natural gas and oil could adversely affect Dominion financial results by causing a permanent write-down of its natural gas and oil properties as required by the full cost method of accounting. Under the full cost method, all direct costs of property acquisition, exploration and development activities are capitalized. If net capitalized costs exceed the present value of estimated future net revenues based on hedge-adjusted period-end prices from the production of proved gas and oil reserves (the ceiling test) in a given country at the end of any quarterly period, then a permanent write-down of the assets must be recognized in that period. An inability to access financial markets could affect the execution of Dominion business plan. Dominion and its Virginia Power and CNG subsidiaries rely on access to both short-term money markets and longer-term capital markets as a significant source of liquidity for capital requirements not satisfied by the cash flows from its operations. Management believes that Dominion and its subsidiaries will maintain sufficient access to these financial markets based upon current credit ratings. However, certain disruptions outside of Dominion control may increase its cost of borrowing or restrict its ability to access one or more financial markets. Such disruptions could include an economic downturn, the bankruptcy of an unrelated energy company or changes to Dominion credit ratings. Restrictions on Dominion ability to access financial markets may affect its ability to execute its business plan as scheduled. D 2004 / Page 45 Table of Contents Changing rating agency requirements could negatively affect Dominion growth and business strategy. As of February 1, 2005, Dominion senior unsecured debt is rated BBB+, negative outlook, by Standard & Poor and Baa1, stable outlook, by Moody s. Both agencies have implemented more stringent applications of the financial requirements for various ratings levels. In order to maintain its current credit ratings in light of these or future new requirements, Dominion may find it necessary to take steps or change its business plans in ways that may adversely affect its growth and earnings per share. A reduction in Dominion credit ratings or the credit ratings of its Virginia Power and CNG subsidiaries by either Standard & Poor or Moody could increase Dominion borrowing costs and adversely affect operating results and could require it to post additional margin in connection with some of its trading and marketing activities. Potential changes in accounting practices may adversely affect Dominion financial results. Dominion cannot predict the impact that future changes in accounting standards or practices may have on public companies in general, the energy industry or its operations specifically. New accounting standards could be issued that could change the way Dominion records revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. These changes in accounting standards could adversely affect Dominion reported earnings or could increase reported liabilities. Failure to retain and attract key executive officers and other skilled professional and technical employees could have an adverse effect on the operations of Dominion. Implementation of Dominion growth strategy is dependent on its ability to recruit, retain and motivate employees. Competition for skilled employees in some areas is high and the inability to retain and attract these employees could adversely affect Dominion business and future financial condition. 
