CIK: 715957
Company Name: DOMINION RESOURCES INC VA 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-02-26


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations MD&A discusses our results of operations and general financial condition. MD&A should be read in conjunction with Item 1. Business and our Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. The terms Dominion, Company, we, our and us are used throughout this report and, depending on the context of their use, may represent any of the following: the legal entity, Dominion Resources, Inc., one or more of Dominion Resources, Inc. consolidated subsidiaries or operating segments or the entirety of Dominion Resources, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. C ONTENTS OF MD&A Our MD&A consists of the following information: Forward-Looking Statements Accounting Matters Results of Operations Segment Results of Operations Selected Information Energy Trading Activities Liquidity and Capital Resources Future Issues and Other Matters F ORWARD -L OOKING S TATEMENTS This report contains statements concerning our expectations, plans, objectives, future financial performance and other statements that are not historical facts. These statements are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In most cases, the reader can identify these forward-looking statements by such words as anticipate, estimate, forecast, expect, believe, should, could, plan, may, target or other similar words. We make forward-looking statements with full knowledge that risks and uncertainties exist that may cause actual results to differ materially from predicted results. Factors that may cause actual results to differ are often presented with the forward-looking statements themselves. Additionally, other factors may cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated in any forward-looking statement. These factors include but are not limited to: Unusual weather conditions and their effect on energy sales to customers and energy commodity prices; Extreme weather events, including hurricanes and winter storms, that can cause outages and property damage to our facilities; State and federal legislative and regulatory developments and changes to environmental and other laws and regulations, including those related to climate change, GHG emissions and other emissions to which we are subject; Cost of environmental compliance, including those costs related to climate change; Risks associated with the operation of nuclear facilities; Fluctuations in energy-related commodity prices and the effect these could have on our earnings, liquidity position and the underlying value of our assets; Counterparty credit risk; Capital market conditions, including price risk due to marketable securities held as investments in nuclear decommissioning and benefit plan trusts; Fluctuations in interest rates; Changes in federal and state tax laws and regulations; Changes in rating agency requirements or credit ratings and their effect on availability and cost of capital; Changes in financial or regulatory accounting principles or policies imposed by governing bodies; Employee workforce factors including collective bargaining agreements and labor negotiations with union employees; The risks of operating businesses in regulated industries that are subject to changing regulatory structures; Receipt of approvals for and timing of closing dates for acquisitions and divestitures; Changes in rules for RTOs in which we participate, including changes in rate designs and new and evolving capacity models; Political and economic conditions, including the threat of domestic terrorism, inflation and deflation; Changes to rates for our regulated electric utility operations, including the outcome of our 2009 base rate review, and the timing of such collection as it relates to fuel costs; Timing and receipt of regulatory approvals necessary for planned construction or expansion projects; The inability to complete planned construction projects within the terms and time frames initially anticipated; Completing the divestiture of Peoples and Hope; and Adverse outcomes in litigation matters. Additionally, other risks that could cause actual results to differ from predicted results are set forth in Item 1A. Risk Factors. Our forward-looking statements are based on our beliefs and assumptions using information available at the time the statements are made. We caution the reader not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements because the assumptions, beliefs, expectations and projections about future events may, and often do, differ materially from actual results. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect developments occurring after the statement is made. A CCOUNTING M ATTERS Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates We have identified the following accounting policies, including certain inherent estimates, that as a result of the judgments, uncertainties, uniqueness and complexities of the underlying accounting standards and operations involved, could result in material changes to our financial condition or results of operations under different conditions or using different assumptions. We have discussed the development, selection and disclosure of each of these policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. A CCOUNTING FOR D ERIVATIVE C ONTRACTS AND O THER I NSTRUMENTS AT F AIR V ALUE We use derivative contracts such as futures, swaps, forwards, options and FTRs to manage the commodity and financial markets risks of our business operations. Derivative contracts, with certain exceptions, are subject to fair value accounting, as prescribed by SFAS No. 157, Fair Value Measurements , and are reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Accounting requirements for derivatives and related hedging 32 Table of Contents activities are complex and may be subject to further clarification by standard-setting bodies. The majority of investments held in our nuclear decommissioning and rabbi trust funds are also subject to fair value accounting. Assets held in our pension and other postretirement benefit plans are subject to the fair value measurement requirements of SFAS No. 157, but are currently not subject to fair value disclosure requirements. Therefore they are not included in the level summaries presented below. See Note 8 of our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our fair value measurements. Fair value is based on actively-quoted market prices, if available. In the absence of actively-quoted market prices, we seek indicative price information from external sources, including broker quotes and industry publications. If pricing information from external sources is not available, or if we believe that observable pricing information is not indicative of fair value, judgment is required to develop the estimates of fair value. In those cases we must estimate prices based on available historical and near-term future price information and use of statistical methods, including regression analysis that reflect our market assumptions. For options and contracts with option-like characteristics where observable pricing information is not available from external sources, we generally use a modified Black-Scholes Model that considers time value, the volatility of the underlying commodities and other relevant assumptions when estimating fair value. We use other option models under special circumstances, including a Spread Approximation Model, when contracts include different commodities or commodity locations and a Swing Option Model, when contracts allow either the buyer or seller the ability to exercise within a range of quantities. For contracts with unique characteristics, we may estimate fair value using a discounted cash flow approach deemed appropriate under the circumstances and applied consistently from period to period. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a significant effect on the contract estimated fair value. In accordance with SFAS No. 157, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. We utilize the following fair value hierarchy as prescribed by SFAS No. 157, which categorizes the inputs used to measure fair value into three levels: Level 1 Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets and liabilities that we have the ability to access at the measurement date. Instruments categorized in Level 1 primarily consist of financial instruments such as the majority of exchange-traded derivatives and exchange-listed equities and Treasury securities held in nuclear decommissioning and rabbi trust funds. Level 2 Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are either directly or indirectly observable for the asset or liability, including quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in inactive markets, inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability, and inputs that are derived from observable market data by correlation or other means. Instruments categorized in Level 2 primarily include non-exchange traded derivatives such as over-the-counter com- modity forwards and swaps, interest rate swaps, foreign currency forwards and options and municipal bonds and short-term debt securities held in nuclear decommissioning and rabbi trust funds. Level 3 Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability, including situations where there is little, if any, market activity for the asset or liability. Instruments categorized in Level 3 consist of long-dated commodity derivatives, natural gas liquids contracts (NGLs), natural gas peaking options, FTRs and other modeled commodity derivatives. Fair value measurements are categorized as Level 3 when a significant amount of price or other inputs that are considered to be unobservable are used in their valuations. Long-dated commodity derivatives are based on unobservable inputs due to the length of time to settlement and absence of market activity and are therefore categorized as Level 3. For NGLs, market illiquidity requires a valuation based on proxy markets that do not always correlate to the actual instrument, therefore they are also categorized as Level 3. For the same illiquidity reason, natural gas peaking options at non-Henry Hub locations are valued using Henry Hub (NYMEX natural gas delivery point) volatilities, which may or may not be identical to the volatilities at transacted locations, and are therefore not considered to be observable inputs. FTRs are categorized as Level 3 fair value measurements because the only relevant pricing available comes from ISO auctions, which is accurate for day-one valuation, but generally is not considered to be representative of the ultimate settlement values. Other modeled commodity derivatives have unobservable inputs in their valuation, mostly due to non-transparent and illiquid markets. As of December 31, 2008, our net balance of commodity derivatives categorized as Level 3 fair value measurements was a net asset of $99 million. A hypothetical 10% increase in commodity prices would decrease the net asset by $21 million, while a hypothetical 10% decrease in commodity prices would increase the net asset by $20 million. SFAS No. 157 clarifies that fair value should be based on assumptions that market participants would use when pricing an asset or liability, including assumptions about risk and the risks inherent in valuation techniques and the inputs to valuations. This includes not only the credit standing of counterparties involved and the impact of credit enhancements but also the impact of our own nonperformance risk on our liabilities. We apply credit adjustments to our derivative fair values in accordance with the guidance in SFAS No. 157. These credit adjustments are currently not material to our derivative fair values. For cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions, we estimate the future cash flows of the forecasted transactions and evaluate the probability of occurrence and timing of such transactions. Changes in conditions or the occurrence of unforeseen events could require discontinuance of hedge accounting or could affect the timing of the reclassification of gains and/or losses on cash flow hedges from AOCI into earnings. U SE OF E STIMATES IN G OODWILL I MPAIRMENT T ESTING As of December 31, 2008, we reported $3.5 billion of goodwill in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. A significant portion resulted from the acquisition of the former CNG in 2000. 33 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued In April of each year, we test our goodwill for potential impairment, and perform additional tests more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change in the interim that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount. The 2008, 2007 and 2006 annual tests did not result in the recognition of any goodwill impairment. As a result of the 2007 disposition of our non-Appalachian E&P operations, goodwill was allocated to such operations based on the relative fair values of the E&P operations being disposed of and the Appalachian portion being retained. The impairment test performed on the goodwill allocated to the retained Appalachian operations showed no impairment. Also, in connection with the 2007 segment realignment, the goodwill allocated to our three gas distribution subsidiaries was tested for impairment during the fourth quarter of 2007. This interim test did not result in the recognition of any goodwill impairment, as the estimated fair values of these businesses exceeded their respective carrying amounts. There were no significant changes to goodwill during the year ended December 31, 2008. In general, we estimate the fair value of our reporting units by using a combination of discounted cash flows, and other valuation techniques that use multiples of earnings for peer group companies and analyses of recent business combinations involving peer group companies. For our non-Appalachian E&P operations, our regulated gas distribution subsidiaries held for sale and certain DCI operations, negotiated sales prices were used as fair value for the tests conducted in 2008 and 2007. Fair value estimates are dependent on subjective factors such as our estimate of future cash flows, the selection of appropriate discount and growth rates, and the selection of peer group companies and recent transactions. These underlying assumptions and estimates are made as of a point in time; subsequent modifications, particularly changes in discount rates or growth rates inherent in our estimates of future cash flows, could result in a future impairment of goodwill. Although we have consistently applied the same methods in developing the assumptions and estimates that underlie the fair value calculations, such as estimates of future cash flows, and based those estimates on relevant information available at the time, such cash flow estimates are highly uncertain by nature and may vary significantly from actual results. If the estimates of future cash flows used in the most recent tests had been 10% lower, the resulting fair values would have still been greater than the carrying values of each of those reporting units tested, indicating that no impairment was present. U SE OF E STIMATES IN L ONG - LIVED A SSET I MPAIRMENT T ESTING Impairment testing for an individual or group of long-lived assets or for intangible assets with definite lives is required when circumstances indicate those assets may be impaired. When an asset carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted estimated future cash flows associated with the asset, the asset is considered impaired to the extent that the asset fair value is less than its carrying amount. Performing an impairment test on long-lived assets involves judgment in areas such as identifying circumstances that indicate an impairment may exist; identifying and grouping affected assets; and developing the undiscounted and discounted estimated future cash flows (used to estimate fair value in the absence of market-based value) associated with the asset, including probability weighting such cash flows to reflect expectations about possible variations in their amounts or timing and the selection of an appropriate discount rate. Although our cash flow estimates are based on relevant information available at the time the estimates are made, estimates of future cash flows are, by nature, highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. For example, estimates of future cash flows would contemplate factors, which may change over time, such as the expected use of the asset, including future production and sales levels, and expected fluctuations of prices of commodities sold and consumed. In the third quarter of 2008, we tested SO 2 emissions allowances held for consumption, with a carrying amount of $144 million, as a result of a decline in the market value of such allowances resulting from the July 2008 D.C. Appeals Court decision vacating CAIR that affected certain emission allowance surrender ratios. Based on the results of our test, including an analysis of recoverability through undiscounted cash flows from plant operations, no impairment charges were recognized. In December 2008, the Court issued a decision to reinstate CAIR that resulted in an increase in the market value of SO 2 allowances. In 2006, we tested Dresden for impairment and concluded that its carrying amount, as well as the estimated cost to complete, was recoverable based on the probability of continued construction and use at that time. As part of our ongoing asset review to improve Dominion return on invested capital, we began the process of exploring the sale of Dresden in the second quarter of 2007. Non-binding indicative bids were received and based on our evaluation of these bids, we believed that it was likely that Dresden would be sold rather than completed and operated in our merchant fleet. This change in intended use represented a triggering event for us to evaluate whether we could recover the carrying amount of our investment in Dresden. This analysis indicated that the carrying amount of Dresden would not be recovered. As a result, in the second quarter of 2007, we recognized a $387 million ($252 million after-tax) impairment charge to reduce Dresden carrying amount to its estimated fair value in connection with the planned sale of Dresden, which closed in September 2007. In 2005, we tested gas and steam electric turbines held for future development with a carrying amount of $187 million for impairment and concluded that the carrying amount was recoverable based upon the probability of future development as a merchant generation project at that time. In the third quarter of 2007, we recognized an $18 million impairment charge ($12 million after-tax) for two of these gas turbines that were sold by our merchant generation operations to our utility generation operations based upon amounts to be recovered by our utility in jurisdictional rate base. These turbines were used in the Ladysmith expansion project discussed under Dominion Generation Properties in Item 1. Business . In conjunction with the results of a review of our portfolio of assets, Peaker facilities, with a combined carrying amount of $504 million, were marketed for sale in the third quarter of 2006. An impairment analysis, performed in the third quarter of 2006, indicated that the carrying amount of each of the Peaker facilities was recoverable as the expected undiscounted cash flows, probability weighted to reflect both continued use and possible sale 34 Table of Contents scenarios, exceeded the carrying amount. In December 2006, we reached an agreement to sell the Peaker facilities and accordingly, we reduced their carrying amounts to fair value less cost to sell and classified them as assets held for sale in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. Also in the fourth quarter of 2006, in conjunction with a review of our assets, a decision was made to no longer pursue the development of a gas transmission pipeline project with capitalized construction costs of $28 million. The pipeline project was previously tested for impairment during 2005. The results of our analysis in 2005 indicated that this asset was not impaired based on the probability of continued construction and use at that time. Impairment charges totaling $280 million ($181 million after-tax) were recorded in December 2006 related to the Peaker facilities and the gas transmission pipeline project. A CCOUNTING FOR R EGULATED O PERATIONS The accounting for our regulated electric and gas operations differs from the accounting for nonregulated operations in that we are required to reflect the effect of rate regulation in our Consolidated Financial Statements. For regulated businesses subject to federal or state cost-of-service rate regulation, regulatory practices that assign costs to accounting periods may differ from accounting methods generally applied by nonregulated companies. When it is probable that regulators will permit the recovery of current costs through future rates charged to customers, we defer these costs as regulatory assets that otherwise would be expensed by nonregulated companies. Likewise, we recognize regulatory liabilities when it is probable that regulators will require customer refunds through future rates or when revenue is collected from customers for expenditures that have yet to be incurred. Generally, regulatory assets are amortized into expense and regulatory liabilities are amortized into income over the period authorized by the regulator. As discussed further in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, in April 2007, the Virginia General Assembly passed legislation that returned the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations to cost-of-service rate regulation. As a result, we reapplied the provisions of SFAS No. 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation , to those operations on April 4, 2007, the date the legislation was enacted. The reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations resulted in a $259 million ($158 million after tax) extraordinary charge and the reclassification of $195 million ($119 million after tax) of unrealized gains from AOCI related to nuclear decommissioning trust funds. This established a $454 million long-term regulatory liability for amounts previously collected from Virginia jurisdictional customers and placed in external trusts (including income, losses and changes in fair value thereon) for the future decommissioning of our utility nuclear generation stations, in excess of amounts recorded pursuant to SFAS No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations . In connection with the reapplication of SFAS No. 71, we prospectively changed certain of our accounting policies for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations to those used by cost-of-service rate-regulated entities. Other than the extraordinary item previously discussed, the overall impact of these changes was not material to our results of operations or financial condition in 2007. We evaluate whether or not recovery of our regulatory assets through future rates is probable and make various assumptions in our analyses. The expectations of future recovery are generally based on orders issued by regulatory commissions or historical experience, as well as discussions with applicable regulatory authorities. If recovery of a regulatory asset is determined to be less than probable, it will be written off in the period such assessment is made. In 2006, we wrote off $166 million of our regulatory assets as a result of the planned sale of Peoples and Hope to Equitable since the recovery of those assets was no longer probable. In January 2008, Dominion and Equitable announced the termination of that agreement, primarily due to the continued delays in achieving final regulatory approvals. We continued to seek other offers for the purchase of these utilities. In July 2008, we announced that we entered into an agreement with BBIFNA to sell Peoples and Hope and recognized a benefit of $47 million due to the re-establishment of certain of these regulatory assets, which we now expect to be recovered through future rates. We currently believe the recovery of our remaining regulatory assets is probable. See Notes 2, 5 and 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. A SSET R ETIREMENT O BLIGATIONS We recognize liabilities for the expected cost of retiring tangible long-lived assets for which a legal obligation exists. These asset retirement obligations (AROs) are recognized at fair value as incurred, and are capitalized as part of the cost of the related long-lived assets. In the absence of quoted market prices, we estimate the fair value of our AROs using present value techniques, in which we make various assumptions including estimates of the amounts and timing of future cash flows associated with retirement activities, credit-adjusted risk free rates and cost escalation rates. AROs currently reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets were measured during a period of historically low interest rates. The impact on measurements of new AROs or remeasurements of existing AROs, using different cost escalation rates in the future, may be significant. When we revise any assumptions used to calculate the fair value of existing AROs, we adjust the carrying amount of both the ARO liability and the related long-lived asset. We accrete the ARO liability to reflect the passage of time. In 2008, 2007 and 2006, we recognized $94 million, $99 million and $109 million, respectively, of accretion, and expect to incur $99 million in 2009. Upon reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations, we began recording accretion and depreciation associated with utility nuclear decommissioning AROs, formerly charged to expense, as an adjustment to the regulatory liability for nuclear decommissioning trust funds previously discussed, in order to match the recognition for rate-making purposes. A significant portion of our AROs relates to the future decommissioning of our nuclear facilities. At December 31, 2008, nuclear decommissioning AROs, which are reported in the Dominion Generation segment, totaled $1.6 billion, representing approximately 85% of our total AROs. Based on their significance, the following discussion of critical assumptions inherent in determining the fair value of AROs relates to those associated with our nuclear decommissioning obligations. 35 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued We utilize periodic site-specific base year cost studies in order to estimate the nature, cost and timing of planned decommissioning activities for our utility and merchant nuclear plants. We obtained updated cost studies for all of our nuclear plants in 2006 which generally reflected increases in base year costs. These cost studies were based on relevant information available at the time they were performed; however, estimates of future cash flows for extended periods of time are by nature highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. In addition, our cost estimates include cost escalation rates that are applied to the base year costs. The selection of these cost escalation rates is dependent on subjective factors which we consider to be a critical assumption. We determine cost escalation rates, which represent projected cost increases over time, due to both general inflation and increases in the cost of specific decommissioning activities, for each of our nuclear facilities. The use of alternative rates could have been material to the liabilities recognized. For example, had we increased the cost escalation rate by 0.5%, the amount recognized as of December 31, 2008 for our AROs related to nuclear decommissioning would have been $290 million higher. E MPLOYEE B ENEFIT P LANS We sponsor noncontributory defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans for eligible active employees, retirees and qualifying dependents. The projected costs of providing benefits under these plans are dependent, in part, on historical information such as employee demographics, the level of contributions made to the plans and earnings on plan assets. Assumptions about the future, including the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, discount rates applied to benefit obligations and the anticipated rate of increase in health care costs and participant compensation, also have a significant impact on employee benefit costs. The impact of changes in these factors, as well as differences between our assumptions and actual experience, is generally recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Income over the remaining average service period of plan participants, rather than immediately. The expected long-term rates of return on plan assets, discount rates and healthcare cost trend rates are critical assumptions. We determine the expected long-term rates of return on plan assets for pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans by using a combination of: Historical return analysis to determine expected future risk premiums, asset volatilities and correlations; Forward-looking return expectations derived from the yield on long-term bonds and the price earnings ratios of major stock market indices; Expected inflation and risk-free interest rate assumptions; and Investment allocation of plan assets. The strategic target asset allocation for our pension funds is 34% U.S. equity securities, 12% non-U.S. equity securities, 22% debt securities, 7% real estate and 25% other, such as private equity investments. Strategic investment policies are established for each of our prefunded benefit plans based upon periodic asset/liability studies. Factors considered in setting the investment policy include those mentioned above such as employee demographics, liability growth rates, future discount rates, the funded status of the plans and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. Deviations from the plans strategic allocation are a function of our assessments regarding short-term risk and reward opportunities in the capital markets and/or short-term market movements which result in the plans actual asset allocations varying from the strategic target asset allocations. Through periodic rebalancing, actual allocations are brought back in line with the target. We develop assumptions, which are then compared to the forecasts of other independent investment advisors to ensure reasonableness. An internal committee selects the final assumptions. We calculated our pension cost using an expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption of 8.50% for 2008 and 8.75% for 2007 and 2006. We calculated our other postretirement benefit cost using an expected long-term rate of return on plan assets assumption of 7.75% for 2008 and 8.00% for 2007 and 2006. The rate used in calculating other postretirement benefit cost is lower than the rate used in calculating pension cost because of differences in the relative amounts of various types of investments held as plan assets. We determine discount rates from analyses of AA/Aa rated bonds with cash flows matching the expected payments to be made under our plans. The discount rates used to calculate pension cost and other postretirement benefit cost were 6.60% and 6.50%, respectively, in 2008, compared to 6.20% and 6.10%, respectively, in 2007, and 5.60% and 5.50%, respectively, in 2006. Higher long-term bond yields were the primary reason for the increase in the discount rate from 2007 to 2008. We selected a discount rate of 6.60% for determining our December 31, 2008 projected pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. We establish the healthcare cost trend rate assumption based on analyses of various factors including the specific provisions of our medical plans, actual cost trends experienced and projected, and demographics of plan participants. Our healthcare cost trend rate assumption as of December 31, 2008 is 9.00% and is expected to gradually decrease to 4.90% by 2059 and continue at that rate for years thereafter. The following table illustrates the effect on cost of changing the critical actuarial assumptions previously discussed, while holding all other assumptions constant: Increase in Net Periodic Cost Change in Actuarial Assumption Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits (millions, except percentages) Discount rate (0.25 )% $ 13 $ 6 Long-term rate of return on plan assets (0.25 )% 12 2 Healthcare cost trend rate 1.00 % N/A 23 In addition to the effects on cost, at December 31, 2008, a 0.25% decrease in the discount rate would increase our projected pension benefit obligation by $120 million and our accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $46 million, while a 1.00% increase in the healthcare cost trend rate would increase our accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $194 million. See Note 22 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our employee benefit plans. A CCOUNTING FOR G AS AND O IL O PERATIONS We follow the full cost method of accounting for gas and oil E&P activities prescribed by the SEC. Under the full cost method, all direct costs of property acquisition, exploration and development 36 Table of Contents activities are capitalized and subsequently depleted using the units-of-production method. The depletable base of costs includes estimated future costs to be incurred in developing proved gas and oil reserves, as well as capitalized asset retirement costs, net of projected salvage values. Capitalized costs in the depletable base are subject to a ceiling test prescribed by the SEC. The test limits capitalized amounts to a ceiling the present value of estimated future net revenues to be derived from the production of proved gas and oil reserves, discounted at 10%, assuming period-end pricing adjusted for any cash flow hedges in place. We perform the ceiling test quarterly and would recognize asset impairments to the extent that total capitalized costs exceed the ceiling. Commodity prices have declined during the first quarter of 2009. If the current price environment continues, it could potentially result in a write-down of our natural gas and oil properties when we perform our March 31, 2009 quarterly ceiling test. While we cannot currently predict the impact of a ceiling test impairment on our results of operations, it would have no impact on our cash flows and we would not expect a material impact on our financial condition. In addition, gains or losses on the sale or other disposition of gas and oil properties are not recognized, unless the gain or loss would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves of natural gas and oil attributable to a country. In 2007, we recognized gains from the sales of our Canadian and U.S. non-Appalachian E&P businesses. See Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on these sales. Our estimate of proved reserves requires a large degree of judgment and is dependent on factors such as historical data, engineering estimates of proved reserve quantities, estimates of the amount and timing of future expenditures to develop the proved reserves, and estimates of future production from the proved reserves. Our estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2008 are based upon studies for each of our properties prepared by our staff engineers and audited by Ryder Scott Company, L.P. Calculations were prepared using standard geological and engineering methods generally accepted by the petroleum industry and in accordance with SEC guidelines. Given the volatility of natural gas and oil prices, it is possible that our estimate of discounted future net cash flows from proved natural gas and oil reserves that is used to calculate the ceiling could materially change in the near-term. The process to estimate reserves is imprecise, and estimates are subject to revision. If there is a significant variance in any of our estimates or assumptions in the future and revisions to the value of our proved reserves are necessary, related depletion expense and the calculation of the ceiling test would be affected and recognition of natural gas and oil property impairments could occur. See Notes 2 and 27 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our gas and oil producing activities. I NCOME T AXES Judgment and the use of estimates are required in developing the provision for income taxes and reporting of tax-related assets and liabilities. The interpretation of tax laws involves uncertainty, since tax authorities may interpret the laws differently. Ultimate resolution of income tax matters may result in favorable or unfavorable impacts to net income and cash flows and adjustments to tax-related assets and liabilities could be material. Prior to 2007, we established liabilities for tax-related contingencies when we believed it was probable that a liability had been incurred and the amount could be reasonably estimated in accordance with SFAS No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, and subsequently reviewed them in light of changing facts and circumstances. However, as discussed in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, effective January 1, 2007, we adopted FIN 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes . Taking into consideration the uncertainty and judgment involved in the determination and filing of income taxes, FIN 48 establishes standards for recognition and measurement, in financial statements, of positions taken, or expected to be taken, by an entity in its income tax returns. Positions taken by an entity in its income tax returns that are recognized in the financial statements must satisfy a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold, assuming that the position will be examined by tax authorities with full knowledge of all relevant information. If we take or expect to take a tax return position that is not recognized in the financial statements, we disclose such amount as an unrecognized tax benefit. At December 31, 2008 we had $404 million of unrecognized tax benefits. For the majority of our unrecognized tax benefits, the ultimate deductibility is highly certain, but there is uncertainty about the timing of such deductibility. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are provided, representing future effects on income taxes for temporary differences between the bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting and tax purposes. We evaluate quarterly the probability of realizing deferred tax assets by reviewing a forecast of future taxable income and the availability of tax planning strategies that can be implemented, if necessary, to realize deferred tax assets. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income or successfully implement tax planning strategies may affect the realization of deferred tax assets. We establish a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that all, or a portion of, a deferred tax asset will not be realized. At December 31, 2008, we had established $78 million of valuation allowances on our deferred tax assets. Other A CCOUNTING S TANDARDS AND P OLICIES During 2008, 2007 and 2006, we were required to adopt several new accounting standards, which are discussed in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards that will be adopted in the future. In the fourth quarter of 2008, we revised our derivative income statement classification policy, described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, to present income statement activity for all non-trading derivatives based on the nature of the underlying risk. This includes unrealized changes in the fair value of and settlements of financially-settled derivatives not held for trading purposes, as well as gains or losses attributable to ineffectiveness, changes in the time value of options, and discontinuances of hedging instruments, all of which were previously presented in other operations and maintenance expense on a net basis. Our prior year Consolidated Statements of Income have been recast to conform to the 2008 presentation; however, this had no impact on earnings. 37 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued R ESULTS OF O PERATIONS Presented below is a summary of our consolidated results: Year Ended December 31, 2008 $ Change 2007 $ Change 2006 (millions, except EPS) Net Income $ 1,834 $ (705 ) $ 2,539 $ 1,159 $ 1,380 Diluted EPS 3.16 (0.72 ) 3.88 1.92 1.96 Overview 2008 VS . 2007 Net income decreased by 28% to $1.8 billion. Unfavorable drivers include the absence of a $2.1 billion after-tax gain on the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business and the absence of ongoing earnings from this business due to the sale. Favorable drivers include the absence of the following items incurred in 2007: Charges related to the sale of the majority of our E&P operations; An impairment charge related to the sale of Dresden; An extraordinary charge in connection with the reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations; and A charge in connection with the termination of a long-term power sales agreement at State Line. Additional favorable drivers include the reinstatement of annual fuel rate adjustments for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations effective July 1, 2007, a higher contribution from our merchant generation operations and the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with the planned sale of Peoples and Hope. Diluted EPS decreased to $3.16 and includes $0.36 of share accretion resulting from the repurchase of shares in 2007 with proceeds received from the sale of the majority of our E&P operations. 2007 VS . 2006 Net income increased by 84% to $2.5 billion. Diluted EPS increased to $3.88 and includes $0.24 of share accretion resulting from the repurchase of shares with proceeds received from the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business. Favorable drivers include a gain on the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business, higher realized prices for our gas and oil production, higher margins at our merchant generation business and the reinstatement of annual fuel rate adjustments for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations. Unfavorable drivers include a decrease in gas and oil production due to the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business, an impairment charge related to the sale of Dresden, an extraordinary charge in connection with the reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations, charges related to the early extinguishment of outstanding debt associated with the completion of our debt tender offer in July 2007, a charge due to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil derivatives and subsequent changes in the fair value of these derivatives as a result of the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business, a charge for the termination of a long-term power sales agreement at State Line and the absence of business interruption insurance revenue received in 2006, associated with Hurricanes Katrina and Rita (2005 hurricanes). Analysis of Consolidated Operations Presented below are selected amounts related to our results of operations: Year Ended December 31, 2008 $ Change 2007 $ Change 2006 (millions) Operating Revenue $ 16,290 $ 1,474 $ 14,816 $ (2,460 ) $ 17,276 Operating Expenses Electric fuel and energy purchases 3,963 592 3,371 276 3,095 Purchased electric capacity 411 (28 ) 439 (42 ) 481 Purchased gas 3,398 623 2,775 (794 ) 3,569 Other energy-related commodity purchases 60 (192 ) 252 (770 ) 1,022 Other operations and maintenance 3,257 (868 ) 4,125 519 3,606 Gain on sale of U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business 42 3,677 (3,635 ) (3,635 ) Depreciation, depletion and amortization 1,034 (334 ) 1,368 (189 ) 1,557 Other taxes 499 (53 ) 552 (16 ) 568 Other income (loss) (58 ) (160 ) 102 (71 ) 173 Interest and related charges 853 (324 ) 1,177 89 1,088 Income tax expense 879 (904 ) 1,783 856 927 Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (2 ) 6 (8 ) 142 (150 ) Extraordinary item, net of tax 158 (158 ) (158 ) An analysis of our results of operations for 2008 compared to 2007 and 2007 compared to 2006 follows. 2008 VS . 2007 Operating Revenue increased 10% to $16.3 billion, primarily reflecting: A $753 million increase in revenue from our electric utility operations resulting primarily from an increase in fuel revenue largely due to the impact of a comparatively higher fuel rate in certain customer jurisdictions; A $626 million increase from merchant generation operations, primarily reflecting higher realized prices for nuclear and fossil operations ($500 million) and the absence of a charge related to the termination of a long-term power sales agreement at State Line in 2007 ($231 million), partially offset by lower overall volumes due to outages at certain fossil and nuclear generating facilities ($105 million); A $330 million increase in our producer services business primarily as a result of higher realized prices for natural gas aggregation activities and favorable price changes associated with natural gas trading activities; 38 Table of Contents A $129 million increase in sales of gas production from our remaining E&P operations, primarily due to: A $70 million increase in sales from our Appalachian properties due to higher prices ($51 million) and increased production ($19 million); and Increased production associated with reacquired overriding royalty interests arising from the VPPs terminated in 2007 ($59 million); A $133 million increase in regulated gas sales attributable to our gas distribution operations primarily resulting from the impact of higher prices; A $131 million increase in nonregulated gas sales by our gas distribution operations, primarily due to the sale of gas inventory by Dominion East Ohio related to its plan to exit the gas merchant function in Ohio and have all customers select an alternate gas supplier; A $117 million increase in gas sales by retail energy marketing operations primarily due to higher prices; A $109 million increase in gas transportation and storage revenue primarily due to a $66 million increase in revenue from our gas distribution operations due to higher prices ($52 million) and increased volumes ($14 million) and a $43 million increase attributable to our gas transmission operations primarily reflecting increased transport and storage activities and gathering and extraction services; A $76 million increase in electricity sales by retail energy marketing operations due to higher sales prices ($54 million) and the acquisition of an additional retail business in September 2008 ($69 million), partially offset by lower volumes ($47 million); and A $44 million increase in sales of extracted products from our gas transmission operations as a result of higher realized prices; These increases were partially offset by: A $716 million decrease due to the sale of the majority of our U.S. E&P operations in 2007, reflecting the absence of $1.4 billion of revenue from these operations, partially offset by the absence of a $541 million charge predominantly due to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil derivatives and subsequent changes in the fair value of these derivatives; and a $171 million charge primarily due to the termination of VPP agreements in connection with the sale; and A $179 million decrease in nonutility coal sales primarily related to exiting this activity. Operating Expenses and Other Items Electric fuel and energy purchases expense increased 18% to $4.0 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $321 million increase for our utility generation operations. This increase was largely due to a $434 million increase in fuel costs, primarily as a result of higher commodity prices, including purchased power. The increase in fuel costs was partially offset by the deferral of fuel expenses that were in excess of the fuel rate recovery ($113 million); A $126 million increase for our merchant generation operations primarily reflecting the impact of higher commodity prices ($54 million) and increased fuel consumption ($72 million) at certain fossil generation facilities; and A $111 million increase from retail energy marketing operations due to higher prices ($86 million) and increased expenses due to the acquisition of an additional retail business ($55 million), partially offset by lower volumes ($30 million). Purchased gas expense increased 22% to $3.4 billion, primarily due to the following factors: A $274 million increase for our producer services business primarily as a result of an increase in prices associated with natural gas aggregation and marketing activities; A $247 million increase in the cost of gas sold by our gas distribution operations primarily reflecting the combined effects of the following: A $129 million increase in volumes primarily due to the net impact of the sale of gas inventory by Dominion East Ohio related to its plan to exit the gas merchant function in Ohio and have all customers select an alternate gas supplier partially offset by lower sales for our regulated gas distribution operations; and A $118 million increase due to higher prices; and A $120 million increase in the cost of gas sold by retail energy marketing operations due to higher prices; partially offset by A $60 million decrease due to the sale of the majority of our U.S. E&P operations. Other energy-related commodity purchases expense decreased 76% to $60 million, primarily due to a $194 million decrease in the cost of nonutility coal sales related to exiting this activity. Other operations and maintenance expense decreased 21% to $3.3 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $443 million decrease reflecting the sale of the majority of our U.S. E&P operations, including the absence of charges incurred in 2007 in connection with the sale; The absence of a $387 million impairment charge in 2007 related to the sale of Dresden; and The absence of $54 million of litigation-related charges in 2007. Gain on sale of U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business primarily reflects the absence of the gain of $3.6 billion resulting from the completion of the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business in 2007. DD&A decreased 24% to $1.0 billion, principally due to decreased gas and oil production resulting from the sale of the majority of our U.S. E&P operations in 2007, partially offset by an increase in rates and production from our remaining E&P operations, property additions and an increase in depreciation rates for our utility generation assets. Other taxes decreased 10% to $499 million primarily due to lower severance and property taxes resulting from the sale of the majority of our U.S. E&P operations in 2007. Other income (loss) was a loss of $58 million in 2008 as compared to income of $102 million in 2007, primarily due to higher other-than-temporary impairments for nuclear decommissioning trust investments. Interest and related charges decreased 28% to $853 million, resulting principally from the absence of charges related to the early extinguishment of outstanding debt associated with our debt tender offer completed in July 2007 and lower interest rates on variable rate debt. Income tax expense decreased by 51% to $879 million, primarily due to lower pre-tax income in 2008 largely reflecting the absence of the gain realized in 2007 from the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business. 39 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued Extraordinary item reflects the absence of a $158 million after-tax charge in 2007 in connection with the reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations. 2007 VS . 2006 Operating Revenue decreased 14% to $14.8 billion, primarily reflecting: A $665 million decrease in our producer services business largely due to the net impact of a decrease in economic hedging activity ($612 million) and a decrease in physical realized prices ($113 million), partially offset by an increase in physical realized volumes ($60 million), all associated with natural gas aggregation and marketing activities; A $632 million decrease in sales of gas and oil production primarily due to lower volumes due to the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business; A $541 million decrease predominantly due to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil derivatives and subsequent changes in the fair value of these derivatives as a result of the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business; A $422 million decrease in revenue from sales of oil purchased by E&P operations, primarily due to the impact of netting sales and purchases of oil under buy/sell arrangements associated with the implementation of EITF 04-13, Accounting for Purchases and Sales of Inventory with the Same Counterparty, in 2006, as discussed in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements; A $309 million decrease in nonutility coal sales, primarily from reduced sales volumes ($281 million) related to exiting certain sales activities and lower prices ($28 million); A $273 million decrease reflecting the absence of business interruption insurance revenue received in 2006, associated with the 2005 hurricanes; A $231 million charge related to the termination of a long-term power sales agreement at State Line; A $222 million decrease in regulated gas sales by our gas distribution operations reflecting the combined effects of: A $185 million decrease reflecting lower gas prices; and A $198 million decrease resulting from the migration of customers to energy choice programs; partially offset by A $161 million increase in volumes due to an increase in the number of heating degree days, primarily in the first quarter of 2007, and changes in customer usage patterns and other factors; A $171 million decrease primarily due to the termination of VPP agreements as a result of the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business. We have retained the repurchased fixed-term overriding royalty interests formerly associated with these agreements; and A $65 million decrease in nonregulated gas sales by our gas distribution operations primarily due to a decrease in volumes; These decreases were partially offset by: A $581 million increase in revenue from our electric utility operations, largely resulting from: A $166 million increase due to the impact of a comparatively higher fuel rate implemented in July 2007 for certain customer jurisdictions; A $162 million increase in sales to retail customers attributable to variations in rates resulting from changes in sales mix and other factors ($95 million) and new customer connections ($67 million) primarily in our residential and commercial customer classes; A $131 million increase in sales to retail customers due to an increase in the number of cooling and heating degree days. As compared to the prior year, we experienced a 15% increase in cooling degree days and a 10% increase in heating degree days; An $80 million increase in sales to wholesale customers; and A $42 million increase resulting primarily from higher ancillary service revenue reflecting higher regulation and operating reserves revenue received from PJM; A $508 million increase for merchant generation operations, primarily reflecting higher realized prices for nuclear and fossil operations ($354 million), including higher capacity revenue associated with new capacity markets in ISO New England and PJM, and increased volumes for fossil operations ($154 million); A $139 million increase in gas sales by retail energy marketing operations due to increased customer accounts ($189 million), partially offset by lower contracted sales prices ($50 million); and An $88 million increase in gas transportation and storage revenue primarily attributable to our gas distribution operations due to increased volumes and higher prices. Operating Expenses and Other Items Electric fuel and energy purchases expense increased 9% to $3.4 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: A $128 million increase for utility generation operations. The underlying fuel costs, including those subject to deferral accounting, increased by approximately $536 million due to higher consumption of fossil fuel and purchased power resulting from an increase in the number of heating and cooling degree days, higher commodity costs and a change in generation mix. This increase was largely offset by a $408 million decrease primarily due to the deferral of fuel expenses that were in excess of current period fuel rate recovery; An $85 million increase for our merchant generation operations primarily due to higher commodity prices and increased fossil fuel consumption; and A $40 million increase related to our retail energy marketing operations primarily due to higher volumes ($22 million) and prices ($18 million). Purchased gas expense decreased 22% to $2.8 billion, primarily due to the following factors: A $594 million decrease associated with our producer services business largely due to a decrease in economic hedging for natural gas aggregation and marketing activities; A $247 million decrease in costs attributable to gas distribution operations primarily due to lower prices ($225 million) and volumes ($22 million); and A $97 million decrease related to gas purchased by our E&P operations to facilitate gas transportation and other contracts primarily due to the implementation of EITF 04-13, as discussed in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements; 40 Table of Contents These decreases were partially offset by: An $85 million increase associated with retail energy marketing operations, due to higher volumes ($168 million), partially offset by lower prices ($83 million). Other energy-related commodity purchases expense decreased 75% to $252 million, primarily attributable to the following factors: A $409 million decrease related to commodity purchases by our E&P operations to facilitate gas transportation and other contracts primarily due to the implementation of EITF 04-13; A $310 million decrease in the cost of nonutility coal sales related to exiting this activity; and A $51 million decrease in the cost of sales of emissions allowances held for resale. Other operations and maintenance expense increased 14% to $4.1 billion, resulting primarily from: A $387 million impairment charge related to the sale of Dresden; A $124 million increase in salaries, wages and benefits expense primarily resulting from higher incentive-based compensation ($100 million) and higher salaries and wages ($83 million), partially offset by lower pension and healthcare benefits expense ($59 million); A $96 million increase in outage costs, primarily related to scheduled outages for both utility and merchant generation operations; A $54 million increase due to a decrease in gains from the sale of emissions allowances held for consumption; and A $54 million increase resulting from litigation-related charges; partially offset by The absence of a $166 million charge in 2006 related to the write-off of certain regulatory assets in connection with the planned sale of Peoples and Hope. Gain on sale of U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business reflects a pre-tax gain of $3.6 billion resulting from the completion of the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business. DD&A decreased 12% to $1.4 billion, principally due to decreased oil and gas production resulting from the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business ($297 million); partially offset by an increase in DD&A rates for our remaining Appalachian E&P business ($124 million). Other income decreased 41% to $102 million, resulting primarily from the recognition of decommissioning trust earnings as a regulatory liability due to the reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations, as well as an increase in charitable contributions. Interest and related charges increased 8% to $1.2 billion, resulting principally from charges related to the early extinguishment of outstanding debt associated with our debt tender offer completed in July 2007, partially offset by a reduction in interest expense resulting from the retirement of this and other debt and the absence of a $60 million charge in 2006 due to the elimination of hedge accounting for certain interest rate swaps associated with our junior subordinated notes payable to affiliated trusts. Income tax expense increased to $1.8 billion, primarily reflecting income tax expense on the gain realized from the sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business. Loss from discontinued operations decreased to $8 million primarily reflecting the absence of a $164 million after-tax charge in 2006 related to the Peaker facilities, which were sold in 2007. Extraordinary item reflects a $158 million after-tax charge in connection with the reapplication of SFAS No. 71 to the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations. Outlook In order to deliver favorable returns to investors, Dominion strategy is to focus on its regulated businesses while maintaining upside potential in well-positioned nonregulated businesses. The goals of this regulated plus model are to provide earnings per share growth, a growing dividend and stable credit ratings. In 2009, we believe our operating businesses will provide moderate growth in net income on a per share basis, including the impact of higher expected average shares outstanding. Our expected results for 2009 include the following growth factors: Higher earnings from Dominion East Ohio as a result of a base rate increase approved in the fourth quarter of 2008; An increase in earnings from our merchant generation operations primarily reflecting higher realized prices for energy and capacity, and one less outage at our Millstone power station; Higher earnings from our LNG and gas transmission and storage operations, reflecting expansion projects at our Cove Point LNG terminal and DTI pipeline system that were completed in December 2008; and An increase in earnings from our electric utility operations assuming an increase in base rates resulting from the 2009 base rate review, normal weather in our utility service territory, rate adjustments for certain generation and transmission expansion projects and continued growth in sales. Despite the recent economic downturn we expect continued growth in sales due to several factors including our limited exposure to industrial customers, an unemployment rate in Virginia that is below the national average, a growing number of energy-intensive computer data centers and significant government presence in our Northern Virginia service territory and U.S. military base closures and reassignments that have resulted in personnel being shifted to facilities in Virginia such as Fort Lee and Fort Belvoir. The increase in 2009 is expected to be partially offset by: Higher interest expense reflecting difficult credit market conditions; An increase in pension and other postretirement benefit costs, largely reflecting the impact of 2008 declines in the market values of investments held to fund these obligations; The impact of lower commodity prices on the market prices received for our unhedged natural gas production; and A decline in production from fixed-term overriding royalty interests formerly associated with our VPP agreements, reflecting the expiration of these interests in February 2009. See Impact of Recent Credit Market Events in Liquidity and Capital Resources for additional factors that may influence our results. 41 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued S EGMENT R ESULTS OF O PERATIONS Segment results include the impact of intersegment revenues and expenses, which may result in intersegment profit or loss. Presented below is a summary of contributions by our operating segments to net income: Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 Net Income Diluted EPS Net Income Diluted EPS Net Income Diluted EPS (millions, except EPS) DVP $ 380 $ 0.65 $ 415 $ 0.64 $ 411 $ 0.59 Dominion Energy 468 0.81 387 0.59 347 0.49 Dominion Generation 1,227 2.11 756 1.15 537 0.76 Primary operating segments 2,075 3.57 1,558 2.38 1,295 1.84 Corporate and Other (241 ) (0.41 ) 981 1.50 85 0.12 Consolidated $ 1,834 $ 3.16 $ 2,539 $ 3.88 $ 1,380 $ 1.96 DVP Presented below are operating statistics related to DVP operations: Year Ended December 31, 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Electricity delivered (million mwhrs) (1) 84.0 (1 )% 84.7 6 % 79.8 Degree days: Cooling (2) 1,621 (10 ) 1,794 15 1,557 Heating (3) 3,426 (2 ) 3,500 10 3,178 Average electric distribution customer accounts (thousands) (4) 2,386 1 2,361 1 2,327 Average retail energy marketing customer accounts (thousands) (4) 1,601 3 1,551 15 1,354 (1) Includes electricity delivered through the retail choice program for our Virginia jurisdictional electric utility customers. (2) Cooling degree days are units measuring the extent to which the average daily temperature is greater than 65 degrees, and are calculated as the difference between 65 degrees and the average temperature for that day. (3) Heating degree days are units measuring the extent to which the average daily temperature is less than 65 degrees, and are calculated as the difference between 65 degrees and the average temperature for that day. (4) Thirteen-month average. Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting DVP net income contribution: 2008 VS . 2007 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Regulated electric sales: Weather $ (14 ) $ (0.03 ) Customer growth 9 0.01 Other (9 ) (0.01 ) Storm damage and service restoration distribution operations (1) (10 ) (0.02 ) Interest expense (9 ) (0.01 ) Retail energy marketing operations (2 ) (0.01 ) Share accretion 0.08 Change in net income contribution $ (35 ) $ 0.01 (1) Reflects an increase in storm damage and service restoration costs resulting from more severe weather during 2008. 2007 VS . 2006 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Regulated electric sales: Weather $ 22 $ 0.03 Customer growth 11 0.02 Storm damage and service restoration distribution operations (1) 9 0.01 Reliability and outside services expenses (18 ) (0.02 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (15 ) (0.02 ) Other (5 ) (0.01 ) Share accretion 0.04 Change in net income contribution $ 4 $ 0.05 (1) Primarily resulting from the absence in 2007 of expenses associated with tropical storm Ernesto in September 2006. 42 Table of Contents Dominion Energy Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion Energy operations: Year Ended December 31, 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Gas distribution throughput (bcf): Sales 50 % 50 (11 )% 56 Transportation 216 3 210 9 193 Heating degree days 6,162 5 5,886 12 5,274 Average gas distribution customer accounts (thousands) (1) : Sales 388 (5 ) 410 (15 ) 485 Transportation 814 2 800 9 732 Production (2) (bcfe) 64.6 12 57.6 47 39.1 Average realized prices without hedging results (per mcfe) $ 8.73 33 $ 6.55 (8 ) $ 7.11 Average realized prices with hedging results (per mcfe) 8.50 30 6.55 33 4.93 DD&A (unit of production rate per mcfe) 1.93 15 1.68 31 1.28 Average production (lifting) cost (per mcfe) (3) 1.37 7 1.28 8 1.19 (1) Thirteen-month average. (2) Includes natural gas, natural gas liquids and oil. Production includes 17.8 bcfe and 15.5 bcfe for 2008 and 2007, respectively, associated with reacquired overriding royalty interests arising from the VPPs terminated in 2007. (3) The inclusion of volumes associated with reacquired overriding royalty interests arising from the VPPs terminated in 2007 would have resulted in lifting costs of $1.11 and $1.00 for 2008 and 2007, respectively. Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Energy net income contribution: 2008 VS . 2007 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Gas and oil prices $ 44 $ 0.07 Gas and oil production (1) 40 0.06 DD&A gas and oil (17 ) (0.03 ) Producer services (6 ) (0.01 ) Other 20 0.04 Share accretion 0.09 Change in net income contribution $ 81 $ 0.22 (1) Primarily reflects an increase in volumes associated with reacquired overriding royalty interests arising from the VPPs terminated in 2007. 2007 VS . 2006 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Gas and oil production $ 66 $ 0.10 Gas and oil prices 33 0.05 Regulated gas sales weather 16 0.02 Producer services (1) (33 ) (0.05 ) DD&A gas and oil (27 ) (0.04 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (7 ) (0.01 ) Gas transmission operations (2) (6 ) (0.01 ) Other (2 ) Share accretion 0.04 Change in net income contribution $ 40 $ 0.10 (1) Primarily related to lower margins reflecting reduced market volatility, as compared to the post-2005 hurricane market conditions in 2006. (2) Gas transmission operations decreased primarily due to a decline in market center services, partially offset by lower system fuel costs and higher margins on extracted products. Included below are the volumes and weighted-average prices associated with hedges in place for our Appalachian E&P operations and fixed-term overriding royalty interests formerly associated with the VPP agreements as of December 31, 2008, by applicable time period. Natural Gas Year Hedged production (bcf) Average hedge price (per mcf) 2009 31.8 $ 9.08 2010 14.8 8.62 2011 1.4 7.36 Dominion Generation Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion Generation operations: Year Ended December 31, 2008 % Change 2007 % Change 2006 Electricity supplied (million mwhrs): Utility 84.0 (1 )% 84.7 6 % 79.7 Merchant 45.3 (2 ) 46.0 11 41.5 Degree days (electric utility service area): Cooling 1,621 (10 ) 1,794 15 1,557 Heating 3,426 (2 ) 3,500 10 3,178 43 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Generation net income contribution: 2008 VS . 2007 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Virginia fuel expenses (1) $ 243 $ 0.37 Merchant generation margin (2) 174 0.27 Interest expense 41 0.06 Depreciation and amortization (37 ) (0.06 ) Regulated electric sales: Weather (27 ) (0.04 ) Customer growth 16 0.03 Other (3) 26 0.04 Other 35 0.05 Share accretion 0.24 Change in net income contribution $ 471 $ 0.96 (1) Primarily reflects the reapplication of deferred fuel accounting effective July 1, 2007 for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations. (2) Primarily reflects higher realized prices, partially offset by higher fuel costs and lower volumes at certain generation facilities due to outages. (3) Primarily reflects higher margins associated with sales to wholesale customers. 2007 VS . 2006 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Merchant generation margin (1) $ 211 $ 0.30 Virginia fuel expenses (2) 120 0.17 Regulated electric sales: Weather 37 0.05 Customer growth 20 0.03 Ancillary service revenue 27 0.04 Outage costs (3) (61 ) (0.09 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (51 ) (0.07 ) Sales of emissions allowances (34 ) (0.05 ) Depreciation and amortization (4) (32 ) (0.05 ) Interest expense (9 ) (0.01 ) Other (9 ) (0.01 ) Share accretion 0.08 Change in net income contribution $ 219 $ 0.39 (1) Primarily reflects higher realized prices for our New England nuclear and fossil generating assets and higher volumes and capacity revenue for other fossil generation operations. Higher prices include the implementation of new capacity markets in ISO New England and PJM. (2) Primarily reflects the reapplication of deferred fuel accounting effective July 1, 2007 for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations; partially offset by increased consumption of fossil fuel and higher purchased power costs during the first six months of 2007. (3) Primarily reflects higher scheduled outage costs for both utility and merchant generation operations. (4) Principally attributable to increased expense from capital additions and revised depreciation rates for our utility generation assets resulting from a new depreciation study implemented during the fourth quarter of 2007. Corporate and Other Presented below are the Corporate and Other segment after-tax results: Year Ended December 31, 2008 2007 2006 (millions, except EPS amounts) Specific items attributable to operating segments $ (137 ) $ (618 ) $ (10 ) Discontinued operations (2 ) (8 ) (150 ) Sale of U.S. E&P business (26 ) 1,426 (5 ) Divested U.S. E&P operations 252 625 Peoples and Hope 78 49 (72 ) Other corporate operations (154 ) (120 ) (303 ) Total net benefit (expense) $ (241 ) $ 981 $ 85 Earnings per share impact $ (0.41 ) $ 1.50 $ 0.12 S PECIFIC I TEMS A TTRIBUTABLE TO O PERATING S EGMENTS Corporate and Other includes specific items attributable to our primary operating segments that are not included in profit measures evaluated by executive management in assessing the segments performance or allocating resources among the segments. See Note 26 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of these items. D ISCONTINUED O PERATIONS The decrease in the loss from the discontinued operations for 2007 as compared to 2006 primarily reflects the impact of a $164 million after-tax charge in 2006 associated with the impairment of the Peaker facilities that were sold in 2007. S ALE OF U.S. E&P B USINESS The sale of our U.S. non-Appalachian E&P business reflects the $2.1 billion after-tax gain recognized in 2007 on the sale, partially offset by charges related to the divestitures as well as charges associated with the early retirement of debt with proceeds from the sale. The 2008 amount reflects post-closing adjustments to the gain on the sale. See Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of these items. D IVESTED U.S. E&P O PERATIONS The lower contribution in 2007 as compared to 2006 is due primarily to a partial year of gas and oil production in 2007 as compared to 2006 and the absence of business interruption insurance revenue received in 2006, associated with the 2005 hurricanes. These decreases were partially offset by higher realized gas and oil prices. P EOPLES AND H OPE The increased net benefit in 2008 primarily reflects a $47 million ($28 million after tax) benefit from the re-establishment of certain regulatory assets in connection with the agreement to sell these subsidiaries to BBIFNA. Regulatory assets of $166 million ($104 million after tax) were previously written off in 2006 in connection with the previous sales agreement with Equitable. See Notes 5 and 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of these items. 44 Table of Contents O THER C ORPORATE O PERATIONS The net expenses associated with other corporate operations for 2008 increased by $34 million as compared to 2007, primarily reflecting a decrease in tax benefits, higher interest expense and the absence of interest income earned on the proceeds received from the sale of our non-Appalachian E&P business in 2007. The decrease in tax benefits primarily reflects the net impact of the following items: A decrease in state tax benefits, including the impact of Massachusetts tax legislation enacted in July 2008; and The absence of tax benefits from the elimination of valuation allowances on federal and state tax loss carryforwards in 2007, partially offset by An increase in tax benefits due to the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with Peoples and Hope in the first quarter of 2008. The increase in net expenses was partially offset by the impact of lower impairment charges in 2008 related to the disposition of certain DCI investments. The net expenses associated with other corporate operations for 2007 decreased by $183 million as compared to 2006, primarily due to a reduction in interest expense following completion of the debt tender offer in July 2007, the absence of a charge in 2006 to eliminate the application of hedge accounting for certain interest rate swaps and a reduction in charges associated with the impairment of DCI investments. In addition, income tax benefits were lower in 2006, resulting primarily from the recognition of deferred tax liabilities in connection with the planned sale of Peoples and Hope. S ELECTED I NFORMATION E NERGY T RADING A CTIVITIES We engage in energy trading, marketing and hedging activities to complement our integrated energy businesses and facilitate our risk management activities. As part of these operations, we enter into contracts for purchases and sales of energy-related commodities, including electricity, natural gas and other energy-related products. Settlements of contracts may require physical delivery of the underlying commodity or cash settlement. We also enter into contracts with the objective of benefiting from changes in prices. For example, after entering into a contract to purchase a commodity, we typically enter into a sales contract, or a combination of sales contracts, with quantities and delivery or settlement terms that are identical or very similar to those of the purchase contract. When the purchase and sales contracts are settled either by physical delivery of the underlying commodity or by net cash settlement, we may receive a net cash margin (a realized gain), or may pay a net cash margin (a realized loss). We continually monitor our contract positions, considering location and timing of delivery or settlement for each energy commodity in relation to market price activity. A summary of the changes in the unrealized gains and losses recognized for our energy-related derivative instruments held for trading purposes during 2008 follows: Amount (millions) Net unrealized gain at December 31, 2007 $ 52 Contracts realized or otherwise settled during the period (39 ) Net unrealized gain at inception of contracts initiated during the period Change in unrealized gains and losses 30 Changes in unrealized gains and losses attributable to changes in valuation techniques Net unrealized gain at December 31, 2008 $ 43 The fair values summarized below were determined in accordance with the requirements of SFAS No. 157, which we adopted effective January 1, 2008. In addition, we aligned the categories below with the Level 1, 2, and 3 fair value measurements as defined by SFAS No. 157. The balance of net unrealized gains and losses recognized for our energy-related derivative instruments held for trading purposes at December 31, 2008, is summarized in the following table based on the approach used to determine fair value: Maturity Based on Contract Settlement or Delivery Date(s) Source of Fair Value Less than 1 year 1-2 years 2-3 years 3-5 years In excess of 5 years Total (millions) Actively-quoted Level 1 (1) $ 2 $ $ $ $ $ 2 Other external sources Level 2 (2) 33 4 37 Models and other valuation methods Level 3 (3) 4 1 (1 ) 4 Total $ 39 $ 5 $ (1 ) $ $ $ 43 (1) Values represent observable unadjusted quoted prices for traded instruments in active markets. (2) Values with inputs that are observable directly or indirectly for the instrument, but do not qualify for Level 1. (3) Values with a significant amount of inputs that are not observable for the instrument. L IQUIDITY AND C APITAL R ESOURCES We depend on both internal and external sources of liquidity to provide working capital and to fund capital requirements. Short-term cash requirements not met by cash provided by operations are generally satisfied with proceeds from short-term borrowings. Long-term cash needs are met through issuances of debt and/or equity securities. At December 31, 2008, we had $2.9 billion of unused capacity under our credit facilities, excluding commitments provided by Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. (Lehman). See additional discussion under Credit Facilities and Short-Term Debt . 45 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued A summary of our cash flows is presented below: 2008 2007 2006 (millions) Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year $ 287 $ 142 $ 146 Cash flows provided by (used in): Operating activities 2,659 (246 ) 4,005 Investing activities (3,490 ) 10,192 (3,494 ) Financing activities 615 (9,801 ) (515 ) Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents (216 ) 145 (4 ) Cash and cash equivalents at end of year (1) $ 71 $ 287 $ 142 (1) 2008 amount includes $5 million and 2007 and 2006 amounts include $4 million of cash classified as held for sale in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Impact of Recent Credit Market Events Despite recent disruptions in the credit markets, we have sufficient access to liquidity for our daily operations through our credit facilities discussed in Financing Cash Flows and Liquidity . While we continue to issue commercial paper, in October 2008 we borrowed $870 million from our credit facilities to reduce our exposure to the commercial paper market. We expect our operations to provide sufficient cash flow to fund maintenance capital expenditures, maintain or grow our dividend and fund a portion of our growth capital expenditures; however, we expect to access the capital markets to fund the balance of our growth capital expenditures not covered by cash flow from operations. If necessary, we have the flexibility to mitigate the need for future debt financings and equity issuances, by postponing or cancelling certain planned capital expenditures, however, a material reduction or delay in growth projects would likely reduce our earnings per share growth rate longer term. Given the increased interest rates and widespread economic pressures in the marketplace, we plan to conserve cash and lower our financing requirements. In December 2008, we announced that we plan to selectively reduce 2009 non-fuel operating and maintenance expenses, which will include work force management, contractor, consultant, advertising and non-utility maintenance reductions. In addition, we will reduce planned capital expenditures by approximately $350 million. We do not expect the planned reduction in spending to adversely impact safety or customer service. As a result of the reduction in spending and the impact of increasing costs of capital, increases in pension and other benefit costs as well as a decline in commodity prices, we now expect lower earnings per share growth in 2009 and 2010 than previously forecast. Despite projected increases in pension and other benefit costs, no contributions to our pension plans are currently expected in 2009 or 2010. We do not expect to change our dividend policy in response to recent events in the credit markets. In fact, in December 2008, our Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of 43.75 cents per share to be paid in March 2009, raising the quarterly dividend approximately 11%, from the existing quarterly dividend rate of 39.5 cents per share. Stated as an annual rate, the Board action increases the dividend rate from $1.58 per share in 2008 to $1.75 per share in 2009. The Board of Directors also reconfirmed a goal of achieving a 55% dividend payout ratio by 2010. Operating Cash Flows In 2008, net cash provided by operating activities was approximately $2.7 billion as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $246 million in 2007. This primarily reflects the absence of income taxes paid in 2007 on the gain from the sale of a majority of our E&P business, the benefit from the reinstatement of annual fuel rate adjustments for the Virginia jurisdiction of our utility generation operations effective July 1, 2007 and a higher contribution from our merchant generation business, partially offset by a reduction in cash flow resulting from the disposition of the majority of our E&P operations and unfavorable changes in working capital. While taxes and other costs of the sale in 2007 were reflected in cash flow from operations, the gross proceeds from the sale were reported in cash flow from investing activities. Our operations are subject to risks and uncertainties that may negatively impact the timing or amounts of operating cash flows which are discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors. C REDIT R ISK Our exposure to potential concentrations of credit risk results primarily from our energy marketing and price risk management activities. Presented below is a summary of our credit exposure as of December 31, 2008 for these activities. Our gross credit exposure for each counterparty is calculated as outstanding receivables plus any unrealized on or off-balance sheet exposure, taking into account contractual netting rights. Gross Credit Exposure Credit Collateral Net Credit Exposure (millions) Investment grade (1) $ 1,229 $ 348 $ 881 Non-investment grade (2) 12 12 No external ratings: Internally rated investment grade (3) 289 2 287 Internally rated non-investment grade (4) 22 22 Total $ 1,552 $ 350 $ 1,202 (1) Designations as investment grade are based upon minimum credit ratings assigned by Moody and Standard & Poor s. The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 42% of the total net credit exposure. (2) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented less than 1% of the total net credit exposure. (3) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 16% of the total net credit exposure. (4) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 1% of the total net credit exposure. Investing Cash Flows In 2008, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $3.5 billion as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $10.2 billion in 2007. This change is primarily due to the absence of the proceeds received in 2007 from the sales of our non-Appalachian E&P business and Peaker facilities, a reduction in capital expenditures as a result of the disposition of the majority of our E&P operations, and proceeds received from the assignment of drilling rights in the Marcellus Shale formation to Antero in 2008, partially offset by an increase in capital expenditures primarily related to our electric utility operations and our investment in wind farm facilities. 46 Table of Contents Financing Cash Flows and Liquidity We rely on banks and capital markets as significant sources of funding for capital requirements not satisfied by cash provided by our operations. As discussed in Credit Ratings , our ability to borrow funds or issue securities and the return demanded by investors are affected by our credit ratings. In addition, the raising of external capital is subject to certain regulatory approvals, including registration with the SEC and, in the case of Virginia Power, approval by the Virginia Commission. In December 2005, the SEC adopted the rules that currently govern the registration, communications and offering processes under the Securities Act of 1933 (Securities Act). The rules provide for a streamlined shelf registration process to provide registrants with timely access to capital. Under these rules, Dominion and Virginia Power meet the definition of a well-known seasoned issuer. This allows the companies to use an automatic shelf registration statement to register any offering of securities, other than those for business combination transactions. In 2008, net cash provided by financing activities was $615 million as compared to net cash used in financing activities of $9.8 billion in 2007. This change is primarily due to net issuances of common stock and short-term and long-term debt in 2008 as compared to net repurchases and repayments in 2007 reflecting the use of proceeds received in 2007 from the sale of the majority of our E&P business. C REDIT F ACILITIES AND S HORT -T ERM D EBT We use short-term debt to fund working capital requirements, as a bridge to long-term debt financing and as bridge financing for acquisitions, if applicable. The levels of borrowing may vary significantly during the course of the year, depending upon the timing and amount of cash requirements not satisfied by cash from operations. In addition, we utilize cash and letters of credit to fund collateral requirements under our commodities hedging program. Collateral requirements are impacted by commodity prices, hedging levels, our credit quality and the credit quality of our counterparties. Our credit facility commitments are with a large consortium of banks, including Lehman. In September 2008, Lehman filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code in the United States Bankruptcy Court in the Southern District of New York. As of December 31, 2008, Lehman total commitment to our credit facilities was less than four percent of the aggregate commitment from the consortium of banks. We believe that the potential reduction in available capacity under these credit facilities that could result from Lehman bankruptcy will not have a significant impact on our liquidity. At December 31, 2008, we had committed lines of credit totaling $5.2 billion, excluding commitments provided by Lehman. These lines of credit support commercial paper borrowings, bank loans and letter of credit issuances. Our financial policy precludes issuing commercial paper in excess of our supporting lines of credit. At December 31, 2008, we had the following commercial paper, bank loans and letters of credit outstanding, as well as capacity available under credit facilities: Facility Limit Outstanding Commercial Paper Outstanding Bank Loans Outstanding Letters of Credit Facility Capacity Available (millions) Five-year joint revolving credit facility (1) $ 2,837 $ 297 $ $ 187 $ 2,353 Five-year Dominion credit facility (2) 1,700 208 1,470 22 Five-year Dominion bilateral facility (3) 200 55 75 70 364-day Dominion credit facility (4) 467 467 Totals $ 5,204 $ 560 $ 1,470 $ 284 $ 2,890 (1) The $2.8 billion five-year credit facility was entered into February 2006 and terminates in February 2011. This credit facility can be used to support bank borrowings and the issuance of commercial paper, as well as to support up to $1.5 billion of letters of credit. (2) The $1.7 billion five-year credit facility was entered into in August 2005 and terminates in August 2010. This facility can be used to support bank borrowings, the issuance of letters of credit and commercial paper. (3) The $200 million five-year facility was entered into in December 2005 and terminates in December 2010. This credit facility can be used to support commercial paper and letter of credit issuances. (4) The $467 million 364-day credit facility was entered into in July 2008 and terminates in July 2009. This credit facility can be used to support bank borrowings and the issuance of commercial paper. In addition to the facilities above, we also entered into a $100 million bilateral credit facility in August 2004 that was to terminate in August 2009. In May 2008, we terminated this facility. Also, in addition to the credit facility commitments of $5.2 billion disclosed above, we have a $182 million five-year credit facility, excluding commitments provided by Lehman, that supports certain Virginia Power tax-exempt financings. In connection with our commodity hedging activities, we are required to provide collateral to counterparties under some circumstances. Under certain collateral arrangements, we may satisfy these requirements by electing to either deposit cash, post letters of credit or, in some cases, utilize other forms of security. From time to time, we vary the form of collateral provided to counterparties after weighing the costs and benefits of various factors associated with the different forms of collateral. These factors include short-term borrowing and short-term investment rates, the spread over these short-term rates at which we can issue commercial paper, balance sheet impacts, the costs and fees of alternative collateral postings with these and other counterparties and overall liquidity management objectives. As previously discussed, we have entered into an agreement with BBIFNA to sell Peoples and Hope for approximately $910 million, subject to adjustments to reflect levels of capital expenditures and changes in working capital. The transaction is expected to close in 2009, subject to regulatory approvals in Pennsylvania and West Virginia as well as clearance under the Exon-Florio provision of the 47 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act. We expect to use the after-tax proceeds from the sale to reduce our debt. L ONG -T ERM D EBT During 2008 we issued the following long-term debt: Type Principal Rate Maturity Issuing Company (millions) Senior notes $ 500 6.40% 2018 Dominion Senior notes 400 7.00% 2038 Dominion Senior notes 600 8.875% 2019 Dominion Senior notes 300 Variable 2010 Dominion Senior notes 600 5.40% 2018 Virginia Power Senior notes 700 8.875% 2038 Virginia Power Total senior notes issued $ 3,100 In January 2008, Virginia Power borrowed $30 million in connection with the Economic Development Authority of the City of Chesapeake Pollution Control Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 2008 A, which mature in 2032 and bear interest at an initial coupon rate of 3.6% for the first five years and at a market rate to be determined thereafter. The proceeds were used to refund the principal amount of the Industrial Development Authority of the City of Chesapeake Money Market Municipals Pollution Control Revenue Bonds, Series 1985 that would otherwise have matured in February 2008. In November 2008, Virginia Power borrowed $122 million in connection with the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Louisa Pollution Control Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 2008 A and B, which mature in 2035 and bear interest at an initial coupon rate of 5.375% for the first five years and at a market rate to be determined thereafter. The proceeds were used to refund the principal amount of the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Louisa Money Market Municipals Pollution Control Revenue Bonds, Series 1984 and 1985 that would have otherwise matured in December 2008. In November 2008, Virginia Power borrowed approximately $38 million in connection with the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Louisa Pollution Control Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 2008 C, which mature in 2035 and bear interest at an initial coupon rate of 5.0% for the first three years and at a market rate to be determined thereafter. The proceeds were used to refund the principal amount of the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Louisa Money Market Municipals Pollution Control Revenue Bonds, Series 1987 and the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Louisa Pollution Control Revenue Bonds, Series 1994 that would have otherwise matured in December 2015 and January 2024, respectively. Including the amounts discussed above, during 2008, we repaid $2.3 billion of long-term debt and notes payable, which also includes Virginia Power repayment of the $412 million 7.375% unsecured Junior Subordinated Notes and the related redemption of all 16 million units of the $400 million 7.375% Virginia Power Capital Trust II preferred securities due July 30, 2042. These securities were redeemed at a price of $25 per preferred security plus accrued and unpaid distributions. I SSUANCE OF C OMMON S TOCK During 2008, we received proceeds of $240 million for 6.2 million shares issued through Dominion Direct (a dividend reinvestment and open enrollment direct stock purchase plan), employee savings plans and the exercise of employee stock options. We expect to issue approximately $500 million of common stock in 2009 and $400 million in 2010. A portion of the proceeds will come from Dominion Direct , employee savings plans and the exercise of employee stock options, with the remainder coming from issuances on the open market. In January 2009, we entered into three separate sales agency agreements with BNY Mellon Capital Markets, LLC; Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated; and Morgan Stanley & Co. Incorporated (collectively the Sales Agents) pursuant to which we may offer from time to time up to $400 million aggregate amount of our common stock. Sales of common stock can be made by means of privately negotiated transactions, as transactions on the New York Stock Exchange at market prices or in such other transactions as are agreed upon by the Company and the Sales Agents and in conformance with applicable securities laws. We provided sales instructions to one of the Sales Agents during February 2009 and have completed several trades resulting in the issuance of a moderate number of shares. In February 2009, we also issued approximately 1.6 million shares of common stock to an existing holder of our senior notes, in a privately negotiated transaction, in exchange for approximately $56 million of the principal of two series of our outstanding senior notes, which were retired. The transaction was exempt from registration pursuant to Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act and no commission or remuneration was paid in connection with the exchange. R EPURCHASES OF C OMMON S TOCK At December 31, 2008, the remaining stock repurchase authorization provided by our Board of Directors is the lesser of 54 million shares or $2.7 billion of our outstanding common stock. Dominion does not expect to repurchase its common stock during 2009, except for shares tendered by employees to satisfy tax withholding obligations on vesting restricted stock, which do not count against our stock repurchase authorization. Credit Ratings Credit ratings are intended to provide banks and capital market participants with a framework for comparing the credit quality of securities and are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. We believe that the current credit ratings of Dominion and Virginia Power (the Dominion Companies) provide sufficient access to the capital markets. However, disruptions in the banking and capital markets not specifically related to us may affect the Dominion Companies ability to access these funding sources or cause an increase in the return required by investors. Both quantitative (financial strength) and qualitative (business or operating characteristics) factors are considered by the credit rating agencies in establishing an individual company credit rating. Credit ratings should be evaluated independently and are subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. The credit ratings for the Dominion Companies are most affected by each company financial profile, mix of regulated and nonregulated businesses and respective cash 48 Table of Contents flows, changes in methodologies used by the rating agencies and event risk, if applicable, such as major acquisitions or dispositions. In April 2008, Fitch upgraded its credit ratings for Virginia Power preferred stock and senior unsecured and junior subordinated debt securities and affirmed its F2 commercial paper rating. Credit ratings for the Dominion Companies as of February 1, 2009 follow: Fitch Moody Standard & Poor Dominion Resources, Inc. Senior unsecured debt securities BBB+ Baa2 A Junior subordinated debt securities BBB Baa3 BBB Enhanced junior subordinated notes BBB Baa3 BBB Commercial paper F2 P-2 A-2 Virginia Power Mortgage bonds A A3 A Senior unsecured (including tax-exempt) debt securities A Baa1 A Junior subordinated debt securities BBB+ Baa2 BBB Preferred stock BBB+ Baa3 BBB Commercial paper F2 P-2 A-2 As of February 1, 2009, Fitch, Moody and Standard & Poor maintain a stable outlook for their respective ratings of the Dominion Companies. Generally, a downgrade in an individual company credit rating would not restrict its ability to raise short-term and long-term financing as long as its credit rating remains investment grade, but it would increase the cost of borrowing. We work closely with Fitch, Moody and Standard & Poor with the objective of maintaining our current credit ratings. In order to maintain our current ratings, we may find it necessary to modify our business plans and such changes may adversely affect our growth and earnings per share. Debt Covenants As part of borrowing funds and issuing debt (both short-term and long-term) or preferred securities, the Dominion Companies must enter into enabling agreements. These agreements contain covenants that, in the event of default, could result in the acceleration of principal and interest payments; restrictions on distributions related to our capital stock, including dividends, redemptions, repurchases, liquidation payments or guarantee payments; and in some cases, the termination of credit commitments unless a waiver of such requirements is agreed to by the lenders/security holders. These provisions are customary, with each agreement specifying which covenants apply. These provisions are not necessarily unique to the Dominion Companies. Some of the typical covenants include: The timely payment of principal and interest; Information requirements, including submitting financial reports filed with the SEC to lenders; Performance obligations, audits/inspections, continuation of the basic nature of business, restrictions on certain matters related to merger or consolidation, restrictions on disposition of all or substantially all of our assets; Compliance with collateral minimums or requirements related to mortgage bonds; and Limitations on liens. We are required to pay minimal annual commitment fees to maintain our credit facilities. In addition, our credit agreements contain various terms and conditions that could affect our ability to borrow under these facilities. They include maximum debt to total capital ratios and cross-default provisions. As of December 31, 2008, the calculated total debt to total capital ratio for our companies, pursuant to the terms of the agreements, was as follows: Company Maximum Ratio Actual Ratio (1) Dominion Resources, Inc. 65 % 60 % Virginia Power 65 % 51 % (1) Indebtedness as defined by the bank agreements excludes junior subordinated notes payable reflected as long-term debt in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. These provisions apply separately to the Dominion Companies. If any one of the Dominion Companies or any of that specific company material subsidiaries fail to make payment on various debt obligations in excess of $35 million, the lenders could require that respective company to accelerate its repayment of any outstanding borrowings under the credit facility and the lenders could terminate their commitment to lend funds to that company. Accordingly, any default by Dominion will not affect the lender commitment to Virginia Power. However, any default by Virginia Power would affect the lenders commitment to Dominion under the joint credit agreement. In June 2006 and September 2006, we executed Replacement Capital Covenants (RCCs) in connection with our offering of $300 million of 2006 Series A Enhanced Junior Subordinated Notes due 2066 (June hybrids) and $500 million of 2006 Series B Enhanced Junior Subordinated Notes due 2066 (September hybrids), respectively. Under the terms of the RCCs, we agree not to redeem or repurchase all or part of the June or September hybrids prior to June 30 or September 30, 2036, respectively, unless we issue qualifying securities to non-affiliates in a replacement offering in the 180 days prior to the redemption or repurchase date. The proceeds we receive from the replacement offering, adjusted by a predetermined factor, must exceed the redemption or repurchase price. Qualifying securities include common stock, preferred stock and other securities that generally rank equal to or junior to the hybrids and include distribution deferral and long-dated maturity features similar to the hybrids. For purposes of the RCCs, non-affiliates include individuals enrolled in our dividend reinvestment plan, direct stock purchase plan and employee benefit plans. The September hybrids are designated as covered debt under the June hybrids RCC and the June hybrids are designated as covered debt under the September hybrids RCC. We monitor the covenants on a regular basis in order to ensure that events of default will not occur. As of December 31, 2008, there have been no events of default under or changes to our debt covenants. Dividend Restrictions The Virginia Commission may prohibit any public service company, including Virginia Power, from declaring or paying a dividend to an affiliate, if found to be detrimental to the public interest. At December 31, 2008, the Virginia Commission had not restricted the payment of dividends by Virginia Power. 49 Table of Contents Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Continued Certain agreements associated with our credit facilities contain restrictions on the ratio of our debt to total capitalization. These limitations did not restrict our ability to pay dividends or receive dividends from our subsidiaries at December 31, 2008. See Note 18 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of potential restrictions on dividend payments by us and certain of our subsidiaries in connection with the deferral of distribution payments on trust preferred securities or deferral of interest payments on enhanced junior subordinated notes. Future Cash Payments for Contractual Obligations and Planned Capital Expenditures C ONTRACTUAL O BLIGATIONS We are party to numerous contracts and arrangements obligating us to make cash payments in future years. These contracts include financing arrangements such as debt agreements and leases, as well as contracts for the purchase of goods and services and financial derivatives. Presented below is a table summarizing cash payments that may result from contracts to which we are a party as of December 31, 2008. For purchase obligations and other liabilities, amounts are based upon contract terms, including fixed and minimum quantities to be purchased at fixed or market-based prices. Actual cash payments will be based upon actual quantities purchased and prices paid and will likely differ from amounts presented below. The table excludes all amounts classified as current liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, other than current maturities of long-term debt, interest payable and certain derivative instruments. The majority of our current liabilities will be paid in cash in 2009. 2009 2010 - 2011 2012 - 2013 2014 and thereafter Total (millions) Long-term debt (1) $ 435 $ 1,632 $ 2,234 $ 11,121 $ 15,422 Interest payments (2) 898 1,700 1,527 10,980 15,105 Leases 121 211 165 138 635 Purchase obligations (3) : Purchased electric capacity for utility operations 361 699 710 1,499 3,269 Fuel commitments for utility operations 882 1,056 471 536 2,945 Fuel commitments for nonregulated operations 96 132 154 233 615 Pipeline transportation and storage 161 199 85 69 514 Energy commodity purchases for resale (4) 560 56 26 642 Other (5) 258 123 7 4 392 Other long-term liabilities (6) : Financial derivative-commodities (4) 179 10 189 Other contractual obligations (7) 16 16 Total cash payments $ 3,967 $ 5,818 $ 5,379 $ 24,580 $ 39,744 (1) Based on stated maturity dates rather than the earlier redemption dates that could be elected by instrument holders. (2) Does not reflect our ability to defer distributions related to our junior subordinated notes payable or interest payments on enhanced junior subordinated notes. (3) Amounts exclude open purchase orders for services that are provided on demand, the timing of which cannot be determined. (4) Represents the summation of settlement amounts, by contracts, due from us if all physical or financial transactions among our counterparties and the Company were liquidated and terminated. (5) Includes capital and operations and maintenance commitments. (6) Excludes regulatory liabilities, AROs and employee benefit plan obligations, which are not contractually fixed as to timing and amount. See Notes 14, 15 and 22 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Due to uncertainty about the timing and amounts that will ultimately be paid, $244 million of income taxes payable associated with unrecognized tax benefits are excluded. Deferred income taxes are also excluded since cash payments are based primarily on taxable income for each discrete fiscal year. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. (7) Includes interest rate swap agreements. P LANNED C APITAL E XPENDITURES Our planned capital expenditures are expected to total approximately $4.0 billion, $3.6 billion and $3.8 billion in 2009, 2010 and 2011, respectively. These expenditures are expected to include construction and expansion of electric generation and natural gas transmission and storage facilities, environmental upgrades, construction improvements and expansion of electric transmission and distribution assets, purchases of nuclear fuel and expenditures to explore for and develop natural gas and oil properties. We expect to fund our capital expenditures with cash from operations and a combination of securities issuances and short-term borrowings. Our planned capital expenditures include capital projects that are subject to approval by regulators and our Board of Directors. Based on available generation capacity and current estimates of growth in customer demand, our Virginia electric utility will need additional generation in the future. See Dominion Generation-Properties in Item 1. Business for a discussion of our Virginia electric utility expansion plans. We may choose to postpone or cancel certain planned capital expenditures in order to mitigate the need for future debt financings and equity issuances. Use of Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements G UARANTEES We primarily enter into guarantee arrangements on behalf of our consolidated subsidiaries. These arrangements are not subject to the recognition and measurement provisions of FIN 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. At December 31, 2008, we had issued $419 million of guarantees to support third parties and equity method investees, primarily reflecting guarantees issued to support the NedPower and Fowler Ridge wind farm joint ventures. See Note 23 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of these guarantees. L EASING A RRANGEMENT We lease the Fairless power station (Fairless) in Pennsylvania, which began commercial operations in June 2004. During construction, we acted as the construction agent for the lessor, controlled the design and construction of the facility and have since been reimbursed for all project costs ($898 million) advanced to the lessor. We make annual lease payments of $53 million. The 50 Table of Contents lease expires in 2013 and at that time, we may renew the lease at negotiated amounts based on original project costs and current market conditions, subject to lessor approval; purchase Fairless at its original construction cost; or sell Fairless, on behalf of the lessor, to an independent third party. If Fairless is sold and the proceeds from the sale are less than its original construction cost, we would be required to make a payment to the lessor in an amount up to 70.75% of original project costs adjusted for certain other costs as specified in the lease. The lease agreement does not contain any provisions that involve credit rating or stock price trigger events. Benefits of this arrangement include: Certain tax benefits as we are considered the owner of the leased property for tax purposes. As a result, we are entitled to tax deductions for depreciation not recognized for financial accounting purposes; and As an operating lease for financial accounting purposes, the asset and related borrowings used to finance the construction of the asset are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Although this improves measures of leverage calculated using amounts reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements, credit rating agencies view lease obligations as debt equivalents in evaluating our credit profile. F UTURE I SSUES AND O THER M ATTERS See Item 1. Business, Item 3. Legal Proceedings and Note 23 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on various environmental, regulatory, legal and other matters that may impact our future results of operations and/or financial condition. Environmental Matters We are subject to costs resulting from a number of federal, state and local laws and regulations designed to protect human health and the environment. These laws and regulations affect future planning and existing operations. They can result in increased capital, operating and other costs as a result of compliance, remediation, containment and monitoring obligations. E NVIRONMENTAL P ROTECTION AND M ONITORING E XPENDITURES We incurred approximately $205 million, $181 million and $138 million of expenses (including depreciation) during 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively, in connection with environmental protection and monitoring activities and expect these expenses to be approximately $283 million and $297 million in 2009 and 2010, respectively. In addition, capital expenditures related to environmental controls were $254 million, $293 million and $332 million for 2008, 2007 and 2006, respectively. These expenditures are expected to be approximately $280 million and $375 million for 2009 and 2010, respectively. F UTURE E NVIRONMENTAL R EGULATIONS We expect that there may be federal legislative or regulatory action regarding the regulation of GHG emissions, compliance with more stringent air emission standards, and regulation of cooling water intake structures and discharges in the future. With respect to GHG emissions, the outcome in terms of specific requirements and timing is uncertain but may include a GHG emissions cap-and-trade program or a carbon tax for electric generators and natural gas businesses. With respect to emission reductions, specific requirements will depend on how the EPA and/or states replace CAMR and the outcome of the EPA response to the CAIR remand. With respect to cooling water intakes and discharges, we expect future federal regulation on cooling water intake structures and more focus by the EPA and state regulatory authorities on thermal discharge issues. If any of these new proposals are adopted, additional significant expenditures may be required. 
