CIK: 715957
Company Name: DOMINION RESOURCES INC VA 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-02-28


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) discusses our results of operations and general financial condition. MD&A should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements. The terms Dominion, Company, we, our and us are used throughout this report and, depending on the context of its use, may represent any of the following: the legal entity, Dominion Resources, Inc., one of Dominion Resources, Inc. consolidated subsidiaries or operating segments or the entirety of Dominion Resources, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries. CONTENTS OF MD&A The reader will find the following information in our MD&A: n Forward-Looking Statements n Introduction n Accounting Matters n Results of Operations n Segment Results of Operations n Selected Information Energy Trading Activities n Liquidity and Capital Resources n Future Issues and Other Matters FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS This report contains statements concerning our expectations, plans, objectives, future financial performance and other statements that are not historical facts. These statements are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In most cases, the reader can identify these forward-looking statements by such words as anticipate, estimate, forecast, expect, believe, should, could, plan, may, target or other similar words. We make forward-looking statements with full knowledge that risks and uncertainties exist that may cause actual results to differ materially from predicted results. Factors that may cause actual results to differ are often presented with the forward-looking statements themselves. Additionally, other factors may cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated in any forward-looking statement. These factors include but are not limited to: n Unusual weather conditions and their effect on energy sales to customers and energy commodity prices; n Extreme weather events, including hurricanes and winter storms, that can cause outages, production delays and property damage to our facilities; n State and federal legislative and regulatory developments, including a movement towards a hybrid form of regulation, and changes to environmental and other laws and regulations to which we are subject; n Cost of environmental compliance; n Risks associated with the operation of nuclear facilities; n Fluctuations in energy-related commodity prices and the effect these could have on our earnings, liquidity position and the underlying value of our assets; n Counterparty credit risk; n Capital market conditions, including price risk due to marketable securities held as investments in nuclear decommissioning and benefit plan trusts; n Fluctuations in interest rates; n Changes in rating agency requirements or credit ratings and their effect on availability and cost of capital; n Changes in financial or regulatory accounting principles or policies imposed by governing bodies; n Employee workforce factors including collective bargaining agreements and labor negotiations with union employees; n The risks of operating businesses in regulated industries that are subject to changing regulatory structures; n Changes in our ability to recover investments made under traditional regulation through rates; n Receipt of approvals for and timing of closing dates for acquisitions and divestitures, including our divestiture of The Peoples Natural Gas Company (Peoples) and Hope Gas, Inc. (Hope) and any divestiture of our exploration and production (E&P) business; n Risks associated with any realignment of our operating assets, including the potential dilutive effect on earnings in the near term, costs associated with any sale of our E&P business and the costs and reinvestment risks related to deployment of proceeds from any sale; n Political and economic conditions, including the threat of domestic terrorism, inflation and deflation; n Completing the divestiture of investments held by our financial services subsidiary, Dominion Capital, Inc. (DCI); n Additional risk exposure associated with the termination of business interruption and offshore property damage insurance related to our E&P operations and our inability to replace such insurance on commercially reasonable terms; and n Changes in rules for regional transmission organizations (RTOs) in which we participate, including changes in rate designs and new and evolving capacity models. Additionally, other risks that could cause actual results to differ from predicted results are set forth in Item 1A. Risk Factors. Our forward-looking statements are based on our beliefs and assumptions using information available at the time the statements are made. We caution the reader not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements because the assumptions, beliefs, expectations and projections about future events may, and often do, differ materially from actual results. We undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect developments occurring after the statement is made. INTRODUCTION Dominion is a fully integrated gas and electric holding company headquartered in Richmond, Virginia. Our strategy is to be a leading provider of electricity, natural gas and related services to customers in the eastern region of the United States (U.S.). Our portfolio of assets includes approximately: n 28,000 megawatts (Mw) of generation capacity; n 7,800 miles of interstate natural gas transmission, gathering and storage pipeline; n 6,000 miles of electric transmission lines; n 55,000 miles of electric distribution lines in Virginia and North Carolina; n 6.5 trillion cubic feet equivalent of proved gas and oil reserves; and n An underground natural gas storage system with 979 billion cubic feet of capacity. 21 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED Our businesses are managed through four primary operating segments: Dominion Delivery, Dominion Energy, Dominion Generation and Dominion E&P. The contributions to net income by our primary operating segments are determined based on a measure of profit that we believe represents the segments core earnings. As a result, certain specific items attributable to those segments are not included in profit measures evaluated by management in assessing segment performance or allocating resources among the segments. Those specific items are reported in the Corporate segment. Dominion Delivery includes our regulated electric and gas distribution and customer service businesses, as well as nonregulated retail energy marketing operations. Our electric distribution operations serve residential, commercial, industrial and governmental customers in Virginia and northeastern North Carolina. Our gas distribution operations serve residential, commercial and industrial gas sales and transportation customers in Ohio, Pennsylvania and West Virginia. Our nonregulated retail energy marketing operations market gas, electricity and related products and services to residential, small commercial and industrial customers in the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic and Midwest. Revenue provided by our electric and gas distribution operations is based primarily on rates established by state regulatory authorities and state law. The profitability of these businesses is dependent on their ability, through the rates we are permitted to charge, to recover costs and earn a reasonable return on our capital investments. Variability in earnings relates largely to changes in volumes, which are primarily weather sensitive, and changes in the cost of routine maintenance and repairs (including labor and benefits). Income from retail energy marketing operations varies in connection with changes in weather and commodity prices, as well as the acquisition and loss of customers. In March 2006, we entered into an agreement with Equitable Resources, Inc. to sell two of our wholly-owned regulated gas distribution subsidiaries, Peoples and Hope for approximately $970 million plus adjustments to reflect capital expenditures and changes in working capital. Peoples and Hope serve approximately 500,000 customer accounts in Pennsylvania and West Virginia. The transaction is expected to close by the end of second quarter of 2007, subject to state regulatory approvals in Pennsylvania and West Virginia, as well as approval under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act. Dominion Energy includes our regulated electric transmission, natural gas transmission pipeline and storage businesses and the Cove Point liquefied natural gas (LNG) import and storage facility. It also includes gathering and extraction activities, as well as certain Appalachian natural gas production. Dominion Energy includes producer services, which consist of aggregation of gas supply, market-based services related to gas transportation and storage, associated gas trading and results of certain energy trading activities exited in December 2004. The electric transmission business serves Virginia and northeastern North Carolina. In 2005, we became a member of PJM Interconnection, LLC (PJM), an RTO, and integrated our electric transmission facilities into PJM wholesale electricity markets. The gas transmission pipeline and storage business serves our gas distribution businesses and other customers in the Northeast, Mid-Atlantic and Midwest. Revenue provided by our regulated electric and gas transmission operations and the LNG facility is based primarily on rates established by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). The profitability of these businesses is dependent on our ability, through the rates we are permitted to charge, to recover costs and earn a reasonable return on our capital investments. Variability in earnings results from changes in rates and the demand for services, which is primarily weather dependent. Earnings from Dominion Energy nonregulated businesses are subject to variability associated with changes in commodity prices. Dominion Energy nonregulated businesses use physical and financial arrangements to attempt to hedge this price risk. Certain hedging and trading activities may require cash deposits to satisfy collateral requirements. Variability in earnings also results from changes in operating and maintenance expenditures (including labor and benefits). Dominion Generation includes the generation operations of our electric utility and merchant fleet and utility energy supply, energy marketing and price risk management activities for our generation assets. Our generation mix is diversified and includes coal, nuclear, gas, oil, hydro and purchased power. The generation facilities of our electric utility fleet are located in Virginia, West Virginia and North Carolina. The generation facilities of our merchant fleet are located in Connecticut, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, West Virginia and Wisconsin. Dominion Generation earnings primarily result from the generation and sale of electricity. Due to 2004 deregulation legislation, revenues for serving Virginia jurisdictional retail load are based on capped rates through 2010 and fuel costs for the utility fleet, including power purchases, are subject to fixed rate recovery provisions until July 1, 2007, at which time fuel rates will be adjusted annually as discussed in Status of Electric Restructuring in Virginia under Future Issues and Other Matters . Changes in our utility operating costs, particularly with respect to fuel and purchased power, relative to costs used to establish capped rates, will impact our earnings. Variability in earnings provided by the merchant fleet relates to changes in market-based prices received for electricity and the demand for electricity, which is primarily weather driven. We manage price volatility by hedging a substantial portion of our expected sales. Variability also results from changes in the cost of fuel consumed, labor and benefits and the timing, duration and costs of scheduled and unscheduled outages. In December 2006, we reached an agreement with an entity jointly owned by Tenaska Power Fund, L.P. and Warburg Pincus LLC to sell three of our natural gas-fired merchant generation peaking facilities (Peaker facilities). Peaking facilities are used during times of high electricity demand, generally in the summer months. The Peaker facilities are: n Armstrong, a 625 Mw station in Shelocta, Pennsylvania; n Troy, a 600 Mw station in Luckey, Ohio; and n Pleasants, a 313 Mw station in St. Mary s, West Virginia. The sale is expected to result in proceeds of approximately $256 million and should close in the first quarter of 2007, pending regulatory approval by FERC. We have obtained approval from the Federal Trade Commission. No state regulatory approvals are required. We offered the facilities for sale following a review of our portfolio of assets. We have decided not to sell a fourth merchant generation facility, State Line, a 515 Mw coal-fired facility in Hammond, Indiana. 22 Table of Contents Dominion E&P includes our gas and oil exploration, development and production business. Operations are located in several major producing basins in the lower 48 states, including the outer continental shelf and deepwater areas of the Gulf of Mexico, West Texas, Mid-Continent, the Rockies and Appalachia, as well as the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin. Dominion E&P generates income from the sale of natural gas and oil we produce from our reserves. Variability in earnings relates primarily to changes in commodity prices, which are market-based, and production volumes, which are impacted by numerous factors including drilling success, timing of development projects and external factors such as storm-related damage caused by hurricanes. We attempt to manage commodity price volatility by hedging a substantial portion of our expected production. These hedging activities may require cash deposits to satisfy collateral requirements. In November 2006, we announced our decision to pursue the sale of all of our oil and natural gas E&P operations and assets, with the exception of those located in the Appalachian Basin. As of December 31, 2006, our natural gas and oil assets excluding the Appalachian Basin included about 5.5 trillion cubic feet of proved reserves. The Appalachian assets that we would retain constitute approximately 15% of our total reserves as of December 31, 2006. Corporate includes our corporate, service company and other operations (including unallocated debt), corporate-wide commodity risk management services, the remaining assets of DCI, which are in the process of being divested, the net impact of our discontinued telecommunications operations that were sold in May 2004 and the net impact of the discontinued operations of the Peaker facilities. In addition, Corporate includes specific items attributable to our operating segments that have been excluded from the profit measures evaluated by management, either in assessing segment performance or in allocating resources among the segments. Outlook A sale of substantially all of our E&P business would allow us to focus on growing our electric generating and energy distribution, transmission and storage businesses and realign our operations and risk profile more closely with our peer investment group of utilities. If a sale is completed, we would use the net cash proceeds to reduce debt and maintain or improve our existing credit ratings. We would also expect to repurchase shares of our common stock and/or acquire select assets to complement our remaining businesses. By redeploying net cash proceeds to debt reduction, stock buybacks and expansion of our remaining businesses, we believe that shareholders would see solid, reliable growth from a complementary set of assets. Our objective is to grow consolidated earnings at a long-term average annual rate of 4 to 6 percent following any E&P sale. Closing of any sale or sales is targeted for mid-2007. While a sale would likely dilute consolidated earnings per share in the short term, we believe a sale will result in more stable and predictable earnings that are less sensitive to changes in commodity prices, and could result in an increased dividend. Our Board of Directors will address the issue of a possible change in the dividend policy following a sale. In total, we believe that our strategic repositioning, once complete, will provide the necessary platform to enhance shareholder value. Another important development impacting the future of our Company is the passage of legislation in Virginia that would re-regulate certain elements of our electric utility business as discussed in Status of Electric Restructuring in Virginia under Future Issues and Other Matters . Since competitive markets have not developed in Virginia, we are supporting legislation passed by the Virginia General Assembly in early 2007 that would create a hybrid regulatory model designed to modify the traditional regulatory method to better suit it to the financial realities of undertaking major new generation and infrastructure projects. We believe this model would continue to provide our customers with comparatively low rates and ensure our ability to build new generation and other infrastructure needed to keep pace with growing demand for electricity in Virginia. The Governor has until March 26, 2007 to sign, propose amendments to, or veto the proposed legislation. With the Governor signature, the legislation would become law effective July 1, 2007. At this time, we cannot predict the outcome of the legislation. ACCOUNTING MATTERS Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates We have identified the following accounting policies, including certain inherent estimates, that as a result of the judgments, uncertainties, uniqueness and complexities of the underlying accounting standards and operations involved, could result in material changes to our financial condition or results of operations under different conditions or using different assumptions. We have discussed the development, selection and disclosure of each of these policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. ACCOUNTING FOR DERIVATIVE CONTRACTS AT FAIR VALUE We use derivative contracts such as futures, swaps, forwards, options and financial transmission rights to buy and sell energy-related commodities and to manage our commodity and financial markets risks. Derivative contracts, with certain exceptions, are subject to fair value accounting and are reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. Accounting requirements for derivatives and related hedging activities are complex and may be subject to further clarification by standard-setting bodies. Fair value is based on actively quoted market prices, if available. In the absence of actively quoted market prices, we seek indicative price information from external sources, including broker quotes and industry publications. If pricing information from external sources is not available, we must estimate prices based on available historical and near-term future price information and use of statistical methods. For options and contracts with option-like characteristics where pricing information is not available from external sources, we generally use a modified Black-Scholes Model that considers time value, the volatility of the underlying commodities and other relevant assumptions. We use other option models under special circumstances, including a Spread Approximation Model, when contracts include different commodities or commodity locations and a Swing Option Model, when contracts allow either the buyer or seller the ability to exercise within a range of quantities. For contracts with unique characteristics, we estimate fair value using a discounted cash flow approach deemed appropriate under the circumstances and applied consistently from period to period. If pricing information is not available from external sources, judgment is required to 23 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED develop the estimates of fair value. For individual contracts, the use of different valuation models or assumptions could have a material effect on a contract estimated fair value. For cash flow hedges of forecasted transactions, we estimate the future cash flows of the forecasted transactions and evaluate the probability of occurrence and timing of such transactions. Changes in conditions or the occurrence of unforeseen events could require discontinuance of hedge accounting or could affect the timing of the reclassification of gains and/or losses on cash flow hedges from accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) (AOCI) into earnings. USE OF ESTIMATES IN GOODWILL IMPAIRMENT TESTING As of December 31, 2006, we reported $4.3 billion of goodwill in our Consolidated Balance Sheet, a significant portion of which resulted from the acquisition of Consolidated Natural Gas Company (CNG) in 2000. Substantially all of this goodwill is allocated to our Generation, Transmission, Delivery and E&P reporting units. In April of each year, we test our goodwill for potential impairment, and perform additional tests more frequently if impairment indicators are present. The 2006, 2005 and 2004 annual tests did not result in the recognition of any goodwill impairment, as the estimated fair values of our reporting units exceeded their respective carrying amounts. We estimate the fair value of our reporting units by using a combination of discounted cash flow analyses, based on our internal five-year strategic plan, and other valuation techniques that use multiples of earnings for peer group companies and analyses of recent business combinations involving peer group companies. These calculations are dependent on subjective factors such as our estimate of future cash flows, the selection of appropriate discount and growth rates, and the selection of peer group companies and recent transactions. These underlying assumptions and estimates are made as of a point in time; subsequent modifications, particularly changes in discount rates or growth rates inherent in our estimates of future cash flows, could result in a future impairment of goodwill. Although we have consistently applied the same methods in developing the assumptions and estimates that underlie the fair value calculations, such as estimates of future cash flows, and based those estimates on relevant information available at the time, such cash flow estimates are highly uncertain by nature and may vary significantly from actual results. If the estimates of future cash flows used in the most recent annual test had been 10% lower, the resulting fair values would have still been greater than the carrying values of each of those reporting units tested, indicating that no impairment was present. USE OF ESTIMATES IN LONG-LIVED ASSET IMPAIRMENT TESTING Impairment testing for an individual or group of long-lived assets or for intangible assets with definite lives is required when circumstances indicate those assets may be impaired. When an asset carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted estimated future cash flows associated with the asset, the asset is considered impaired to the extent that the asset fair value is less than its carrying amount. Performing an impairment test on long-lived assets involves judgment in areas such as identifying circumstances that indicate an impairment may exist; identifying and grouping affected assets; and developing the undiscounted and discounted estimated future cash flows (used to estimate fair value in the absence of market-based value) associated with the asset, including probability weighting such cash flows to reflect expectations about possible variations in their amounts or timing and the selection of an appropriate discount rate. Although our cash flow estimates are based on relevant information available at the time the estimates are made, estimates of future cash flows are, by nature, highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. For example, estimates of future cash flows would contemplate factors such as the expected use of the asset, including future production and sales levels, and expected fluctuations of prices of commodities sold and consumed. In conjunction with the results of a review of our portfolio of assets, the Peaker facilities, with a combined carrying amount of $504 million, were marketed for sale in the third quarter of 2006. An impairment analysis performed in the third quarter of 2006 indicated that the carrying amount of each of the Peaker facilities was recoverable as the expected undiscounted cash flows, probability weighted to reflect both continued use and possible sale scenarios, exceeded the carrying amount. In December 2006, we reached an agreement to sell the Peaker facilities and accordingly, we reduced their carrying amounts to fair value less cost to sell and classified them as held for sale in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. Also in the fourth quarter of 2006, in conjunction with the review of our assets, a decision was made to no longer pursue the development of a gas transmission pipeline project with capitalized construction costs of $28 million. The pipeline project was previously tested for impairment during 2005. The results of our analysis in 2005 indicated that this asset was not impaired. Impairment charges of $280 million ($181 million after-tax) were recorded in December 2006 related to the Peaker facilities and the transmission pipeline project. Also in 2006, a natural gas-fired merchant generation facility project, with a carrying amount of $460 million, was tested for impairment. The results of our analysis indicated that this carrying amount, as well as the estimated cost to complete, were recoverable. In 2005, we tested a group of gas and steam electric turbines held for future development with a carrying amount of $187 million for impairment. The results of our analysis indicated that this carrying amount was recoverable. In 2004, we did not test any significant long-lived assets or asset groups for impairment as no circumstances arose that indicated an impairment may exist. ASSET RETIREMENT OBLIGATIONS We recognize liabilities for the expected cost of retiring tangible long-lived assets for which a legal obligation exists. These asset retirement obligations (AROs) are recognized at fair value as incurred, and are capitalized as part of the cost of the related long-lived assets. In the absence of quoted market prices, we estimate the fair value of our AROs using present value techniques, in which we make various assumptions including estimates of the amounts and timing of future cash flows associated with retirement activities, credit-adjusted risk free rates and cost escalation rates. AROs currently reported in our Consolidated Balance Sheets were measured during a period of historically low interest rates. The impact on measurements of new AROs or remeasurements of existing AROs, using different rates in the future, may be significant. When we revise any assumptions used to calculate the fair value of existing AROs, we adjust the carrying amount of both the ARO liability and the related long-lived asset. We 24 Table of Contents accrete the ARO liability to reflect the passage of time. In 2006, 2005 and 2004, we recognized $109 million, $102 million and $91 million, respectively, of accretion, and expect to incur $82 million in 2007. A significant portion of our AROs relates to the future decommissioning of our nuclear facilities. At December 31, 2006, nuclear decommissioning AROs, which are reported in the Dominion Generation segment, totaled $1.4 billion, representing approximately 73% of our total AROs. Based on their significance, the following discussion of critical assumptions inherent in determining the fair value of AROs relates to those associated with our nuclear decommissioning obligations. We obtain from third-party specialists periodic site-specific base year cost studies in order to estimate the nature, cost and timing of planned decommissioning activities for our utility and merchant nuclear plants. We obtained updated cost studies for all of our nuclear plants in 2006 which generally reflected increases in base year costs. These cost studies are based on relevant information available at the time they are performed; however, estimates of future cash flows for extended periods of time are by nature highly uncertain and may vary significantly from actual results. In addition, our cost estimates include cost escalation rates that are applied to the base year costs. The selection of these cost escalation rates is dependent on subjective factors which we consider to be a critical assumption. We determine cost escalation rates, which represent projected cost increases over time, due to both general inflation and increases in the cost of specific decommissioning activities, for each of our nuclear facilities. In 2006, we lowered the cost escalation rate assumptions used in the ARO calculation by 0.72% due to projected reductions in both general and decommissioning specific inflation rates, resulting in a $481 million decrease in our nuclear decommissioning AROs. EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS We sponsor noncontributory defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans for eligible active employees, retirees and qualifying dependents. The projected costs of providing benefits under these plans are dependent, in part, on historical information such as employee demographics, the level of contributions made to the plans and earnings on plan assets. Assumptions about the future, including the expected rate of return on plan assets, discount rates applied to benefit obligations and the anticipated rate of increase in health care costs and participant compensation, also have a significant impact on employee benefit costs. The impact on pension and other postretirement benefit plan obligations associated with changes in these factors is generally recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Income over the remaining average service period of plan participants rather than immediately. The expected long-term rates of return on plan assets, discount rates and medical cost trend rates are critical assumptions. We determine the expected long-term rates of return on plan assets for pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans by using a combination of: n Historical return analysis to determine expected future risk premiums; n Forward-looking return expectations derived from the yield on long-term bonds and the price earnings ratios of major stock market indices; n Expected inflation and risk-free interest rate assumptions; and n Investment allocation of plan assets. Effective September 1, 2006, the strategic target asset allocation for our pension fund is 34% U.S. equity securities, 12% non-U.S. equity securities, 22% debt securities, 7% real estate and 25% other, such as private equity investments. Prior to September 1, 2006, the strategic target asset allocation for our pension fund was 45% U.S. equity securities, 8% non-U.S. equity securities, 22% debt securities and 25% other, such as real estate and private equity investments. Assisted by an independent actuary, we develop assumptions, which are then compared to the forecasts of other independent investment advisors to ensure reasonableness. An internal committee selects the final assumptions. We calculated our pension cost using an expected return on plan assets assumption of 8.75% for 2006, 2005 and 2004. We calculated our 2006 and 2005 other postretirement benefit cost using an expected return on plan assets assumption of 8.00% compared to 7.79% for 2004. The rate used in calculating other postretirement benefit cost is lower than the rate used in calculating pension cost because of differences in the relative amounts of various types of investments held as plan assets. We determine discount rates from analyses performed by a third-party actuarial firm of AA/Aa rated bonds with cash flows matching the expected payments to be made under our plans. The discount rates used to calculate 2006 pension cost and other postretirement benefit cost were 5.60% and 5.50%, respectively, compared to the 6.00% and 6.25% discount rates used to calculate 2005 and 2004 pension and other postretirement benefit costs, respectively. Lower long-term bond yields were the primary reason for the decline in the discount rate from 2005 to 2006. We selected discount rates of 6.20% and 6.10% for determining our December 31, 2006 projected pension and postretirement benefit obligations, respectively. We establish the medical cost trend rate assumption based on analyses performed by a third-party actuarial firm of various factors including the specific provisions of our medical plans, actual cost trends experienced and projected, and demographics of plan participants. Our medical cost trend rate assumption as of December 31, 2006 is 9.00% and is expected to gradually decrease to 5.00% in later years. The following table illustrates the effect on cost of changing the critical actuarial assumptions previously discussed, while holding all other assumptions constant: Increase in Net Periodic Cost Actuarial Assumption Change in Assumption Pension Benefits Other Postretirement Benefits (millions, except percentages) Discount rate (0.25 )% $ 13 $ 3 Rate of return on plan assets (0.25 )% 11 2 Healthcare cost trend rate 1 % N/A 30 In addition to the effects on cost, a 0.25% decrease in the discount rate would increase our projected pension benefit obligation by $122 million and would increase our accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $38 million at December 31, 2006. 25 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED ACCOUNTING FOR REGULATED OPERATIONS The accounting for our regulated electric and gas operations differs from the accounting for nonregulated operations in that we are required to reflect the effect of rate regulation in our Consolidated Financial Statements. For regulated businesses subject to federal or state cost-of-service rate regulation, regulatory practices that assign costs to accounting periods may differ from accounting methods generally applied by nonregulated companies. When it is probable that regulators will permit the recovery of current costs through future rates charged to customers, we defer these costs as regulatory assets that otherwise would be expensed by nonregulated companies. Likewise, we recognize regulatory liabilities when it is probable that regulators will require customer refunds through future rates and when revenue is collected from customers for expenditures that are not yet incurred. Regulatory assets are amortized into expense and regulatory liabilities are amortized into income over the recovery period authorized by the regulator. We evaluate whether or not recovery of our regulatory assets through future rates is probable and make various assumptions in our analyses. The expectations of future recovery are generally based on orders issued by regulatory commissions or historical experience, as well as discussions with applicable regulatory authorities. If recovery of a regulatory asset is determined to be less than probable, it will be written off in the period such assessment is made. In 2006, $166 million of our regulatory assets were written off as a result of the pending sale of Peoples and Hope since the recovery of those assets is no longer probable. We currently believe the recovery of our remaining regulatory assets is probable. See Notes 2 and 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. ACCOUNTING FOR GAS AND OIL OPERATIONS We follow the full cost method of accounting for gas and oil E&P activities prescribed by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Under the full cost method, all direct costs of property acquisition, exploration and development activities are capitalized and subsequently depleted using the units-of-production method. The depletable base of costs includes estimated future costs to be incurred in developing proved gas and oil reserves, as well as capitalized asset retirement costs, net of projected salvage values. Capitalized costs in the depletable base are subject to a ceiling test prescribed by the SEC. The test limits capitalized amounts to a ceiling the present value of estimated future net revenues to be derived from the production of proved gas and oil reserves, assuming period-end pricing adjusted for any cash flow hedges in place. We perform the ceiling test quarterly, on a country-by-country basis, and would recognize asset impairments to the extent that total capitalized costs exceed the ceiling. In addition, gains or losses on the sale or other disposition of gas and oil properties are not recognized, unless the gain or loss would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves of natural gas and oil attributable to a country. Our estimate of proved reserves requires a large degree of judgment and is dependent on factors such as historical data, engineering estimates of proved reserve quantities, estimates of the amount and timing of future expenditures to develop the proved reserves, and estimates of future production from the proved reserves. Our estimated proved reserves as of December 31, 2006 are based upon studies for each of our properties prepared by our staff engineers and audited by Ryder Scott Company, L.P. Calculations were prepared using standard geological and engineering methods generally accepted by the petroleum industry and in accordance with SEC guidelines. Given the volatility of natural gas and oil prices, it is possible that our estimate of discounted future net cash flows from proved natural gas and oil reserves that is used to calculate the ceiling could materially change in the near-term. The process to estimate reserves is imprecise, and estimates are subject to revision. If there is a significant variance in any of our estimates or assumptions in the future and revisions to the value of our proved reserves are necessary, related depletion expense and the calculation of the ceiling test would be affected and recognition of natural gas and oil property impairments could occur. See Notes 2 and 29 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. INCOME TAXES Judgment and the use of estimates are required in developing the provision for income taxes and reporting of tax-related assets and liabilities. The interpretation of tax laws involves uncertainty, since tax authorities may interpret the laws differently. Ultimate resolution of income tax matters may result in favorable or unfavorable impacts to net income and cash flows and adjustments to tax-related assets and liabilities could be material. Through December 31, 2006, we have established liabilities for tax-related contingencies in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 5, Accounting for Contingencies, and reviewed them in light of changing facts and circumstances. However, as discussed in Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, effective January 1, 2007, we adopted Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes (FIN 48). Taking into consideration the uncertainty and judgment involved in the determination and filing of income taxes, FIN 48 establishes standards for recognition and measurement, in financial statements, of positions taken, or expected to be taken, by an entity in its income tax returns. Positions taken by an entity in its income tax returns that are recognized in the financial statements must satisfy a more-likely than-not recognition threshold, assuming that the position will be examined by taxing authorities with full knowledge of all relevant information. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are provided, representing future effects on income taxes for temporary differences between the bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting and tax purposes. We evaluate quarterly the probability of realizing deferred tax assets by reviewing a forecast of future taxable income and the availability of tax planning strategies that can be implemented, if necessary, to realize deferred tax assets. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income or successfully implement tax planning strategies may affect the realization of deferred tax assets. Other ACCOUNTING STANDARDS During 2006, 2005 and 2004, we were required to adopt several new accounting standards, which are discussed in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our adoption of SFAS No. 158 , Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans on December 31, 2006 affected the comparability of our Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2006 to prior periods. Under SFAS No. 158, our 26 Table of Contents Consolidated Balance Sheet now reflects the overfunded or underfunded status of our defined benefit plans as an asset or a liability, respectively, with previously unrecognized net actuarial gains or losses, prior service costs or credits and transition obligations recognized as a component of either AOCI or regulatory assets or liabilities. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting standards that will be adopted in the future. DOMINION CLEARINGHOUSE During the fourth quarter of 2004, we performed an evaluation of our Dominion Clearinghouse (Clearinghouse) trading and marketing operations, which resulted in a decision to exit certain energy trading activities and instead focus on the optimization of our assets. In January 2005, in connection with the reorganization, commodity derivative contracts held by the Clearinghouse were assessed to determine if they contribute to the optimization of our assets. As a result of this review, certain commodity derivative contracts previously designated as held for trading purposes were redesignated as held for non-trading purposes. Under our derivative income statement classification policy described in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, all changes in fair value, including amounts realized upon settlement, related to the reclassified contracts were previously presented in operating revenue on a net basis. Upon redesignation as non-trading, all unrealized changes in fair value and settlements related to those derivative contracts that are financially settled are reported in other operations and maintenance expense. In addition, all physically-settled sales contracts are presented in operating revenue and all physically-settled purchase contracts are presented in operating expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Presented below is a summary of our consolidated results: Year Ended December 31, 2006 $ Change 2005 $ Change 2004 (millions, except EPS) Net Income $ 1,380 $ 347 $ 1,033 $ (216 ) $ 1,249 Diluted earnings per share (EPS) 3.93 0.93 3.00 (0.78 ) 3.78 Overview 2006 VS. 2005 Net income increased 34% to $1.4 billion. Favorable drivers included increased gas and oil production, higher realized prices from our merchant generation business, an increased contribution from our nonregulated retail energy marketing operations, higher business interruption insurance proceeds received in 2006 than in 2005 and the absence of losses incurred in 2005 due to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil hedges resulting from hurricane-related interruptions of gas and oil production in the Gulf of Mexico. These favorable drivers were partially offset by an impairment charge related to the Peaker facilities, milder weather in our gas and electric service territories, lower realized gas prices for our E&P operations and a reduction in gains from sales of emissions allowances held for consumption. 2005 VS. 2004 Our 2005 results were significantly impacted by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita (2005 hurricanes), which struck the Gulf Coast area in late August and late September 2005, respectively. Due to the hurricanes, our production assets in the Gulf of Mexico and, to a lesser extent, southern Louisiana were temporarily shut in. The interruption in gas and oil production resulted in a $272 million after-tax loss related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil hedges. Results were also impacted by delays in production caused by damage to third-party downstream infrastructure. Our 2005 results were also negatively impacted by increased fuel and purchased power expenses incurred by our electric utility operations primarily as a result of higher commodity prices. These negatives were partially offset by higher realized gas and oil prices for our E&P operations, gains on the sale of emissions allowances and a higher contribution from merchant generation operations, primarily reflecting the benefit of two acquisitions during 2005. In January 2005, we completed the acquisition of three fossil-fired power stations with generating capacity of more than 2,700 Mw (Dominion New England) and in July 2005, we completed the acquisition of the 556 Mw Kewaunee nuclear power station (Kewaunee). Analysis of Consolidated Operations Presented below are selected amounts related to our results of operations: Year ended December 31, 2006 $ Change 2005 $ Change 2004 (millions) Operating Revenue $ 16,482 $ (1,489 ) $ 17,971 $ 4,042 $ 13,929 Operating Expenses Electric fuel and energy purchases 3,236 (1,434 ) 4,670 2,544 2,126 Purchased electric capacity 481 (23 ) 504 (83 ) 587 Purchased gas 2,937 (1,004 ) 3,941 1,014 2,927 Other energy-related commodity purchases 1,022 (369 ) 1,391 402 989 Other operations and maintenance 3,280 226 3,054 299 2,755 Depreciation, depletion and amortization 1,606 209 1,397 108 1,289 Other taxes 575 (6 ) 581 62 519 Other income 174 6 168 1 167 Interest and related charges 1,030 64 966 40 926 Income tax expense 920 332 588 (117 ) 705 Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (183 ) (175 ) (8 ) 16 (24 ) An analysis of our results of operations for 2006 compared to 2005 and 2005 compared to 2004 follows. 27 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED 2006 VS. 2005 Operating Revenue decreased 8% to $16.5 billion, primarily reflecting: n A $1.0 billion decrease primarily attributable to lower volumes associated with requirements-based power sales contracts that we are exiting. The effect of this decrease is more than offset by a corresponding decrease in Electric fuel and energy purchases expense ; n An $844 million decrease in our producer services business consisting of a decrease in both volumes and prices associated with gas aggregation, partially offset by favorable price changes related to gas marketing activities. The effect of this decrease is partially offset by a corresponding decrease in Purchased gas expense ; n A $367 million decrease from regulated gas distribution operations, primarily reflecting a $219 million decrease resulting from the loss of customers to Energy Choice programs and a $270 million decrease associated with milder weather and variations in rates resulting from changes in customer usage patterns, sales mix and other factors, partially offset by a $122 million increase related to the recovery of higher gas prices. The effect of this net decrease was partially offset by a corresponding decrease in Purchased gas expense ; n A $308 million decrease in nonutility coal sales, primarily resulting from decreased volumes. This decrease was largely offset by a corresponding decrease in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense ; n A $178 million decrease in sales of emissions allowances purchased for resale, reflecting lower prices ($115 million) and lower overall sales volume ($63 million). The effect of this decrease was largely offset by a corresponding decrease in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense ; and n A $93 million decrease in revenue from sales of gas purchased by E&P operations to facilitate gas transportation and other contracts, primarily due to the impact of netting sales and purchases of gas under buy/sell arrangements associated with the implementation of Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) Issue No. 04-13, Accounting for Purchases and Sales of Inventory with the Same Counterparty . These decreases were partially offset by: n A $313 million increase from our merchant generation business, primarily reflecting higher revenue for nuclear operations as a result of higher realized prices and new business from the addition of Kewaunee, which was acquired in July 2005. This increase was partially offset by lower sales volume for fossil plants driven largely by comparably milder weather and lower prices; n A $235 million increase associated with hedging activities for our merchant generation assets. The effect of this increase is offset by a corresponding increase in Other operations and maintenance expense ; n A $188 million increase in sales of gas and oil production, primarily due to higher volumes ($397 million), partially offset by lower prices ($209 million); n A $184 million increase in gas sales by our nonregulated retail energy marketing operations primarily resulting from increased customer counts ($141 million) and higher contracted sales prices ($43 million); n A $170 million increase in sales of extracted products, primarily due to increased prices and a contractual change for a portion of our gas production processed by third parties. We now take title to and market the extracted products from this gas; n An increase of $95 million resulting from higher business interruption insurance revenue received in 2006 related to the 2005 hurricanes ($274 million) versus business interruption revenue received in 2005 ($179 million) related to Hurricane Ivan; and n An $88 million increase due to a sale of gas inventory by our East Ohio Gas subsidiary related to the implementation of the Standard Service Offer (SSO) pilot program as approved by the Ohio Commission. The SSO was initiated to encourage and assist other suppliers to enter the gas procurement market. By the end of the transition period, we plan to exit the gas merchant function in Ohio and have all customers select an alternate gas supplier. The effect of this increase was offset by a comparable increase in Purchased gas expense . Operating Expenses Electric fuel and energy purchases expense decreased 31% to $3.2 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: n A $1.2 billion decrease associated with lower volumes associated with requirements-based power sales contracts, as discussed in Operating Revenue; n A $162 million decrease for our utility generation operations, primarily due to lower commodity prices, including purchased power, and decreased consumption of fossil fuel, reflecting the effects of milder weather on demand, partially offset by an increase in purchased power volumes; and n A $104 million decrease from our merchant generation business, due primarily to lower commodity prices and decreased consumption of fossil fuel, reflecting the effects of milder weather on demand, partially offset by higher replacement power costs incurred due to an increase in scheduled outage days. Purchased gas expense decreased 25% to $2.9 billion, principally resulting from: n An $815 million decrease associated with our producer services business, due to lower volumes and prices; n A $192 million decrease related to regulated gas distribution operations, due to a $252 million decrease associated with milder weather and the migration of additional customers to Energy Choice and a $222 million decrease due to lower average gas prices, partially offset by a $282 million increase related to the recovery of gas costs; n A $120 million decrease related to E&P operations, as the result of lower volumes and the impact of netting sales and purchases of gas under buy/sell arrangements following the implementation of EITF 04-13, as discussed in Operating Revenue ; partially offset by n A $139 million increase associated with nonregulated retail energy marketing operations, primarily due to increased volumes. Other energy-related commodity purchases expense decreased 27% to $1.0 billion, primarily attributable to the following factors, all of which are discussed in Operating Revenue : n A $237 million decrease in the cost of coal purchased for resale; and n A $175 million decrease in emissions allowances purchased for resale; partially offset by 28 Table of Contents n A $47 million increase related to purchases of oil by E&P operations, reflecting higher market prices ($63 million), partially offset by lower volumes ($16 million) of oil purchases under buy/sell arrangements. Other operations and maintenance expense increased 7% to $3.3 billion, resulting from: n A $235 million increase primarily related to hedging activities associated with our generation assets. The effect of this increase is offset by a corresponding increase in Operating Revenue ; n A $166 million charge from the write-off of certain regulatory assets related to the pending sale of Peoples and Hope; n A $105 million increase attributable to higher production handling, transportation and operating costs related to E&P operations; n A $97 million increase resulting primarily from higher salaries, wages and benefits expenses; n $91 million of impairment charges related to DCI investments; n A $79 million increase resulting from Kewaunee, which was acquired in July 2005; n A $65 million decrease in gains from the sale of emissions allowances held for consumption; n A $60 million charge to eliminate the application of hedge accounting for certain interest rate swaps associated with our junior subordinated notes payable to affiliated trusts that sold trust preferred securities; n A $41 million reduction in proceeds related to financial transmission rights (FTRs) granted by PJM to our utility generation operations. These FTRs are used to offset congestion costs associated with PJM spot market activity, which are included in Electric fuel and energy purchases expense ; n A $35 million increase in generation-related outage costs primarily due to an increase in the number of scheduled outages; n A $29 million increase related to major storm damage and service restoration costs associated with our distribution operations, primarily resulting from tropical storm Ernesto in September 2006; n A $27 million charge resulting from the cancellation of a pipeline project; These increases were partially offset by: n A $62 million benefit resulting from favorable changes in the fair value of certain gas and oil derivatives that were de-designated as hedges following the 2005 hurricanes; n A $96 million decrease in hedge ineffectiveness expense associated with our E&P operations, primarily due to a decrease in the fair value differential between the delivery location and commodity specifications of derivative contracts held by us as compared to our forecasted gas and oil sales and the increased use of basis swaps; n A benefit resulting from the absence of the following items recognized in 2005: n A $423 million loss related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil hedges resulting from an interruption of gas and oil production in the Gulf of Mexico caused by the 2005 hurricanes; n A $77 million charge resulting from the termination of a long-term power purchase agreement; n A $59 million loss related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain oil derivatives primarily resulting from a delay in reaching anticipated production levels in the Gulf of Mexico, and subsequent changes in the fair value of those derivatives; and n A $51 million charge related to credit exposure associated with the bankruptcy of Calpine Corporation; partially offset by n A $24 million net benefit resulting from the establishment of certain regulatory assets and liabilities in connection with the settlement of a North Carolina rate case in the first quarter of 2005. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense (DD&A) increased 15% to $1.6 billion, largely due to the impact of increased gas and oil production, as well as higher E&P finding and development costs. Interest expense increased 7% to $1.0 billion principally reflecting the impact of additional borrowings and higher interest rates on variable rate debt. Loss from discontinued operations increased to $183 million primarily reflecting a $164 million after-tax impairment charge related to the pending sale of the Peaker facilities, whose operating losses were reclassified to discontinued operations in December 2006. 2005 VS. 2004 Operating Revenue increased 29% to $18.0 billion, primarily reflecting: n A $1.1 billion increase in sales from our merchant generation operations, primarily attributable to the addition of Dominion New England and Kewaunee and a full year of commercial operations at our Fairless Energy power station (Fairless), which began operating in June 2004; n A $730 million increase related to the designation of certain commodity derivative contracts as held for non-trading purposes effective January 1, 2005. These contracts were previously held for trading purposes as discussed in Note 28 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. The impact of this change in classification was offset by similar changes in Other operations and maintenance expense and Electric fuel and energy purchases expense; n A $588 million increase from gas aggregation activities and nonregulated retail energy marketing operations primarily due to higher gas prices. This increase was largely offset by a corresponding increase in Purchased gas expense ; n A $363 million increase from our regulated electric utility operations reflecting a $153 million increase in sales to wholesale customers, a $99 million increase due to the impact of a comparatively higher fuel rate for non-Virginia jurisdictional customers, a $77 million increase primarily due to the impact of favorable weather on customer usage and a $59 million increase from customer growth associated with new customer connections, partially offset by a $25 million decrease due to variations in seasonal rate premiums and discounts. The increase resulting from a comparatively higher fuel rate was more than offset by an increase in Electric fuel and energy purchases expense ; and n A $341 million increase from regulated gas distribution operations primarily related to the recovery of higher gas prices. 29 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED The effect of this increase was offset by a comparable increase in Purchased gas expense; n A $276 million increase in nonutility coal sales resulting from higher coal prices ($171 million) and increased sales volumes ($105 million). This increase was more than offset by a corresponding increase in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense ; n A $110 million increase due to higher natural gas prices related to market-based services for the optimization of transportation and storage assets by our E&P operations, partially offset by the effect of unfavorable price changes on unsettled contracts. This increase was largely offset by a corresponding increase in Purchased gas expense ; n A $110 million increase in sales of gas purchased by E&P operations to facilitate gas transportation and satisfy other agreements. This increase was largely offset by a corresponding increase in Purchased gas expense ; n An $87 million increase in sales of purchased oil by E&P operations. This increase was more than offset by a corresponding increase in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense ; n A $37 million increase in sales of emissions allowances held for resale primarily due to higher prices. This increase was more than offset by a corresponding increase in Other energy-related commodity purchases expense . Operating Expenses Electric fuel and energy purchases expense increased 120% to $4.7 billion, primarily reflecting the combined effects of: n A $1.2 billion increase related to the designation of certain commodity derivative contracts as held for non-trading purposes effective January 1, 2005, which were previously held for trading purposes as discussed in Operating Revenue; n A $796 million increase related to utility operations primarily resulting from higher commodity prices including purchased power; and n A $556 million increase due to the addition of Dominion New England and Kewaunee and a full year of commercial operations at Fairless. Purchased electric capacity expense decreased 14% to $504 million, as a result of the termination of several long-term power purchase agreements in connection with the purchase of the related generating facilities in 2005 and 2004. Purchased gas expense increased 35% to $3.9 billion, principally resulting from the following items which are discussed in Operating Revenue : n A $522 million increase associated with gas aggregation activities and nonregulated retail energy marketing operations; n A $305 million increase associated with regulated gas distribution operations; and n A $124 million increase related to E&P operations. Other energy related-commodity purchases expense increased 41% to $1.4 billion, primarily reflecting the following items which are discussed in Operating Revenue : n A $263 million increase in the cost of coal purchased for resale; n A $91 million increase related to purchases of oil by E&P operations; and n A $47 million increase in emissions allowances purchased for resale. Other operations and maintenance expense increased 11% to $3.1 billion, resulting from: n A $423 million loss related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain gas and oil hedges resulting from an interruption of gas and oil production in the Gulf of Mexico caused by the 2005 hurricanes; n A $361 million increase due to the addition of Dominion New England and Kewaunee and a full year of commercial operations at Fairless; n A $193 million increase in salaries and benefits, due to higher incentive-based compensation ($106 million), wages ($43 million) and pension and medical benefits ($44 million); n A $77 million charge resulting from the termination of a long-term power purchase agreement; n A $75 million increase in hedge ineffectiveness expense associated with E&P operations, primarily due to an increase in the fair value differential between the delivery location and commodity specifications of our derivative contracts and the delivery location and commodity specifications of our forecasted gas and oil sales; n A $59 million loss related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting in March 2005 for certain oil hedges primarily resulting from a delay in reaching anticipated production levels in the Gulf of Mexico, and subsequent changes in the fair value of those hedges; n A $51 million charge related to credit exposure associated with the bankruptcy of Calpine Corporation; n A $35 million charge related to our investment in and planned divestiture of DCI assets; These increases were partially offset by the following: n A $344 million decrease related to the designation of certain commodity derivative contracts as held for non-trading purposes effective January 1, 2005, which were previously held for trading purposes as discussed in Operating Revenue ; n A $186 million benefit related to FTRs; n A $139 million gain resulting from the sale of emissions allowances held for consumption; n A $24 million net benefit resulting from the establishment of certain regulatory assets and liabilities in connection with the settlement of a North Carolina rate case in the first quarter of 2005; and n The net impact of the following items recognized in 2004: n A $184 million charge related to the sale of our interest in a long-term power tolling contract in connection with our exit from certain energy trading activities; n A $96 million loss related to the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain oil hedges resulting from an interruption of oil production in the Gulf of Mexico caused by Hurricane Ivan, and subsequent changes in the fair value of those hedges during the third quarter; n A $72 million charge associated with the impairment of retained interests from mortgage securitizations and venture capital and other equity investments held by DCI; and n A $71 million net charge resulting from the termination of certain long-term power purchase agreements; partially offset by 30 Table of Contents n A $120 million benefit due to favorable changes in the fair value of certain oil options related to E&P operations. Depreciation, depletion and amortization expense increased 8% to $1.4 billion, largely due to incremental depreciation and amortization expense resulting from our acquisition of the Dominion New England power plants and other property additions. Other taxes increased 12% to $581 million, primarily due to higher property taxes resulting from the Dominion New England power plants and higher severance taxes associated with increased commodity prices. Loss from discontinued operations reflects charges related to the Peaker facilities, whose operating losses were reclassified to discontinued operations as a result of their pending sale. SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Segment results include the impact of intersegment revenues and expenses, which may result in intersegment profit or loss. Presented below is a summary of contributions by our operating segments to net income: Year Ended December 31, 2006 2005 2004 Net Income Diluted EPS Net Income Diluted EPS Net Income Diluted EPS (millions, except EPS) Dominion Delivery $ 438 $ 1.25 $ 448 $ 1.30 $ 466 $ 1.41 Dominion Energy 360 1.02 319 0.93 190 0.57 Dominion Generation 537 1.53 416 1.20 533 1.61 Dominion E&P 680 1.93 565 1.64 595 1.80 Primary operating segments 2,015 5.73 1,748 5.07 1,784 5.39 Corporate (635 ) (1.80 ) (715 ) (2.07 ) (535 ) (1.61 ) Consolidated $ 1,380 $ 3.93 $ 1,033 $ 3.00 $ 1,249 $ 3.78 Dominion Delivery Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion Delivery operations: Year Ended December 31, 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Electricity delivered (million mwhrs) (1) 79.8 (2 )% 81.4 4 % 78.0 Degree days (electric service area): Cooling (2) 1,557 (9 ) 1,707 8 1,585 Heating (3) 3,178 (16 ) 3,784 3 3,682 Average electric delivery customer accounts (4) 2,327 2 2,286 2 2,244 Gas throughput (bcf): Gas sales 94 (28 ) 131 3 127 Gas transportation 240 241 (1 ) 244 Heating degree days (gas service area) (3) 5,190 (12 ) 5,899 3 5,716 Average gas delivery customer accounts (4) : Gas sales 858 (17 ) 1,030 3 996 Gas transportation 830 26 661 (5 ) 693 Average nonregulated retail energy marketing customer accounts (4) 1,354 17 1,162 (13 ) 1,341 mwhrs = megawatt hours bcf = billion cubic feet (1) Includes electricity delivered through the retail choice program for our Virginia jurisdictional electric customers. (2) Cooling degree days (CDDs) are units measuring the extent to which the average daily temperature is greater than 65 degrees. CDDs are calculated as the difference between the average temperature for each day and 65 degrees. (3) Heating degree days (HDDs) are units measuring the extent to which the average daily temperature is less than 65 degrees. HDDs are calculated as the difference between the average temperature for each day and 65 degrees. (4) Thirteen-month average, in thousands. Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Delivery net income contribution: 2006 VS. 2005 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Regulated electric sales: Weather $ (29 ) $ (0.08 ) Customer growth 11 0.03 Other (1) 15 0.04 Regulated gas sales weather (26 ) (0.07 ) Major storm damage and service restoration (18 ) (0.05 ) Interest expense (2) (11 ) (0.03 ) Other margins gas (3) (10 ) (0.03 ) 2005 North Carolina rate case settlement (6 ) (0.02 ) Nonregulated retail energy marketing operations (4) 57 0.17 Other 7 0.02 Share dilution (0.03 ) Change in net income contribution $ (10 ) $ (0.05 ) (1) Attributable to rate variations from changes in customer usage patterns and sales mix, and other factors. (2) Principally reflects additional intercompany borrowings and higher interest rates on those borrowings. (3) Largely reflects reduced customer usage at our regulated gas distribution operations, due in part to price sensitivity. (4) Largely reflects higher electric and gas margins due to higher rates, increased gas customers and lower commodity costs. 2005 VS. 2004 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Interest expense (1) $ (25 ) $ (0.08 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (14 ) (0.04 ) Depreciation expense (10 ) (0.03 ) Bad debt expense (2) (7 ) (0.02 ) Regulated electric sales: Weather 14 0.04 Customer growth 11 0.03 Regulated gas sales weather 8 0.02 2005 North Carolina rate case settlement 6 0.02 Other (1 ) Share dilution (0.05 ) Change in net income contribution $ (18 ) $ (0.11 ) (1) Represents the impact of additional long-term affiliate borrowings and variable rate debt, higher interest rates on affiliate borrowings and prepayment penalties resulting from the early redemption of debt. (2) Higher bad debt expense primarily reflects the absence of a 2004 reduction in reserves. 31 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED Dominion Energy Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion Energy operations: Year Ended December 31, 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Gas transportation throughput (bcf) 650 (18 )% 794 13 % 704 Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Energy net income contribution: 2006 VS. 2005 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Gas transmission: Other margins (1) $ 39 $ 0.11 Rate settlement (2) (13 ) (0.04 ) Producer services (3) 23 0.06 Other (8 ) (0.02 ) Share dilution (0.02 ) Change in net income contribution $ 41 $ 0.09 (1) Higher margins primarily from extracted products and short-term transportation and storage opportunities. (2) Represents lower natural gas transportation and storage revenue as a result of a rate settlement between Dominion Transmission, Inc. (DTI) and its customers, effective July 1, 2005. (3) Higher income resulting from the impact of favorable price changes related to price risk management and gas marketing activities associated with certain transportation and storage contracts. 2005 VS. 2004 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Producer services (1) $ 119 $ 0.36 Economic hedges (2) 22 0.07 Cove Point (3) 13 0.04 Gas transmission rate settlement (17 ) (0.05 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (11 ) (0.03 ) Other 3 0.01 Share dilution (0.04 ) Change in net income contribution $ 129 $ 0.36 (1) Reflects the impact of losses in the prior year related to certain energy trading activities that were exited in December 2004 and higher contributions from market-based gas trading, storage, transportation and aggregation activities. (2) Represents the impact of price movements in 2004 associated with a portfolio of financial derivative instruments used to manage price risk associated with a portion of our anticipated sales of 2004 natural gas production that had not been considered in the hedging activities of the Dominion E&P segment. In 2005, we did not enter into similar economic hedging transactions. (3) Reflects the addition of a fifth storage tank in December 2004 and increased pipeline capacity. Dominion Generation Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion Generation operations: Year Ended December 31, 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Electricity supplied (million mwhrs): Utility 79.7 (2 )% 81.4 4 % 78.0 Merchant (1) 41.7 41.5 43 29.1 Degree days (electric utility service area): Cooling 1,557 (9 ) 1,707 8 1,585 Heating 3,178 (16 ) 3,784 3 3,682 (1) Includes electricity supplied by the Peaker facilities whose results were reclassified to discontinued operations in December 2006 due to their pending sale. Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion Generation net income contribution: 2006 VS. 2005 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Merchant generation margin (1) $ 215 $ 0.63 Unrecovered Virginia fuel expenses 40 0.12 Regulated electric sales: Customer growth 24 0.07 Weather (64 ) (0.18 ) Other (2) 17 0.05 Sales of emissions allowances (40 ) (0.12 ) Energy supply margin (3) (27 ) (0.08 ) Outage costs (4) (20 ) (0.06 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (13 ) (0.04 ) 2005 North Carolina rate case settlement (10 ) (0.03 ) Other (1 ) Share dilution (0.03 ) Change in net income contribution $ 121 $ 0.33 (1) Primarily reflects higher realized prices. (2) Primarily attributable to rate variations from changes in customer usage patterns and sales mix, and other factors. (3) Primarily reflects a reduced benefit from FTRs in excess of congestion costs at our utility operations. (4) Primarily due to an increase in the duration of scheduled outage days for our electric utility and certain merchant fossil plants. 32 Table of Contents 2005 VS. 2004 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Unrecovered Virginia fuel expenses $ (280 ) $ (0.85 ) Energy marketing and risk management activities (1) (50 ) (0.15 ) Interest and other financing expense (2) (44 ) (0.13 ) Salaries, wages and benefits expense (36 ) (0.11 ) Merchant generation margin (3) 102 0.31 Sales of emissions allowances 63 0.19 Energy supply margin (4) 40 0.12 Regulated electric sales: Weather 39 0.12 Customer growth 24 0.07 Purchased electric capacity expense 37 0.11 2005 North Carolina rate case settlement 10 0.03 Other (22 ) (0.07 ) Share dilution (0.05 ) Change in net income contribution $ (117 ) $ (0.41 ) (1) Reflects lower gains in 2005 from coal trading and marketing activities and losses related to price risk management activities and legacy power transactions. (2) Represents higher interest rates on affiliate borrowings and variable rate debt, prepayment penalties resulting from the early redemption of debt and the lease financing of Fairless. (3) Primarily represents contributions from Dominion New England and Kewaunee, partially offset by a lower contribution from the Millstone power station due to an additional scheduled outage in 2005. (4) Higher energy supply margins reflect a benefit from FTRs in excess of congestion costs at our utility operations. Dominion E&P Presented below are operating statistics related to Dominion E&P operations: Year Ended December 31, 2006 % Change 2005 % Change 2004 Gas production (bcf) 308 10 % 280 (17 )% 337 Oil production (million bbls) 24.7 61 15.3 13 13.6 Average realized prices without hedging results: Gas (per mcf) (1) $ 6.63 (17 ) $ 7.98 39 $ 5.74 Oil (per bbl) 54.66 10 49.54 40 35.49 Average realized prices with hedging results (2) : Gas (per mcf) (1) 4.29 (9 ) 4.73 16 4.08 Oil (per bbl) 33.39 11 30.21 20 25.11 DD&A (per mcfe) 1.71 16 1.47 13 1.30 Average production (lifting) cost (per mcfe) (3) 1.19 2 1.17 27 0.92 bbl = barrel mcf = thousand cubic feet mcfe = thousand cubic feet equivalent (1) Excludes $262 million, $323 million and $223 million of revenue recognized in 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, under the volumetric production payment (VPP) agreements described in Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. (2) Excludes the effects of the economic hedges discussed under Dominion Energy . (3) The inclusion of volumes produced and delivered under the VPP agreements would have resulted in lifting costs of $1.06, $1.00 and $0.83 for 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. Presented below, on an after-tax basis, are the key factors impacting Dominion E&P net income contribution: 2006 VS. 2005 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Gas and oil production (1) $ 406 $ 1.18 Business interruption insurance 62 0.18 Operations and maintenance (2) 40 0.11 Gas and oil prices (208 ) (0.60 ) DD&A (162 ) (0.47 ) Interest expense (3) (30 ) (0.09 ) Other 7 0.02 Share dilution (0.04 ) Change in net income contribution $ 115 $ 0.29 (1) Represents an increase primarily in Gulf of Mexico deepwater and shelf gas and oil production and Rocky Mountain gas production. (2) Primarily reflects the impact of mark-to-market gains associated with gas hedges that were de-designated following the 2005 hurricanes, partially offset by increased production costs and salaries, wages and benefits expense. (3) Primarily reflects additional intercompany borrowings and higher interest rates on those borrowings. 2005 VS. 2004 Increase (Decrease) Amount EPS (millions, except EPS) Operations and maintenance (1) $ (134 ) $ (0.41 ) Gas and oil production (2) (111 ) (0.34 ) Interest expense (3) (25 ) (0.08 ) Gas and oil prices 185 0.56 Business interruption insurance Hurricane Ivan 50 0.15 Other 5 0.02 Share dilution (0.06 ) Change in net income contribution $ (30 ) $ (0.16 ) (1) Reflects the absence of a 2004 benefit from favorable changes in the fair value of certain oil options, an increase in hedge ineffectiveness expense in 2005 and the discontinuance of hedge accounting for certain oil hedges in March 2005 largely resulting from delays in reaching anticipated production levels in the Gulf of Mexico, and subsequent changes in the fair value of those hedges, partially offset by a benefit reflecting the impact of a decrease in gas and oil prices on hedges that were de-designated following the 2005 hurricanes. (2) Reflects interruptions caused by the 2005 hurricanes and the sale of the majority of our natural gas and oil properties in British Columbia, Canada in December 2004. (3) Represents the combined impact of an increase in affiliate borrowings and higher interest rates, as well as prepayment penalties resulting from the early redemption of Canadian debt. Included below are the volumes and weighted average prices associated with hedges in place as of December 31, 2006 by applicable time period: Natural Gas Oil Year Hedged production (bcf) Average hedge price (per mcf) Hedged production (million bbls) Average hedge price (per bbl) 2007 225.2 $ 5.90 10.0 $ 33.41 2008 174.9 8.23 5.0 49.36 2009 36.6 7.97 0.3 75.36 33 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED Corporate Presented below are the Corporate segment after-tax results: 2006 2005 2004 (millions, except EPS amounts) Specific items attributable to operating segments $ (149 ) $ (505 ) $ (224 ) DCI operations (95 ) (22 ) (82 ) Peaker discontinued operations (183 ) (13 ) (9 ) Telecommunications operations (1) 5 (13 ) Other corporate operations (208 ) (180 ) (207 ) Total net expense (635 ) (715 ) (535 ) Earnings per share impact $ (1.80 ) $ (2.07 ) $ (1.61 ) (1) $5 million and $(15) million are classified as discontinued operations in 2005 and 2004, respectively. Specific Items Attributable to Operating Segments Corporate includes specific items attributable to our operating segments that have been excluded from the profit measures evaluated by management, either in assessing segment performance or in allocating resources among the segments. See Note 28 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of these items. DCI Operations DCI net loss for 2006 increased $73 million, primarily due to an $85 million impairment of a DCI investment during the third quarter of 2006. DCI recognized a net loss of $22 million in 2005; a decrease of $60 million as compared to 2004. The decrease primarily resulted from a reduction in after-tax charges associated with the impairment and divestiture of other DCI investments. Peaker Discontinued Operations In 2006, we recognized a $283 million ($183 million after-tax) loss from the discontinued operations of the Peaker facilities. The loss from discontinued operations includes: n $253 million ($164 million after-tax) associated with the impairment of the merchant generation facilities; and n $30 million ($19 million after-tax) of operating losses. As a result of the pending sale, we reclassified 2005 and 2004 after-tax operating losses of $13 million and $9 million, respectively, to discontinued operations. Telecommunications Operations We sold our telecommunications business in May 2004 to Elantic Telecom, Inc., which subsequently filed for bankruptcy. Due to the resolution of certain contingencies, we recognized an after-tax benefit of $5 million in 2005 related to the discontinued telecommunications business. Other Corporate Operations The net expenses associated with other corporate operations for 2006 increased by $28 million as compared to 2005, primarily reflecting a $37 million after-tax charge to eliminate the application of hedge accounting for certain interest rate swaps associated with our junior subordinated notes payable to affiliated trusts. The net expenses associated with other corporate operations for 2005 decreased by $27 million as compared to 2004, primarily reflecting an increase in interest income from affiliate advances and higher income tax benefits. This was partially offset by the absence of a $28 million after-tax benefit in 2004 associated with the disposition of CNG International investment in Australian pipeline assets. SELECTED INFORMATION ENERGY TRADING ACTIVITIES We engage in energy trading, marketing and hedging activities to complement our integrated energy businesses and facilitate our risk management activities. As part of these operations, we enter into contracts for purchases and sales of energy-related commodities, including natural gas, electricity, oil and coal. Settlements of contracts may require physical delivery of the underlying commodity or cash settlement. We also enter into contracts with the objective of benefiting from changes in prices. For example, after entering into a contract to purchase a commodity, we typically enter into a sales contract, or a combination of sales contracts, with quantities and delivery or settlement terms that are identical or very similar to those of the purchase contract. When the purchase and sales contracts are settled either by physical delivery of the underlying commodity or by net cash settlement, we may receive a net cash margin (a realized gain), or may pay a net cash margin (a realized loss). We continually monitor our contract positions, considering location and timing of delivery or settlement for each energy commodity in relation to market price activity. A summary of the changes in the unrealized gains and losses recognized for our energy-related derivative instruments held for trading purposes during 2006 follows: Amount (millions) Net unrealized loss at December 31, 2005 $ (7 ) Contracts realized or otherwise settled during the period (14 ) Net unrealized gain at inception of contracts initiated during the period Change in unrealized gains and losses 63 Changes in unrealized gains and losses attributable to changes in valuation techniques Net unrealized gain at December 31, 2006 $ 42 The balance of net unrealized gains and losses recognized for our energy-related derivative instruments held for trading purposes at December 31, 2006, is summarized in the following table based on the approach used to determine fair value: Maturity Based on Contract Settlement or Delivery Date(s) Source of Fair Value Less than 1 year 1-2 years 2-3 years 3-5 years In excess of 5 years Total (millions) Actively-quoted (1) $ 42 $ (2 ) $ 1 $ $ $ 41 Other external sources (2) 1 (4 ) 3 1 1 Models and other valuation methods Total $ 42 $ (1 ) $ (3 ) $ 3 $ 1 $ 42 (1) Exchange-traded and over-the-counter contracts. (2) Values based on prices from over-the-counter broker activity and industry services and, where applicable, conventional option pricing models. 34 Table of Contents LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES We depend on both internal and external sources of liquidity to provide working capital and to fund capital requirements. Short-term cash requirements not met by cash provided by operations are generally satisfied with proceeds from short-term borrowings. Long-term cash needs are met through sales of securities and additional long-term financing. At December 31, 2006, we had $3.0 billion of unused capacity under our credit facilities. See additional discussion under Credit Facilities and Short-Term Debt . A summary of our cash flows for 2006, 2005 and 2004 is presented below: 2006 2005 2004 (millions) Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year $ 146 $ 361 $ 126 Cash flows provided by (used in): Operating activities 4,005 2,623 2,770 Investing activities (3,494 ) (3,360 ) (1,215 ) Financing activities (515 ) 522 (1,320 ) Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents (4 ) (215 ) 235 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year (1) $ 142 $ 146 $ 361 (1) 2006 amount includes $4 million of cash classified as held for sale in our Consolidated Balance Sheet. Operating Cash Flows In 2006, net cash provided by operating activities increased by $1.4 billion as compared to 2005. The increase was primarily due to an increase in cash earnings attributable to higher natural gas and oil production, recovery of deferred fuel and purchased gas costs and business interruption insurance proceeds, as well as increased contributions from our merchant generation, nonregulated retail energy marketing and gas transmission businesses. The 2006 increase also reflects favorable changes in working capital, mainly accounts receivable and inventories. We believe that our operations provide a stable source of cash flow sufficient to contribute to planned levels of capital expenditures and maintain or grow the dividend on common shares. However, our operations are subject to risks and uncertainties that may negatively impact the timing or amounts of operating cash flows which are discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors. The declaration and payment of dividends are subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon our results of operations, financial condition, capital requirements and future prospects. CREDIT RISK Our exposure to potential concentrations of credit risk results primarily from our energy marketing and price risk management activities and sales of gas and oil production. Presented below is a summary of our gross credit exposure as of December 31, 2006 for these activities. Our gross credit exposure for each counterparty is calculated as outstanding receivables plus any unrealized on or off-balance sheet exposure, taking into account contractual netting rights. Gross credit exposure is calculated prior to the application of collateral. Gross Credit Exposure Credit Collateral Net Credit Exposure (millions) Investment grade (1) $ 855 $ 28 $ 827 Non-investment grade (2) 57 2 55 No external ratings: Internally rated investment grade (3) 280 5 275 Internally rated non-investment grade (4) 171 171 Total $ 1,363 $ 35 $ 1,328 (1) Designations as investment grade are based upon minimum credit ratings assigned by Moody Investors Service (Moody s) and Standard & Poor Ratings Services (Standard & Poor s). The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 21% of the total net credit exposure. (2) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 2% of the total net credit exposure. (3) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 13% of the total net credit exposure. (4) The five largest counterparty exposures, combined, for this category represented approximately 3% of the total net credit exposure. Investing Cash Flows Significant cash flows used in investing activities for 2006 included: n $2.1 billion of capital expenditures for the purchase and development of gas and oil producing properties, drilling and equipment costs and undeveloped lease acquisitions; n $2.0 billion of capital expenditures, including environmental upgrades, routine capital improvements, construction of generation facilities, purchase of nuclear fuel and construction and improvements of gas and electric transmission and distribution assets; n $1.1 billion for purchases of securities held as investments in our nuclear decommissioning trusts; and n $91 million related to the acquisition of Pablo Energy LLC, which holds producing and other properties in the Texas Panhandle area, net of cash acquired. Cash flows used in investing activities for 2006 were partially offset by: n $1.0 billion of proceeds from the sales of securities held as investments in our nuclear decommissioning trusts; n $393 million of proceeds from sales of gas and oil properties, primarily resulting from the fourth quarter sale of certain properties located in Texas and New Mexico; n $150 million of proceeds received from the sale or disposal of certain assets; and n $76 million of proceeds from sales of emissions allowances held for consumption. Financing Cash Flows and Liquidity We rely on banks and capital markets as significant sources of funding for capital requirements not satisfied by cash provided by the companies operations. As discussed in Credit Ratings , our ability to borrow funds or issue securities and the return demanded by investors are affected by the issuing company credit ratings. In addition, the raising of external capital is subject 35 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED to certain regulatory approvals, including registration with the SEC and, in the case of Virginia Electric and Power Company (Virginia Power), approval by the Virginia State Corporation Commission (Virginia Commission). In December 2005, the SEC adopted rules that modify the registration, communications and offering processes under the Securities Act of 1933. The rules streamline the shelf registration process to provide registrants with more timely access to capital. Under the new rules, Dominion and Virginia Power meet the definition of a well-known seasoned issuer. This allows the companies to use an automatic shelf registration statement to register any offering of securities, other than those for business combination transactions. Significant financing activities in 2006 included: n $2.3 billion for the repayment of long-term debt; n $970 million of common dividend payments; n $540 million for the repurchase of common stock; and n $300 million for the repayment of affiliated notes payable; partially offset by n $2.5 billion from the issuance of long-term debt; n $713 million from the net issuance of short-term debt; and n $479 million from the issuance of common stock. CREDIT FACILITIES AND SHORT-TERM DEBT We use short-term debt, primarily commercial paper, to fund working capital requirements, as a bridge to long-term debt financing and as bridge financing for acquisitions, if applicable. The level of our borrowings may vary significantly during the course of the year, depending upon the timing and amount of cash requirements not satisfied by cash from operations. In addition, we utilize cash and letters of credit to fund collateral requirements under our commodities hedging program. Collateral requirements are impacted by commodity prices, hedging levels and our credit quality and the credit quality of our counterparties. Short-term financing is supported by a $3.0 billion five-year joint credit facility with Virginia Power and CNG dated February 2006, that can also be used to support up to $1.5 billion of letters of credit. Short-term financing at CNG is also supported by an amended and restated $1.7 billion five-year revolving credit facility and a $1.05 billion 364-day credit facility, both dated February 2006. At December 31, 2006, we had committed lines of credit totaling $5.75 billion. These lines of credit support commercial paper borrowings, bank loans and letter of credit issuances. Our financial policy precludes issuing commercial paper in excess of our supporting lines of credit. At December 31, 2006, we had the following commercial paper, bank loans and letters of credit outstanding and capacity available under credit facilities: Facility Limit Outstanding Commercial Paper Outstanding Bank Loans Outstanding Letters of Credit Facility Capacity Available (millions) Five-year revolving joint credit facility (1) $ 3,000 $ 1,759 $ $ 236 $ 1,005 Five-year CNG credit facility (2) 1,700 500 484 716 364-day CNG credit facility (3) 1,050 1,050 Totals $ 5,750 $ 1,759 $ 500 $ 720 $ 2,771 (1) The $3.0 billion five-year credit facility was entered into in February 2006 and terminates in February 2011. This credit facility can also be used to support up to $1.5 billion of letters of credit. (2) The $1.7 billion five-year credit facility is primarily used to support the issuance of letters of credit and commercial paper by CNG to fund collateral requirements under its gas and oil hedging program. The facility was entered into in February 2006 and terminates in August 2010. In October 2006, we borrowed $500 million from this facility to repay CNG $500 million 2001 Series B 5.375% Senior Notes, which matured on November 1, 2006. We expect to repay the outstanding loan with proceeds received from pending asset sales. (3) The $1.05 billion 364-day credit facility was used to support the issuance of letters of credit and commercial paper by CNG to fund collateral requirements under its gas and oil hedging program. The facility was entered into in February 2006 and terminated in February 2007. We have also entered into several bilateral credit facilities in addition to the facilities above in order to provide collateral required on derivative contracts used in our risk management strategies for gas and oil production operations. At December 31, 2006, we had the following letter of credit facilities: Company Facility Limit Outstanding Letters of Credit Facility Capacity Remaining Facility Inception Date Facility Maturity Date (millions) CNG $ 100 $ 25 $ 75 June 2004 June 2007 CNG 100 100 August 2004 August 2009 CNG (1) 200 200 December 2005 December 2010 Totals $ 400 $ 125 $ 275 (1) This facility can also be used to support commercial paper borrowings. In connection with our commodity hedging activities, we are required to provide collateral to counterparties under some circumstances. Under certain collateral arrangements, we may satisfy these requirements by electing to either deposit cash, post letters of credit or, in some cases, utilize other forms of security. From time to time, we vary the form of collateral provided to counterparties after weighing the costs and benefits of various factors associated with the different forms of collateral. These factors include short-term borrowing and short-term investment rates, the spread over these short-term rates at which we can issue commercial paper, balance sheet impacts, the costs and fees of alternative collateral postings with these and other counterparties and overall liquidity management objectives. 36 Table of Contents LONG-TERM DEBT During 2006, we issued the following long-term debt: Type Principal Rate Maturity Issuing Company (millions) Enhanced junior subordinated notes $ 500 6.30 % 2066 Dominion Senior notes 400 variable 2008 Dominion Enhanced junior subordinated notes 300 7.50 % 2066 Dominion Senior notes 250 5.60 % 2016 Dominion Senior notes 550 6.00 % 2036 Virginia Power Senior notes 450 5.40 % 2016 Virginia Power Total long-term debt issued $ 2,450 In February 2006, we successfully remarketed $330 million of 5.75% 2002 Series A senior notes related to our equity-linked debt securities. The senior notes, which will mature in 2008, now carry an annual interest rate of 5.687%. In February 2006, Dominion Energy Brayton Point, LLC borrowed $47 million in connection with the Massachusetts Development Finance Agency issuance of its Solid Waste Disposal Revenue Bonds (Dominion Energy Brayton Point Issue) Series 2006, which mature in 2036 and bear a coupon rate of 5.0%. The bonds were issued pursuant to a trust agreement whereby funds are withdrawn from the trust as improvements are made at our Brayton Point Station located in Somerset, Massachusetts. We have withdrawn $33 million from the trust as of December 31, 2006. In June 2006, DCI began consolidating a collateralized debt obligation (CDO) entity in accordance with FASB Interpretation No. 46 (revised December 2003), Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities (FIN 46R). At December 31, 2006, this CDO entity had $385 million of notes payable that mature in January 2017 and are nonrecourse to us. During 2006, we repaid $2.3 billion of long-term debt securities. ISSUANCE OF COMMON STOCK During 2006, we issued 6.6 million shares of common stock and received proceeds of $479 million. Of this amount, 4.5 million shares and proceeds of $330 million resulted from the settlement of stock purchase contracts associated with our 2002 issuance of equity-linked debt securities. The remainder of the shares issued and proceeds received were through Dominion Direct (a dividend reinvestment and open enrollment direct stock purchase plan), employee savings plans and the exercise of employee stock options. From May 2006 until November 2006, we issued new common shares in consideration of proceeds received through these programs. In November 2006, we began purchasing our common stock on the open market with the proceeds received through these programs, rather than having additional new common shares issued. REPURCHASES OF COMMON STOCK In February 2005, we were authorized by our Board of Directors to repurchase up to the lesser of 25 million shares or $2.0 billion of our outstanding common stock. Pursuant to this authority, in November 2006, we repurchased 500 thousand shares of our common stock for approximately $40 million. Additionally, in December 2006, we entered into a prepaid accelerated share repurchase agreement (ASR) with a financial institution as the counterparty. Under the ASR, we will ultimately receive between 5.6 million and 6.5 million shares in exchange for the prepayment of $500 million. At the time of execution of the ASR, the counterparty delivered to us 5 million shares. The final number of shares delivered to the Company will be determined by a volume weighted-average price of our common stock over the period commencing on December 12, 2006, and terminating on or before May 16, 2007. The actual termination date is at the option of the counterparty. The average price to be used to determine the final shares delivered to the Company is subject to a maximum and minimum price. Assuming normal termination, we will receive a minimum of 560 thousand additional shares. In no event will termination, normal or otherwise, result in the Company delivering shares or additional cash to the counterparty. At December 31, 2006 the remaining purchase authorization is the lesser of 15.7 million shares or $1.2 billion of our outstanding common stock. Credit Ratings Credit ratings are intended to provide banks and capital market participants with a framework for comparing the credit quality of securities and are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. We believe that the current credit ratings of Dominion, Virginia Power and CNG (the Dominion Companies) provide sufficient access to the capital markets. However, disruptions in the banking and capital markets not specifically related to us may affect the Dominion Companies ability to access these funding sources or cause an increase in the return required by investors. Both quantitative (financial strength) and qualitative (business or operating characteristics) factors are considered by the credit rating agencies in establishing an individual company credit rating. Credit ratings should be evaluated independently and are subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization. The credit ratings for the Dominion Companies are most affected by each company financial profile, mix of regulated and nonregulated businesses and respective cash flows, changes in methodologies used by the rating agencies and event risk, if applicable, such as major acquisitions or dispositions. 37 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED Credit ratings for the Dominion Companies as of February 1, 2007 follow: Fitch Moody Standard & Poor Dominion Resources, Inc. Senior unsecured debt securities BBB+ Baa2 BBB Junior subordinated debt securities BBB Baa3 BB+ Enhanced junior subordinated notes BBB Baa3 BB+ Commercial paper F2 P-2 A-2 Virginia Power Mortgage bonds A A3 A Senior unsecured (including tax-exempt) debt securities BBB+ Baa1 BBB Junior subordinated debt securities BBB Baa2 BB+ Preferred stock BBB Baa3 BB+ Commercial paper F2 P-2 A-2 CNG Senior unsecured debt securities BBB+ Baa1 BBB Junior subordinated debt securities BBB Baa2 BB+ Commercial paper F2 P-2 A-2 In November 2006, Standard & Poor placed the credit ratings for the Dominion Companies on positive outlook, citing that the sale of the oil and gas assets would be favorable as it improves Dominion business risk profile by significantly reducing exposure to this segment to less than 5% of overall cash flow. Moody reaffirmed its credit ratings for the Dominion Companies, stating that the oil and gas divestiture is a potentially positive development for the credit, but will not have a material effect on the ratings at this time. Moody stated that a divestiture of Dominion oil and gas operations will substantially reduce the nonregulated revenues, earnings, cash flows and assets as a percentage of the consolidated company, which will, in turn, significantly lower our overall business and operating risk profile. Fitch reaffirmed its credit ratings for the Dominion Companies, stating that the closing of the potential oil and gas sale would alleviate several of Fitch primary rating concerns and increase the share of consolidated cash flows from more stable businesses. Generally, a downgrade in an individual company credit rating would not restrict its ability to raise short-term and long-term financing as long as its credit rating remains investment grade, but it would increase the cost of borrowing. We work closely with Fitch, Moody and Standard & Poor with the objective of maintaining our current credit ratings. In order to maintain our current ratings, we may find it necessary to modify our business plans and such changes may adversely affect our growth and earnings per share. Debt Covenants As part of borrowing funds and issuing debt (both short-term and long-term) or preferred securities, the Dominion Companies must enter into enabling agreements. These agreements contain covenants that, in the event of default, could result in the acceleration of principal and interest payments; restrictions on distributions related to our capital stock, including dividends, redemptions, repurchases, liquidation payments or guarantee payments; and in some cases, the termination of credit commitments unless a waiver of such requirements is agreed to by the lenders/security holders. These provisions are customary, with each agreement specifying which covenants apply. These provisions are not necessarily unique to the Dominion Companies. Some of the typical covenants include: n The timely payment of principal and interest; n Information requirements, including submitting financial reports filed with the SEC to lenders; n Performance obligations, audits/inspections, continuation of the basic nature of business, restrictions on certain matters related to merger or consolidation, restrictions on disposition of all or substantially all of our assets; n Compliance with collateral minimums or requirements related to mortgage bonds; and n Limitations on liens. We are required to pay minimal annual commitment fees to maintain our credit facilities. In addition, our credit agreements contain various terms and conditions that could affect our ability to borrow under these facilities. They include maximum debt to total capital ratios and cross-default provisions. As of December 31, 2006, the calculated total debt to total capital ratio for our companies, pursuant to the terms of the agreements, was as follows: Company Maximum Ratio Actual Ratio (1) Dominion Resources, Inc. 65% 54% Virginia Power 65% 47% CNG 65% 47% (1) Indebtedness as defined by the bank agreements excludes junior subordinated notes payable reflected as long-term debt on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. These provisions apply separately to the Dominion Companies. If any one of the Dominion Companies or any of that specific company material subsidiaries fail to make payment on various debt obligations in excess of $35 million, the lenders could require that respective company to accelerate its repayment of any outstanding borrowings under the credit facility and the lenders could terminate their commitment to lend funds to that company. Accordingly, any defaults on indebtedness by CNG or any of its material subsidiaries would not affect the lenders commitment to Virginia Power. Similarly, any defaults on indebtedness by Virginia Power or any of its material subsidiaries would not affect the lenders commitment to CNG. Likewise, any default by Dominion will not affect the lender commitment to Virginia Power or CNG. However, any default by either CNG or Virginia Power would also affect in like manner the lenders commitment to Dominion under the joint credit agreement. In June 2006 and September 2006, we executed Replacement Capital Covenants (RCCs) in connection with our offering of $300 million of 2006 Series A Enhanced Junior Subordinated Notes due 2066 (June hybrids) and $500 million of 2006 Series B Enhanced Junior Subordinated Notes due 2066 (September hybrids), respectively. We have initially designated the $250 million 8.4% Capital Securities of Dominion Resources Capital Trust III that were issued in January 2001 as covered debt under the RCCs. In the future, we will be allowed to change the series of our debt designated as covered debt under the RCCs. Under the terms of the RCCs, we agree not to redeem or repurchase all or part of the June or September hybrids prior to June 30 or September 30, 2036, respectively, unless we issue qualifying securities to non-affiliates in a replacement offering in the 180 days prior to 38 Table of Contents the redemption or repurchase date. The proceeds we receive from the replacement offering, adjusted by a predetermined factor, must exceed the redemption or repurchase price. Qualifying securities include common stock, preferred stock and other securities that generally rank equal to or junior to the hybrids and include distribution deferral and long-dated maturity features similar to the hybrids. For purposes of the RCCs, non-affiliates include individuals enrolled in our dividend reinvestment plan, direct stock purchase plan and employee benefit plans. We monitor the covenants on a regular basis in order to ensure that events of default will not occur. Other than the RCCs discussed above, as of December 31, 2006, there have been no changes to or events of default under our debt covenant. Dividend Restrictions The Virginia Commission may prohibit any public service company, including Virginia Power, from declaring or paying a dividend to an affiliate, if found to be detrimental to the public interest. At December 31, 2006, the Virginia Commission had not restricted the payment of dividends by Virginia Power. Certain agreements associated with our credit facilities contain restrictions on the ratio of our debt to total capitalization. These limitations did not restrict our ability to pay dividends or receive dividends from our subsidiaries at December 31, 2006. See Note 18 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of potential restrictions on dividend payments by us and certain of our subsidiaries in connection with the deferral of distribution payments on trust preferred securities or deferral of interest payments on enhanced junior subordinated notes. Future Cash Payments for Contractual Obligations and Planned Capital Expenditures We are party to numerous contracts and arrangements obligating the Company to make cash payments in future years. These contracts include financing arrangements such as debt agreements and leases, as well as contracts for the purchase of goods and services and financial derivatives. Presented below is a table summarizing cash payments that may result from contracts to which we are a party as of December 31, 2006. For purchase obligations and other liabilities, amounts are based upon contract terms, including fixed and minimum quantities to be purchased at fixed or market-based prices. Actual cash payments will be based upon actual quantities purchased and prices paid and will likely differ from amounts presented below. The table excludes all amounts classified as current liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets, other than current maturities of long-term debt, interest payable, and certain derivative instruments. The majority of our current liabilities will be paid in cash in 2007. Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Total (millions) Long-term debt (1) $ 2,479 $ 2,021 $ 2,443 $ 10,370 $ 17,313 Interest payments (2) 1,005 1,662 1,378 9,904 13,949 Leases 209 345 250 294 1,098 Purchase obligations (3) : Purchased electric capacity for utility operations 414 745 697 2,207 4,063 Fuel to be used for utility operations 717 838 367 573 2,495 Fuel to be used for nonregulated operations 28 68 58 172 326 Production handling 54 69 26 5 154 Pipeline transportation and storage 149 241 121 85 596 Energy commodity purchases for resale (4) 469 31 12 4 516 Other (5) 594 166 49 68 877 Other long-term liabilities (6) : Financial derivative commodities (4) 839 189 2 1,030 Other contractual obligations (7) 60 84 15 159 Total cash payments $ 7,017 $ 6,459 $ 5,418 $ 23,682 $ 42,576 (1) Based on stated maturity dates rather than the earlier redemption dates that could be elected by instrument holders. (2) Does not reflect our ability to defer payments related to our trust preferred securities and enhanced junior subordinated notes. (3) Amounts exclude open purchase orders for services that are provided on demand, the timing of which cannot be determined. (4) Represents the summation of settlement amounts, by contracts, due from us if all physical or financial transactions among our counterparties and the Company were liquidated and terminated. (5) Includes capital and operations and maintenance commitments, onshore and offshore drilling rigs and funding for our investment in a wind-power facility as discussed in Note 23 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. (6) Excludes regulatory liabilities, AROs and employee benefit plan obligations that are not contractually fixed as to timing and amount. See Notes 14, 15 and 22 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Deferred income taxes are also excluded since cash payments are based primarily on taxable income for each discrete fiscal year. (7) Includes interest rate swap agreements. Our planned capital expenditures during 2007 and 2008 are expected to total approximately $4.4 billion and $4.6 billion, respectively. These expenditures are expected to include construction and expansion of electric generation and LNG facilities, environmental upgrades, construction improvements and expansion of gas and electric transmission and distribution assets, 39 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED purchases of nuclear fuel and expenditures to explore for and develop natural gas and oil properties. We expect to fund our capital expenditures with cash from operations and a combination of securities issuances and short-term borrowings. Based on available generation capacity and current estimates of growth in customer demand, we will need additional generation in the future. We currently have plans to restart our Hopewell plant in 2007, a 63 Mw (at net summer capability) coal burning plant located in Hopewell, Virginia, which has been out of service since 2003, and we are evaluating a 290 Mw (at net summer capability) expansion of our Ladysmith site in Ladysmith, Virginia. We are also leading a consortium of companies that are considering building a 500 to 600 Mw coal-fired plant in southwest Virginia. We will continue to evaluate the development of new plants to meet customer demand for additional generation needs in the future. Through 2009, we will continue to meet any additional capacity requirements through market purchases. We may choose to postpone or cancel certain planned capital expenditures in order to mitigate the need for future debt financings. Use of Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements GUARANTEES We primarily enter into guarantee arrangements on behalf of our consolidated subsidiaries. These arrangements are not subject to the recognition and measurement provisions of FASB Interpretation No. 45, Guarantor Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others. See Note 23 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of these guarantees. At December 31, 2006, we have issued $32 million of guarantees to support third parties, equity method investees and employees affected by Hurricane Katrina. In addition, in 2005, we, along with two other gas and oil E&P companies, entered into a four-year drilling contract related to a new, ultra-deepwater drilling rig that is expected to be delivered in mid-2008. The contract has a four-year primary term, plus four one-year extension options. Our minimum commitment under the agreement is for approximately $99 million over the four-year term; however, we are jointly and severally liable for up to $394 million to the contractor if the other parties fail to pay the contractor for their obligations under the primary term of the agreement. We believe this scenario is improbable and have not recognized any significant liabilities related to any of these arrangements. In 2006, we, along with three other gas and oil exploration companies, executed agreements with a third party to design, construct, install and own the Thunder Hawk facility, a semi-submersible production facility to be located in the deepwater Gulf of Mexico. We anticipate that mechanical completion of the Thunder Hawk facility will occur in 2009 and that the processing of our production will start by 2010. Due to current offshore insurance market conditions, it is anticipated that the Thunder Hawk facility will only be partially insured against a catastrophic full or partial loss. We, along with the three other participating producers, will be required to continue to make demand payments in the event of a catastrophic loss if insurance payments are not sufficient to pay the lessor outstanding debt incurred for the Thunder Hawk facility. The agreements require that we pay a demand charge of approximately $63 million over five years starting on the day after the mechanical completion of the Thunder Hawk facility. Our obligation will terminate upon the earlier event of full payment of the lessor debt incurred for the Thunder Hawk facility or the full payment of our demand charge obligation. We believe that it is unlikely that we would be required to perform under this guarantee and have not recognized any significant liabilities for this arrangement. The agreements also require the payment of production processing fees including a minimum processing fee if yearly production processing fees are below specified amounts. Our maximum obligation for the minimum processing fee would be approximately $3 million per year. Our obligation for the payment of these processing fees will terminate upon the cessation of our production. LEASING ARRANGEMENT We have an agreement to lease the Fairless power station in Pennsylvania, which began commercial operations in June 2004. During construction, we acted as the construction agent for the lessor, controlled the design and construction of the facility and have since been reimbursed for all project costs ($898 million) advanced to the lessor. We make annual lease payments of $53 million. The lease expires in 2013 and at that time, we may renew the lease at negotiated amounts based on original project costs and current market conditions, subject to lessor approval; purchase Fairless at its original construction cost; or sell Fairless, on behalf of the lessor, to an independent third party. If Fairless is sold and the proceeds from the sale are less than its original construction cost, we would be required to make a payment to the lessor in an amount up to 70.75% of original project costs adjusted for certain other costs as specified in the lease. The lease agreement does not contain any provisions that involve credit rating or stock price trigger events. Benefits of this arrangement include: n Certain tax benefits as we are considered the owner of the leased property for tax purposes. As a result, we are entitled to tax deductions for depreciation not recognized for financial accounting purposes; and n As an operating lease for financial accounting purposes, the asset and related borrowings used to finance the construction of the asset are not included in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Although this improves measures of leverage calculated using amounts reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements, credit rating agencies view lease obligations as debt equivalents in evaluating our credit profile. FUTURE ISSUES AND OTHER MATTERS Status of Electric Restructuring in Virginia 1999 VIRGINIA RESTRUCTURING ACT The Virginia Electric Utility Restructuring Act (1999 Virginia Restructuring Act) was enacted in 1999 and established a plan to restructure the electric utility industry in Virginia. In general, this legislation provided for a transition from bundled cost-based rates for regulated electric service to unbundled cost-based rates for transmission and distribution services, and to market pricing for generation services, including retail choice for our customers. The 1999 Virginia Restructuring Act addressed capped base rates, RTO participation, retail choice, stranded costs recovery, and functional separation of an electric utility generation from its transmission and distribution operations. 40 Table of Contents Retail choice was made available to all of our Virginia regulated electric customers since January 1, 2003. We have separated our generation, distribution and transmission functions through the creation of divisions. State regulatory requirements ensure that our generation division and other divisions operate independently and prevent cross-subsidies between our generation division and other divisions. Additionally, in 2005 we became a member of PJM, an RTO, and have integrated our electric transmission facilities into the PJM wholesale electricity markets. Under the 1999 Virginia Restructuring Act, our base rates have been capped until December 31, 2010, unless modified earlier. 2004 amendments to the 1999 Virginia Restructuring Act addressed a minimum stay exemption program, a wires charge exemption program and the development of a coal-fired generating plant in southwest Virginia. VIRGINIA FUEL EXPENSES In May 2006, Virginia law was amended to modify the way our Virginia jurisdictional fuel factor is set during the three and one-half year period beginning July 1, 2007. The bill became law effective July 1, 2006 and: n Allows annual fuel rate adjustments for three twelve-month periods beginning July 1, 2007 and one six-month period beginning July 1, 2010 (unless capped rates are terminated earlier under the 1999 Virginia Restructuring Act); n Allows an adjustment at the end of each of the twelve-month periods to account for differences between projections and actual recovery of fuel costs during the prior twelve months; and n Authorizes the Virginia Commission to defer up to 40% of any fuel factor increase approved for the first twelve-month period, with recovery of the deferred amount over the two and one-half year period beginning July 1, 2008 (under prior law, such a deferral was not possible). Fuel prices have increased considerably since our Virginia fuel factor provisions were frozen in 2004, which has resulted in our fuel expenses being significantly in excess of our rate recovery. We expect that fuel expenses will continue to exceed rate recovery until our fuel factor is adjusted in July 2007. While the 2006 amendments do not allow us to collect any unrecovered fuel expenses that were incurred prior to July 1, 2007, once our fuel factor is adjusted, the risk of under-recovery of prudently incurred fuel costs until July 1, 2010 is greatly diminished. STRANDED COSTS Stranded costs are generation-related costs incurred or commitments made by utilities under cost-based regulation that may not be reasonably expected to be recovered in a competitive market. At December 31, 2006, our exposure to potential stranded costs included long-term power purchase contracts that could ultimately be determined to be above market prices; generating plants that could possibly become uneconomical in a deregulated environment; and unfunded obligations for nuclear plant decommissioning and postretirement benefits. We believe capped electric retail rates will provide an opportunity to recover our potential stranded costs, depending on market prices of electricity and other factors. Recovery of our potential stranded costs remains subject to numerous risks, even in the capped-rate environment. These risks include, among others, exposure to long-term power purchase commitment losses, future environmental compliance requirements, changes in certain tax laws, nuclear decommissioning costs, increased fuel costs, inflation, increased capital costs and recovery of certain other items. The generation-related cash flows provided by the 1999 Virginia Restructuring Act are intended to compensate us for continuing to provide generation services and to allow us to incur costs to restructure such operations during the transition period. As a result, during the transition period, our earnings may increase to the extent that we can reduce operating costs for our utility generation-related operations. Conversely, the same risks affecting the recovery of our stranded costs may also adversely impact our margins during the transition period. Accordingly, we could realize the negative economic impact of any such adverse event. Using cash flows from operations during the transition period, we may further alter our cost structure or choose to make additional investments in our business. 2007 VIRGINIA RESTRUCTURING ACT AMENDMENTS In February 2007, both houses of the Virginia General Assembly passed identical bills that would significantly change electricity restructuring in Virginia. The bills would end capped rates two years early, on December 31, 2008. After capped rates end, retail choice would be eliminated for all but individual retail customers with a demand of more than 5 Mw and a limited number of non-residential retail customers whose aggregated load would exceed 5 Mw. Also, after the end of capped rates, the Virginia Commission would set the base rates of investor-owned electric utilities under a modified cost-of-service model. Among other features, the currently proposed model would provide for the Virginia Commission to: n Initiate a base rate case for each utility during the first six months of 2009, as a result of which the Virginia Commission: n establishes a return on equity (ROE) no lower than that reported by a group of utilities within the southeastern U.S., with certain limitations on earnings and rate adjustments; n shall increase base rates, if needed, to allow the utility the opportunity to recover its costs and earn a fair rate of return, if the utility is found to have earnings more than 50 basis points below the established ROE; n may reduce rates or, alternatively, order a credit to customers if the utility is found to have earnings more than 50 basis points above the established ROE; and n may authorize performance incentives, if appropriate. n After the initial rate case, review base rates biennially, as a result of which the Virginia Commission: n establishes an ROE no lower than that reported by a group of utilities within the southeastern U.S., with certain limitations on earnings and rate adjustments; however, if the Virginia Commission finds that such ROE limit at that time exceeds the ROE set at the time of the initial base rate case in 2009 by more than the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index in the interim, it may reduce that lower ROE limit to a level that increases the initial ROE by only as much as the change in the Consumer Price Index; 41 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED n shall increase base rates, if needed, to allow the utility the opportunity to recover its costs and earn a fair rate of return if the utility is found to have earnings more than 50 basis points below the established ROE; or n may order a credit to customers if the utility is found to have earnings more than 50 basis points above the established ROE, and reduce rates if the utility is found to have such excess earnings during two consecutive biennial review periods; and n may authorize performance incentives if appropriate. n Authorize stand-alone rate adjustments for recovery of certain costs, including new generation projects, major generating unit modifications, environmental compliance projects, FERC-approved costs for transmission service, energy efficiency and conservation programs, and renewable energy programs; and n Authorize an enhanced ROE as a financial incentive for construction of major baseload generation projects and for renewable energy portfolio standard programs. The bills would also continue statutory provisions directing us to file annual fuel cost recovery cases with the Virginia Commission beginning in 2007 and continuing thereafter. However, our fuel factor increase as of July 1, 2007 would be limited to an amount that results in residential customers not receiving an increase of more than 4% of total rates as of that date, and the remainder would be deferred and collected over three years, as follows: n in calendar year 2008, the deferral portion collected is limited to an amount that results in residential customers not receiving an increase of more than 4% of total rates as of January 1, 2008; n in calendar year 2009, the deferral portion collected is limited to an amount that results in residential customers not receiving an increase of more than 4% of total rates as of January 1, 2009; and n the remainder of the deferral balance, if any, would be collected in the fuel factor in calendar year 2010. The Governor has until March 26, 2007 to sign, propose amendments to, or veto the bills. With the Governor signature, the bills would become law effective July 1, 2007. At this time, we cannot predict the outcome of these legislative proposals. Transmission Expansion Plan Each year, as part of PJM Regional Transmission Expansion Plan (RTEP) process, reliability projects will be authorized. In June 2006, PJM, through the RTEP process, authorized construction of numerous electric transmission upgrades through 2011. We are involved in two of the major construction projects. The first project is an approximately 270-mile 500-kilovolt (kV) transmission line from southwestern Pennsylvania to Virginia, of which we will construct approximately 70 miles in Virginia and a subsidiary of Allegheny Energy, Inc. will construct the remainder. The second project is an approximately 56-mile 500 kV transmission line that we will construct in southeastern Virginia. These transmission upgrades are designed to improve the reliability of service to our customers and the region. The siting and construction of these transmission lines will be subject to applicable state and federal permits and approvals. Offshore Oil and Gas Leases A bill passed by the U.S. House of Representatives on January 16, 2007, but not yet enacted into law, addresses certain federal offshore oil and gas leases issued in 1998 and 1999 that do not include a provision requiring royalties to be paid on specified royalty suspension volumes when oil and gas commodity futures closing prices exceed specified threshold levels (as is the case under current market conditions). The bill imposes a conservation of resources fee of $1.25 per million British thermal units (MMbtu) of gas and $9.00 per barrel oil (2005 dollars) produced from such leases on and after October 1, 2006 in calendar years when the average oil or gas (as applicable) commodity futures monthly closing prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) exceed $4.34 per MMbtu for gas or $34.73 for oil (2005 dollars). In addition, commencing on and after October 1, 2006, in calendar years when the average NYMEX monthly closing prices exceed the foregoing thresholds, a conservation of resources fee of $3.75 per acre per lease per year is imposed on such leases that are non-producing. The bill permits lessees to avoid payment of the foregoing fee by agreeing to lease amendments that provide that royalties are payable with respect to royalty suspension volumes on and after October 1, 2006 when the foregoing threshold conditions are met. Finally, the bill imposes sanctions on lessees, including disqualification from future offshore lease sales, for those who do not enter into such lease amendments and fail to pay the fee. The Senate is considering similar legislation. Common Stock Dividend Increase In January 2007, our quarterly dividend rate increased from 69 cents per share to 71 cents per share, for an annual rate in 2007 of $2.84. While all dividends are payable only as and when declared by the Board of Directors, our expected cash flow and earnings should enable us to pay dividends at the current rate and to make future increases when our Board of Directors deems it financially prudent. The Board of Directors declares common stock dividends on a quarterly basis. Environmental Matters We are subject to costs resulting from a number of federal, state and local laws and regulations designed to protect human health and the environment. These laws and regulations affect future planning and existing operations. They can result in increased capital, operating and other costs as a result of compliance, remediation, containment and monitoring obligations. To the extent that environmental costs are incurred in connection with operations regulated by the Virginia Commission, during the period ending December 31, 2010, in excess of the level currently included in the Virginia jurisdictional electric retail rates, our results of operations will decrease. After that date, recovery through regulated rates may be sought for only those environmental costs related to regulated electric transmission and distribution operations and recovery, if any, through the generation component of rates will be dependent upon the market price of electricity. We also may seek recovery through regulated rates for environmental expenditures related to regulated gas transmission and distribution operations. However, the foregoing risks are subject to change upon the adoption, if any, of the proposed 2007 Virginia Restructuring Act Amendments. 42 Table of Contents ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND MONITORING EXPENDITURES We incurred approximately $138 million, $205 million and $132 million of expenses (including depreciation) during 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively, in connection with environmental protection and monitoring activities and expect these expenses to be approximately $181 million and $188 million in 2007 and 2008, respectively. In addition, capital expenditures related to environmental controls were $332 million, $140 million and $94 million for 2006, 2005 and 2004, respectively. These expenditures are expected to be approximately $300 million and $174 million for 2007 and 2008, respectively. CLEAN AIR ACT (CAA) COMPLIANCE In March 2005, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Administrator signed both the Clean Air Interstate Rule (CAIR) and the Clean Air Mercury Rule (CAMR). These rules, when implemented, will require significant reductions in sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ), nitrogen oxide (NO X ) and mercury emissions from electric generating facilities. The SO 2 and NO X emission reduction requirements are imposed in two phases, with initial reduction levels targeted for 2009 (NO X ) and 2010 (SO 2 ), and a second phase of reductions targeted for 2015 (SO 2 and NO X ). The mercury emission reduction requirements are also in two phases, with initial reduction levels targeted for 2010 and a second phase of reductions targeted for 2018. The new rules allow for the use of cap-and-trade programs. States are currently developing implementation plans, which will determine the levels and timing of required emission reductions in each of the states within which we own and operate affected generating facilities. Several of these states have issued proposed regulations for the implementation of CAIR and CAMR. West Virginia has adopted both final rules. Illinois has adopted CAMR and is more strict than the federal requirements. In April 2006, legislation titled, Air Emissions Control , which addresses many of the requirements of CAIR and CAMR, was adopted in Virginia and is more strict than the federal requirements. This legislation, however, does not serve as Virginia final plan for the implementation of CAIR and CAMR. Illinois has proposed, but not yet finalized, regulations to implement CAIR, which are also more strict than the federal requirements. Separate from CAIR and CAMR, Massachusetts has regulations specifically targeting reductions in NO x , SO 2 , carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) and mercury emissions from our affected facilities in Massachusetts. These CAA regulatory and legislative actions will require additional reductions in emissions from our fossil fuel-fired generating facilities and are already addressed in our current compliance planning. In June 2005, the EPA finalized amendments to the Regional Haze Rule, also known as the Clean Air Visibility Rule (CAVR). The states have not yet finalized regulations to implement CAVR. Although we anticipate that the emission reductions achieved through compliance with CAIR and CAMR will address CAVR, at this time we cannot predict with certainty any additional financial impacts of the regional haze regulations on our operations at this time. Implementation of projects to comply with these SO 2 , NO X and mercury limitations, and other state emission control programs are ongoing and will be influenced by changes in the regulatory environment, availability of emission allowances and emission control technology. In response to these CAA requirements, we estimate that we will make capital expenditures at our affected generating facilities of approximately $958 million during the period 2007 through 2011. In March 2004, the State of North Carolina filed a petition with the EPA under Section 126 of the CAA seeking additional NO X and SO 2 reductions from electrical generating units in thirteen states, claiming emissions from those units are contributing to air quality problems in North Carolina. We have electrical generating units in six of the thirteen states. In March 2006, the EPA issued a final rulemaking through which it denied the North Carolina petition on the basis that the implementation of CAIR adequately addresses the air quality issues identified by North Carolina. Therefore, we do not anticipate additional expenditures in relation to this matter. OTHER We operate two fossil fuel-fired generating power stations in Massachusetts that are subject to the implementation of CO 2 emission regulations issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. The final CO 2 regulations have been promulgated and contain provisions that limit our liability through the establishment of alternative compliance payments. Based on our analysis we estimated that the impact of these regulations will not be material. Additionally, in January 2007, the Governor of Massachusetts signed the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, committing Massachusetts to a multi-state effort to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide. Implementing regulations in Massachusetts have yet to be promulgated. Until the implementing regulations are promulgated, it is not possible to predict the financial impact that may result. CLEAN WATER ACT COMPLIANCE In July 2004, the EPA published regulations that govern existing utilities that employ a cooling water intake structure and that have flow levels exceeding a minimum threshold. The EPA rule presents several compliance options. We have been evaluating information from certain of our existing power stations and had expected to spend approximately $8 million over the next 2 years conducting studies and technical evaluations. However, in January 2007, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit issued a decision on an appeal of the regulations, remanding the rule to the EPA. We cannot predict the outcome of the EPA regulatory process or determine with any certainty what specific controls may be required. In August 2006, the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection (CTDEP) issued a notice of a Tentative Determination to renew Millstone Power Station pollution elimination discharge permit, which included a draft copy of the revised permit. An administrative hearing will be held on the draft permit with a Final Determination expected to be issued by the CTDEP within the next year. Until the final permit is reissued, it is not possible to predict the financial impact that may result. In October 2003, the EPA and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection each issued new National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits for the Brayton Point Power Station. The new permits contained identical conditions that in effect require the installation of cooling towers to address concerns over the withdrawal and discharge of cooling water. In November 2003, appeals were filed with the EPA Envi - - 43 Table of Contents MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS, CONTINUED ronmental Appeals Board (EAB) and the Division of Administrative Law Appeals in Massachusetts, and both permits were stayed. In February 2006, the EAB remanded a portion of the EPA NPDES permit to the EPA for reconsideration. In November 2006, EPA issued its determination on remand regarding four remaining issues appealed by Brayton Point concerning its NPDES permit. In January 2007, Brayton Point appealed three of those issues to the EPA EAB. Both permits are stayed pending the outcome of the EPA process. Until the remand process and any resulting appeals are completed, the outcome of this matter cannot be predicted. FUTURE ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS From time to time, the U.S. Congress considers various legislative proposals that would require generating facilities to comply with more stringent air emissions standards. Emission reduction requirements under consideration would be phased in under periods of up to ten to fifteen years. If these new proposals are adopted, additional significant expenditures may be required. In 1997, the U.S. signed an International Protocol (Protocol) to limit man-made greenhouse emissions under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. However, the Protocol will not become binding unless approved by the U.S. Senate. The Bush Administration has indicated that it will not pursue ratification of the Protocol and has set a voluntary goal of reducing the nation greenhouse gas emission intensity by 18% during the period 2002 through 2012. We expect continuing legislative efforts in the U.S. Congress to include provisions seeking to target the reductions of greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to possible federal action, some of the states in which we operate have already or may adopt carbon reduction programs. The cost of compliance with the Protocol or other greenhouse gas reduction programs could be significant. Given the highly uncertain outcome and timing of future action, if any, by the U.S. federal government and states on this issue, we cannot predict the financial impact of future climate change actions on our operations at this time. 
