CIK: 731802
Company Name: ATMOS ENERGY CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-11-22


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations INTRODUCTION This section provides management discussion of the financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations of Atmos Energy Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries with specific information on results of operations and liquidity and capital resources. It includes management interpretation of our financial results, the factors affecting these results, the major factors expected to affect future operating results and future investment and financing plans. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. Our performance in the future will primarily depend on the results of our utility and nonutility operations. Several factors exist that could influence our future financial performance, some of which are described in Item 1A above, Risk Factors . They should be considered in connection with evaluating forward-looking statements contained in this report or otherwise made by or on behalf of us since these factors could cause actual results and conditions to differ materially from those set out in such forward-looking statements. Cautionary Statement for the Purposes of the Safe Harbor under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 The statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report are forward-looking statements made in good faith by us and are intended to qualify for the safe harbor from liability established by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. When used in this Report, or any other of our documents or oral presentations, the words anticipate , believe , estimate , expect , forecast , goal , intend , objective , plan , projection , seek , strategy or similar words are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the statements relating to our strategy, operations, markets, services, rates, recovery of costs, availability of gas supply and other factors. These risks and uncertainties include the following: regulatory trends and decisions, including deregulation initiatives and the impact of rate proceedings before various state regulatory commissions; adverse weather conditions, such as warmer than normal weather in our utility service territories or colder than normal weather that could adversely affect our natural gas marketing activities; the concentration of our distribution, pipeline and storage operations in one state; impact of environmental regulations on our business; market risks beyond our control affecting our risk management activities including market liquidity, commodity price volatility, increasing interest rates and counterparty creditworthiness; our ability to continue to access the capital markets; the effects of inflation and changes in the availability and prices of natural gas, including the volatility of natural gas prices; increased competition from energy suppliers and alternative forms of energy; increased costs of providing pension and postretirement health care benefits; the capital-intensive nature of our distribution business, the inherent hazards and risks involved in operating our distribution business, and other risks and uncertainties discussed herein, especially in Item 1A above, all of which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control. Accordingly, while we believe these forward-looking statements to be reasonable, there can be no assurance that they will approximate actual experience or that the expectations derived from them will be realized. Further, we undertake no obligation to update or revise any of our forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. OVERVIEW In fiscal 2006, we earned $147.7 million in net income or $1.82 per diluted share, compared with net income of $135.8 million, or $1.72 per diluted share in fiscal 2005. The nine percent year-over-year increase in net income was primarily attributable strong financial results in our natural gas marketing segment as it was able to capture higher margins in a volatile natural gas market and favorable unrealized mark-to-market gains. Additionally, pipeline and storage net income increased 16 percent compared with the prior year. These positive results helped overcome the adverse effects on our utility segment of weather (adjusted for WNA) that 35 Table of Contents was 13 percent warmer than normal, the adverse effect of Hurricane Katrina on our Louisiana Division and a non-recurring, noncash charge to impair certain assets. Our utility operations contributed $53.0 million ($0.65 per diluted share) or 36 percent to fiscal 2006 results. Our nonutility operations, comprised of our natural gas marketing, pipeline and storage and other nonutility segments, contributed $94.7 million ($1.17 per diluted share) or 64 percent to fiscal 2006 results. Key financial and other events for fiscal 2006 include the following: Our utility segment net income decreased $28.1 million during the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with the year ended September 30, 2005. The decrease primarily resulted from the impact of weather, as adjusted for jurisdictions with weather-normalized rates, that was two percent warmer than the prior-year period and 13 percent warmer than normal, coupled with higher operating expenses. Utility segment results also reflect a $14.6 million net of tax charge associated with the impairment of the West Texas Division irrigation assets. During fiscal 2006, our Louisiana and Mid-Tex divisions received WNA in their rate designs that will go into effect in fiscal 2007. After receiving WNA in these two jurisdictions, we will have weather protection for over 90 percent of our residential and commercial meters for the 2006-2007 winter heating season. Our natural gas marketing segment net income increased $35.2 million during the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with the year ended September 30, 2005. The increase in natural gas marketing net income primarily reflects an increase in our unrealized margin of $43.2 million and increased realized margins due to our ability to capture higher margins in a volatile natural gas market. These increases were partially offset by a $7.4 million increase in operating expenses and increased interest charges resulting from increased short-term borrowings to fund working capital needs. Our pipeline and storage segment net income increased $5.0 million during the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with the year ended September 30, 2005. Increased gross profit margin resulting from higher transportation and related services margins coupled with increased throughput on our Atmos Pipeline-Texas system and Atmos Pipeline & Storage, LLC ability to capture more favorable arbitrage spreads in its asset management contracts were partially offset by higher operating expenses. Our capitalization ratio at September 30, 2006 was 60.9 percent compared with 59.3 percent at September 30, 2005 reflecting the impact of increased short-term debt borrowings to fund working capital needs partially offset by current-year net income. For the year ended September 30, 2006, we generated $311.4 million in operating cash flow compared with $386.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2005, reflecting the adverse impact of high natural gas costs on our working capital. Capital expenditures increased to $425.3 million from $333.2 million primarily reflecting increased capital spending for various pipeline expansion projects in our Atmos Pipeline Texas Division. Our financial performance is discussed in greater detail below in Results of Operations. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES Our consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We based our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to risk management and trading activities, allowance for doubtful accounts, legal and environmental accruals, insurance accruals, pension and postretirement obligations, deferred income taxes and the valuation of goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets. Our critical accounting policies are reviewed by the Audit Committee quarterly. Actual results may differ from estimates. 36 Table of Contents Regulation Our utility operations are subject to regulation with respect to rates, service, maintenance of accounting records and various other matters by the respective regulatory authorities in the states in which we operate. Our regulated utility operations are accounted for in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation. This statement requires cost-based, rate-regulated entities that meet certain criteria to reflect the financial effects of the ratemaking and accounting practices and policies of the various regulatory commissions in their financial statements. We record regulatory assets for costs that have been deferred for which future recovery through customer rates is considered probable. Regulatory liabilities are recorded when it is probable that revenues will be reduced for amounts that will be credited to customers through the ratemaking process. As a result, certain costs that would normally be expensed under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States are permitted to be capitalized because they can be recovered through rates. Further, regulation may impact the period in which revenues or expenses are recognized. The amounts to be recovered or recognized are based upon historical experience and our understanding of the regulations. The impact of regulation on our utility operations may be affected by decisions of the regulatory authorities or the issuance of new regulations. Revenue recognition Sales of natural gas to our utility customers are billed on a monthly cycle basis; however, the billing cycle periods for certain classes of customers do not necessarily coincide with accounting periods used for financial reporting purposes. We follow the revenue accrual method of accounting for utility segment revenues whereby revenues applicable to gas delivered to customers, but not yet billed under the cycle billing method, are estimated and accrued and the related costs are charged to expense. On occasion, we are permitted to implement new rates that have not been formally approved by our regulators and are subject to refund. As permitted by SFAS No. 71, we recognize this revenue and establish a reserve for amounts that could be refunded based on our experience for the jurisdiction in which the rates were implemented. Rates established by regulatory authorities are adjusted for increases and decreases in our purchased gas cost through purchased gas adjustment mechanisms. Purchased gas adjustment mechanisms provide gas utility companies a method of recovering purchased gas costs on an ongoing basis without filing a rate case to address all of the utility non-gas costs. These mechanisms are commonly utilized when regulatory authorities recognize a particular type of expense, such as purchased gas costs, that (i) is subject to significant price fluctuations compared to the utility other costs, (ii) represents a large component of the utility cost of service and (iii) is generally outside the control of the gas utility. There is no gross profit generated through purchased gas adjustments, but they do provide a dollar-for-dollar offset to increases or decreases in utility gas costs. Although substantially all of our utility sales to our customers fluctuate with the cost of gas that we purchase, utility gross profit is generally not affected by fluctuations in the cost of gas due to the purchased gas adjustment mechanism. The effects of these purchased gas adjustment mechanisms are recorded as deferred gas costs on our balance sheet. Energy trading contracts resulting in the delivery of a commodity where we are the principal in the transaction are recorded as natural gas marketing sales or purchases at the time of physical delivery. Realized gains and losses from the settlement of financial instruments that do not result in physical delivery related to our natural gas marketing energy trading contracts and unrealized gains and losses from changes in the market value of open contracts are included as a component of natural gas marketing revenues. Allowance for doubtful accounts For the majority of our receivables, we establish an allowance for doubtful accounts based on our collections experience. On certain other receivables where we are aware of a specific customer inability or reluctance to pay, we record an allowance for doubtful accounts against amounts due to reduce the net receivable balance to the amount we reasonably expect to collect. However, if circumstances change, our estimate of the recoverability of accounts receivable could be different. Circumstances which could affect our estimates include, but are not limited to, customer credit issues, the level of natural gas prices and general economic conditions. Accounts are written off once they are deemed to be uncollectible. Derivatives and hedging activities In our utility segment, we use a combination of storage and financial derivatives to partially insulate us and our natural gas utility customers against gas price volatility 37 Table of Contents during the winter heating season. The financial derivatives we use in our utility segment are accounted for under the mark-to-market method pursuant to SFAS 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities. Changes in the valuation of these derivatives primarily result from changes in the valuation of the portfolio of contracts, the maturity and settlement of contracts and newly originated transactions. However, because the costs of financial derivatives used in our utility segment will ultimately be recovered through our rates, current period changes in the assets and liabilities from these risk management activities are recorded as a component of deferred gas costs in accordance with SFAS 71. Accordingly, there is no earnings impact to our utility segment as a result of the use of financial derivatives. The changes in the assets and liabilities from risk management activities are recognized in purchased gas cost in the income statement when the related costs are recovered through our rates. Our natural gas marketing risk management activities are conducted through our natural gas marketing segment. This segment is exposed to risks associated with changes in the market price of natural gas, which we manage through a combination of storage and financial derivatives, including futures, over-the-counter and exchange-traded options and swap contracts with counterparties. Option contracts provide the right, but not the requirement, to buy or sell the commodity at a fixed price. Swap contracts require receipt of payment for the commodity based on the difference between a fixed price and the market price on the settlement date. The use of these contracts is subject to our risk management policies, which are monitored for compliance daily. We participate in transactions in which we combine the natural gas commodity and transportation costs to minimize our costs incurred to serve our customers. Additionally, we engage in natural gas storage transactions in which we seek to find and profit from pricing differences that occur over time. We purchase or sell physical natural gas and then sell or purchase financial contracts at a price sufficient to cover our carrying costs and provide a gross profit margin. Through the use of transportation and storage services and derivatives, we seek to capture gross profit margin through the arbitrage of pricing differences in various locations and by recognizing pricing differences that occur over time. Under SFAS 133, natural gas inventory is designated as the hedged item in a fair-value hedge by AEM and Atmos Pipeline and Storage LLC. This inventory is marked to market at the end of each month with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains or losses in revenue in the period of change. Effective October 2005, we changed the index used to value our physical natural gas from Inside FERC to Gas Daily to better reflect the prices of our physical commodity. This change had no material impact on our financial position on the date of adoption. Costs to store the gas are recognized in the period the costs are incurred. We recognize revenue and the carrying value of the inventory as an associated purchased gas cost in our consolidated statement of income when we sell the gas and deliver it out of the storage facility. Derivatives associated with our natural gas inventory are marked to market each month based upon the NYMEX price with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains or losses in the period of change. The difference in the indices used to mark to market our physical inventory (Gas Daily) and the related fair-value hedges (NYMEX) are reported as a component of revenue and can result in volatility in our reported net income. Over time, we expect gains and losses on the sale of storage gas inventory to be offset by gains and losses on the fair-value hedges, resulting in the realization of the economic gross profit margin we anticipated at the time we structured the original transaction. We continually manage our positions and seek to optimize value as market conditions and other circumstances change. We elect to exclude the differential between the spot price used to value our physical inventory and the forward price used to value the financial hedges designated against our physical inventory for purposes of assessing the effectiveness of these fair-value hedges. Similar to our inventory position, we attempt to mitigate substantially all of the commodity price risk associated with our fixed-price contracts with minimum volume requirements through the use of various offsetting derivatives. Prior to April 2004, these derivatives were not designated as hedges under SFAS 133 because they naturally locked in the economic gross profit margin at the time we entered into the contract. The fixed-price forward and offsetting derivative contracts were marked to market each month with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses recorded in revenue in our consolidated statement of income. The unrealized gains and losses were realized as a component of revenue in the period in which we fulfilled the requirements of the fixed-price contract and the derivatives settled. To the extent that the 38 Table of Contents unrealized gains and losses of the fixed-price forward contracts and the offsetting derivatives did not offset exactly, our earnings experienced some volatility. At delivery, the gains and losses on the fixed-price contracts were offset by gains and losses on the derivatives, resulting in the realization of the economic gross profit margin we anticipated at the time we structured the original transaction. Effective April 2004, we elected to treat our fixed-price forward contracts as normal purchases and sales. As a result, we ceased marking the fixed-price forward contracts to market. We designated the offsetting derivative contracts as cash flow hedges of anticipated transactions. As a result of this change, unrealized gains and losses on these open derivative contracts have been recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income and are recognized in earnings as a component of revenue when the hedged volumes are sold. Hedge ineffectiveness, to the extent incurred, is reported as a component of revenue. Additionally, we utilize storage swaps and futures to capture additional storage arbitrage opportunities that arise subsequent to the execution of the original fair value hedge associated with our physical natural gas inventory, basis swaps to insulate and protect the economic value of our fixed price and storage books and various over-the-counter and exchange-traded options. Although the purpose of these instruments is to either reduce basis or other risks or lock in arbitrage opportunities, these derivative instruments have not been designated as hedges. Accordingly, these derivative instruments are recorded at fair value with all changes in fair value included in revenue in our natural gas marketing segment. During fiscal 2004, we entered into four Treasury lock agreements to fix the Treasury yield component of the interest cost of financing associated with the anticipated issuance of $875 million of long-term debt. We designated these Treasury lock agreements as cash flow hedges of an anticipated transaction. Accordingly, unrealized gains and losses associated with the Treasury lock agreements were recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. These Treasury lock agreements were settled in October 2004 with a net $43.8 million payment to the counterparties. This realized loss is being recognized as a component of interest expense over the life of the related financing arrangements. The fair value of our financial derivatives is determined through a combination of prices actively quoted on national exchanges, prices provided by other external sources and prices based on models and other valuation methods. Changes in the valuation of our financial derivatives primarily result from changes in market prices, the valuation of the portfolio of our contracts, maturity and settlement of these contracts and newly originated transactions, each of which directly affect the estimated fair value of our derivatives. We believe the market prices and models used to value these derivatives represent the best information available with respect to closing exchange and over-the-counter quotations, time value and volatility factors underlying the contracts. Values are adjusted to reflect the potential impact of an orderly liquidation of our positions over a reasonable period of time under then current market conditions. Impairment assessments We perform impairment assessments of our goodwill, intangible assets subject to amortization and long-lived assets. We currently have no indefinite-lived intangible assets. We annually evaluate our goodwill balances for impairment during our second fiscal quarter or as impairment indicators arise. We use a present value technique based on discounted cash flows to estimate the fair value of our reporting units. We have determined our reporting units to be each of our utility divisions and wholly-owned subsidiaries. Goodwill is allocated to the reporting units responsible for the acquisition that gave rise to the goodwill. The discounted cash flow calculations used to assess goodwill impairment are dependent on several subjective factors including the timing of future cash flows, future growth rates and the discount rate. An impairment charge is recognized if the carrying value of a reporting unit goodwill exceeds its fair value. We periodically evaluate whether events or circumstances have occurred that indicate that our intangible assets subject to amortization and other long-lived assets may not be recoverable or that the remaining useful life may warrant revision. When such events or circumstances are present, we assess the recoverability of these assets by determining whether the carrying value will be recovered through expected future cash flows. These cash flow projections consider various factors such as the timing of the future cash flows and the discount rate and are based upon the best information available at the time the estimate is made. Changes in 39 Table of Contents these factors could materially affect the cash flow projections and result in the recognition of an impairment charge. An impairment charge is recognized as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value if the sum of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value of the related asset. Pension and other postretirement plans Pension and other postretirement plan costs and liabilities are determined on an actuarial basis and are affected by numerous assumptions and estimates including the market value of plan assets, estimates of the expected return on plan assets, assumed discount rates and current demographic and actuarial mortality data. We review the estimates and assumptions underlying our pension and other postretirement plan costs and liabilities annually based upon a June 30 measurement date. The assumed discount rate and the expected return are the assumptions that generally have the most significant impact on our pension costs and liabilities. The assumed discount rate, the assumed health care cost trend rate and assumed rates of retirement generally have the most significant impact on our postretirement plan costs and liabilities. The discount rate is utilized principally in calculating the actuarial present value of our pension and postretirement obligation and net pension and postretirement cost. When establishing our discount rate, we consider high quality corporate bond rates based on Moody Aa bond index, changes in those rates from the prior year and the implied discount rate that is derived from matching our projected benefit disbursements with a high quality corporate bond spot rate curve. The expected long-term rate of return on assets is utilized in calculating the expected return on plan assets component of our annual pension and postretirement plan cost. We estimate the expected return on plan assets by evaluating expected bond returns, equity risk premiums, asset allocations, the effects of active plan management, the impact of periodic plan asset rebalancing and historical performance. We also consider the guidance from our investment advisors in making a final determination of our expected rate of return on assets. To the extent the actual rate of return on assets realized over the course of a year is greater than or less than the assumed rate, that year annual pension or postretirement plan cost is not affected. Rather, this gain or loss reduces or increases future pension or postretirement plan cost over a period of approximately ten to twelve years. We estimate the assumed health care cost trend rate used in determining our postretirement net expense based upon our actual health care cost experience, the effects of recently enacted legislation and general economic conditions. Our assumed rate of retirement is estimated based upon our annual review of our participant census information as of the measurement date. Actual changes in the fair market value of plan assets and differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets could have a material effect on the amount of pension cost ultimately recognized. A 0.25 percent change in our discount rate would impact our pension and postretirement cost by approximately $1.1 million. A 0.25 percent change in our expected rate of return would impact our pension and postretirement cost by approximately $0.8 million. 40 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following table presents our financial highlights for the three fiscal years ended September 30, 2006: For the Year Ended September 30 2006 2005 2004 (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Operating revenues $ 6,152,363 $ 4,961,873 $ 2,920,037 Gross profit 1,216,570 1,117,637 562,191 Operating expenses 833,954 768,982 368,496 Operating income 382,616 348,655 193,695 Miscellaneous income 881 2,021 9,507 Interest charges 146,607 132,658 65,437 Income before income taxes 236,890 218,018 137,765 Income tax expense 89,153 82,233 51,538 Net income $ 147,737 $ 135,785 $ 86,227 Utility sales volumes MMcf 272,033 296,283 173,219 Utility transportation volumes MMcf 121,962 114,851 72,814 Total utility throughput MMcf 393,995 411,134 246,033 Natural gas marketing sales volumes MMcf 283,962 238,097 222,572 Pipeline transportation volumes MMcf 420,217 383,377 Heating Degree Days (1) Actual (weighted average) 2,527 2,587 3,271 Percent of normal 87% 89% 96% Consolidated utility average transportation revenue per Mcf $ 0.50 $ 0.51 $ 0.42 Consolidated utility average cost of gas per Mcf sold $ 10.02 $ 7.41 $ 6.55 (1) Adjusted for service areas that have weather normalized operations. For service areas that have weather normalized operations, normal degree days are used instead of actual degree days in computing the total number of heating degree days. 41 Table of Contents The following table shows our operating income by utility division and by segment for the three fiscal years ended September 30, 2006. The presentation of our utility operating income is included for financial reporting purposes and may not be appropriate for ratemaking purposes. 2006 2005 2004 Heating Heating Heating Degree Days Degree Days Degree Days Operating Percent of Operating Percent of Operating Percent of Income Normal (1) Income Normal (1) Income Normal (1) (In thousands, except degree day information) Colorado-Kansas $ 22,524 99 % $ 25,157 99 % $ 20,876 99 % Kentucky 14,338 100 % 18,657 98 % 22,738 98 % Louisiana 27,772 78 % 24,819 78 % 40,762 93 % Mid-States 35,555 95 % 35,687 93 % 38,778 95 % Mid-Tex 71,703 72 % 84,965 80 % Mississippi 23,276 102 % 19,045 96 % 18,709 101 % West Texas 2,215 100 % 27,520 99 % 22,090 90 % Other 4,511 515 (4,063 ) Utility segment 201,894 87 % 236,365 89 % 159,890 96 % Natural gas marketing segment 102,235 40,985 27,726 Pipeline and storage segment 77,858 70,286 5,293 Other nonutility segment 629 1,019 786 Consolidated operating income $ 382,616 87 % $ 348,655 89 % $ 193,695 96 % (1) Adjusted for service areas that have weather-normalized operations. For service areas that have weather normalized operations, normal degree days are used instead of actual degree days in computing the total number of heating degree days. Year ended September 30, 2006 compared with year ended September 30, 2005 Utility segment Our utility segment has historically contributed 65 to 85 percent of our consolidated net income. However, during fiscal 2006, our utility segment contributed approximately 36 percent of our consolidated net income primarily due to the adverse effect of significantly warmer than normal weather, the adverse effect of Hurricane Katrina and a non-recurring, noncash charge to recognize the impairment of our irrigation assets. The primary factors that impact the results of our utility operations are seasonal weather patterns, competitive factors in the energy industry and economic conditions in our service areas. Natural gas sales to residential, commercial and public-authority customers are affected by winter heating season requirements. This generally results in higher operating revenues and net income during the period from October through March of each year and lower operating revenues and either lower net income or net losses during the period from April through September of each year. Accordingly, our second fiscal quarter has historically been our most critical earnings quarter with an average of approximately 64 percent of our consolidated net income having been earned in the second quarter during the three most recently completed fiscal years. Additionally, we typically experience higher levels of accounts receivable, accounts payable, gas stored underground and short-term debt balances during the winter heating season due to the seasonal nature of our revenues and the need to purchase and store gas to support these operations. Utility sales to industrial customers are much less weather sensitive. Changes in the cost of gas impact revenue but do not directly affect our gross profit from utility operations because the fluctuations in gas prices are passed through to our customers. Accordingly, we believe gross profit margin is a better indicator of our financial performance than revenues. However, higher gas costs may cause customers to conserve or, in the case of industrial customers, to use alternative energy sources. Higher gas costs may also adversely impact our accounts receivable collections, resulting in higher bad debt 42 Table of Contents expense, and may require us to increase borrowings under our credit facilities resulting in higher interest expense. The effects of weather that is above or below normal are substantially offset through weather normalization adjustments in most of our service areas. WNA allows us to increase the base rate portion of customers bills when weather is warmer than normal and decrease the base rate when weather is colder than normal. Accordingly, in our WNA service areas, our gross profit margin should be based substantially on the amount of gross profit that would result from normal weather, despite actual weather conditions that may be either warmer or colder than normal. During fiscal 2006, we received WNA in our two most weather sensitive jurisdictions: the Louisiana and Mid-Tex divisions. With the addition of WNA in these two jurisdictions, we will have weather protection for over 90 percent of our residential and commercial meters for the 2006-2007 winter heating season. Prior to these decisions, there was limited weather protection in these jurisdictions. The Louisiana Division had previously benefited from a higher base customer charge. However, this rate structure was not as beneficial during periods where weather was significantly warmer than normal. In May 2006, the LPSC approved a settlement that provided for a modified WNA which provides a partial decoupling mechanism to stabilize this jurisdiction margins. The approved WNA will cover a period from December to March. Prior to October 1, 2006, the Mid-Tex Division, which is our largest utility division and contains almost 50 percent of our approximately 3.2 million distribution customers, had benefited from a rate structure that combined a monthly customer charge with a declining block rate schedule to partially mitigate the impact of warmer-than-normal weather on revenue. The combination of the monthly customer charge and the customer billing under the first block of the declining block rate schedule provided for the recovery of a significant portion of our fixed costs for such operations under average weather conditions. However, this rate structure was not as beneficial during periods where weather was significantly warmer than normal. In July 2006, in connection with the Mid-Tex Division rate proceeding the RRC approved an interim and a permanent WNA effective October 1, 2006 for the Mid-Tex Division. The WNA covers the period from October through May. The interim WNA is based on 30 years of weather history, and the permanent WNA will be modified or adjusted to conform to the rate design that the RRC ultimately approves in the rate proceeding, which proceeding is described in greater detail under Recent Ratemaking Activity. In the pending rate proceeding before the RRC, we are seeking for our Mid-Tex Division additional annual revenues of approximately $60 million and several rate design changes including revenue stabilization and recovery of the gas cost component of bad debt expense. While the outcome of the Mid-Tex Division pending rate proceeding before the RRC cannot be predicted with certainty, we believe that we have adequately demonstrated to the RRC that the Mid-Tex Division is entitled to receive an increase in annual revenues and that the remaining rate design changes should be implemented. However, if the RRC were to deny an increase in the Mid-Tex Division rates or not allow new rate design changes the Mid-Tex Division has requested, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected in the future. Operating income Utility gross profit increased to $925.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2006 from $907.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. Total throughput for our utility business was 394.0 Bcf during the current year compared to 411.1 Bcf in the prior year. The increase in utility gross profit, despite lower throughput, primarily reflects higher franchise fees and state gross receipts taxes, which are paid by utility customers and have no permanent effect on net income. Additionally, margins increased approximately $14.0 million due to rate increases received from our fiscal 2005 and fiscal 2004 GRIP filings and the recognition of $6.2 million that had been previously deferred in Louisiana following the LPSC ratification of our agreement in May 2006. These increases were partially offset by approximately $22.9 million due to the impact of significantly warmer than normal weather, particularly in our Mid-Tex and Louisiana divisions. For the year ended September 30, 2006, weather was 43 Table of Contents 13 percent warmer than normal, as adjusted for jurisdictions with weather-normalized operations and two percent warmer than the prior year. In the Mid-Tex and Louisiana Divisions, which did not have weather-normalized rates during the 2005-2006 winter heating season, weather was 28 percent and 22 percent warmer than normal. Additionally, utility gross profit decreased approximately $2.9 million compared with the prior year in the Louisiana Division due to the impact of Hurricane Katrina. Service has been restored in some areas affected by the storm; however, it is not likely that service will be restored to all of the affected service areas. As more fully described under Recent Ratemaking Activity, we implemented new rates in September 2006 that reflect the impact of Hurricane Katrina. Operating expenses increased to $723.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2006 from $671.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. The increase reflects a $13.3 million increase in taxes, primarily related to franchise fees and state gross receipts taxes, both of which are calculated as a percentage of revenue, and are paid by our customers as a component of their monthly bills. Although these amounts are included as a component of revenue in accordance with our tariffs, timing differences between when these amounts are billed to our customers and when we recognize the associated expense may affect net income favorably or unfavorably on a temporary basis. However, there is no permanent effect on net income. Operation and maintenance expense, excluding the provision for doubtful accounts, increased $7.8 million primarily due to higher employee costs associated with increased headcount to fill positions that were previously outsourced to a third party, higher medical and dental claims and increased pension and postretirement costs resulting from changes in the assumptions used to determine our fiscal 2006 costs. Increased line locate, telecommunication and facilities costs also contributed to the overall increase. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in third-party costs for outsourced administrative and meter reading functions that were in-sourced during fiscal 2006. Operation and maintenance expense for the year ended September 30, 2006 was also favorably impacted by the absence of $2.1 million of merger and integration cost amortization associated with the merger of United Cities Gas Company in July 1997, as these costs were fully amortized by December 2004. The provision for doubtful accounts increased $3.1 million to $20.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2006, compared with $17.5 million in the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to increased collection risk associated with higher natural gas prices. In the utility segment, the average cost of natural gas for the year ended September 30, 2006 was $10.02 per Mcf, compared with $7.41 per Mcf for the year ended September 30, 2005. Additionally, during the first quarter of fiscal 2006, the MPSC, in connection with the modification of our rate design described in Recent Ratemaking Activity, decided to allow the recovery of $2.8 million in deferred costs, which it had originally disallowed in its September 2004 decision. This charge was originally recorded in fiscal 2004. This ruling decreased our depreciation expense during the year ended September 30, 2006. This decrease was offset by increased depreciation expense associated with the placement of various capital projects into service during the fiscal year. Operating expenses were also impacted by $22.9 million noncash charge to impair our West Texas Division irrigation assets. During the fiscal 2006 fourth quarter, we determined that, as a result of declining irrigation sales primarily associated with our agricultural customers shift from gas-powered pumps to electric pumps, the West Texas Division irrigation assets would not be able to generate sufficient future cash flows from operations to recover the net investment in these assets. Therefore, the entire net book value was written off. We will continue to operate these assets until we determine a plan for these assets as we are obligated to provide natural gas services to certain customers served by these assets. As a result of the aforementioned factors, our utility segment operating income for the year ended September 30, 2006 decreased to $201.9 million from $236.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. 44 Table of Contents Miscellaneous income Miscellaneous income for the year ended September 30, 2006 was $9.5 million compared to miscellaneous income of $6.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. This increase was primarily attributable to increased interest income on intercompany borrowings to our natural gas marketing segment to fund its working capital needs. This increase was partially offset by a $3.3 million charge recorded during the fiscal 2006 second quarter associated with an adverse ruling in Tennessee related to the calculation of a performance-based rate mechanism associated with gas purchases. Interest charges Interest charges allocated to the utility segment for the year ended September 30, 2006 increased to $126.5 million from $112.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. The increase was attributable to higher average outstanding short-term debt balances to fund natural gas purchases at significantly higher prices coupled with an approximate 200 basis point increase in the interest rate on our $300 million unsecured floating rate Senior Notes due 2007 due to an increase in the three-month LIBOR rate. These increases were partially offset by $4.8 million of interest savings arising from the early payoff of $72.5 million of our First Mortgage Bonds in June 2005. Natural gas marketing segment Our natural gas marketing segment aggregates and purchases gas supply, arranges transportation and/or storage logistics and ultimately delivers gas to our customers at competitive prices. To facilitate this process, we utilize proprietary and customer-owned transportation and storage assets to provide the various services our customers request, including furnishing natural gas supplies at fixed and market-based prices, contract negotiation and administration, load forecasting, gas storage acquisition and management services, transportation services, peaking sales and balancing services, capacity utilization strategies and gas price hedging through the use of derivative products. As a result, our revenues arise from the types of commercial transactions we have structured with our customers and include the value we extract by optimizing the storage and transportation capacity we own or control as well as revenues for services we deliver. To optimize the storage and transportation capacity we own or control, we participate in transactions in which we combine the natural gas commodity and transportation costs to minimize our costs incurred to serve our customers by identifying the lowest cost alternative within the natural gas supplies, transportation and markets to which we have access. Additionally, we engage in natural gas storage transactions in which we seek to find and profit from the pricing differences that occur over time. We purchase physical natural gas and then sell financial contracts at favorable prices to lock in gross profit margins. Through the use of transportation and storage services and derivative contracts, we seek to capture gross profit margin through the arbitrage of pricing differences in various locations and by recognizing pricing differences that occur over time. Operating income Gross profit margin for our natural gas marketing segment consists primarily of marketing activities, which represent the utilization of proprietary and customer-owned transportation and storage assets to provide the various services our customers request, and storage activities, which are derived from the optimization of our managed proprietary and third party storage and transportation assets. 45 Table of Contents Our natural gas marketing segment gross profit margin was comprised of the following for the year ended September 30, 2006 and 2005: Year Ended September 30 2006 2005 (In thousands, except physical position) Storage Activities Realized margin $ 26,225 $ 28,008 Unrealized margin (1,293 ) (14,007 ) Total Storage Activities 24,932 14,001 Marketing Activities Realized margin 87,236 59,971 Unrealized margin 18,459 (11,999 ) Total Marketing Activities 105,695 47,972 Gross profit $ 130,627 $ 61,973 Net physical position (Bcf) 14.5 6.9 Our natural gas marketing segment gross profit margin was $130.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2006 compared to gross profit of $62.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. Gross profit margin from our natural gas marketing segment for the year ended September 30, 2006 included an unrealized gain of $17.2 million compared with an unrealized loss of $26.0 million in the prior year. Natural gas marketing sales volumes were 336.5 Bcf during the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with 273.2 Bcf for the prior year. Excluding intersegment sales volumes, natural gas marketing sales volumes were 284.0 Bcf during the current year compared with 238.1 Bcf in the prior year. The increase in consolidated natural gas marketing sales volumes was primarily due to focusing our marketing efforts on higher margin opportunities partially offset by warmer-than-normal weather across our market areas. Our storage activities generated $24.9 million in gross profit margin for the year ended September 30, 2006 compared to $14.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. Lower realized margins in our storage operations were primarily due to the realization of less favorable arbitrage spreads compared with the prior year coupled with increased storage fees. These decreases were partially offset by a decrease in the unrealized loss associated with these operations due to a favorable movement during the year ended September 30, 2006 in the forward natural gas prices used to value the financial hedges designated against our physical inventory and our fixed-price forward contracts. These decreases were also favorably impacted by positive basis ineffectiveness resulting from natural gas market price differences between the locations of the hedged inventory and the delivery location specified in the derivative instruments designated as a fair value hedge. These results were magnified by a 7.6 Bcf increase in our net physical position at September 30, 2006 compared to the prior year. We continually seek opportunities to increase the amount of our storage capacity. To the extent we obtain and utilize new capacity and experience price volatility, the amount of our unrealized storage contribution could increase in future periods. Our marketing activities generated $105.7 million in gross profit margin for the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with $48.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. This increase reflects increased realized margins coupled with a favorable unrealized margin variance compared with the prior year. The increase in our realized marketing operations was primarily attributable to successfully capturing increased margins in certain market areas that experienced higher market volatility. The favorable unrealized margin variance was primarily due to favorable movement during the year ended September 30, 2006 in the forward natural gas prices associated with financial derivatives used in these activities and positive basis ineffectiveness on those financial derivatives. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes other than income taxes, increased to $28.4 million for the 46 Table of Contents year ended September 30, 2006 from $21.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. The increase in operating expense primarily was attributable to an increase in personnel costs due to increased headcount and an increase in regulatory compliance costs. The improved gross profit margin partially offset by higher operating expenses resulted in an increase in our natural gas marketing segment operating income to $102.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with operating income of $41.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. Interest charges Interest charges allocated to the natural gas marketing segment for the year ended September 30, 2006 increased to $8.5 million from $3.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. The increase was attributable to higher average outstanding debt balances to fund natural gas purchases at significantly higher prices. Pipeline and storage segment Our pipeline and storage segment consists of the regulated pipeline and storage operations of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division and the nonregulated pipeline and storage operations of Atmos Pipeline and Storage, LLC (APS), which were previously included in our other nonutility segment. The Atmos Pipeline Texas Division transports natural gas to our Mid-Tex Division and for third parties and manages five underground storage reservoirs in Texas. We also provide ancillary services customary in the pipeline industry including parking arrangements, lending and sales of inventory on hand. These operations represent one of the largest intrastate pipeline operations in Texas with a heavy concentration in the established natural gas-producing areas of central, northern and eastern Texas, extending into or near the major producing areas of the Texas Gulf Coast and the Delaware and Val Verde Basins of West Texas. This pipeline system provides access to nine basins located in Texas, which are estimated to contain a substantial portion of the nation remaining onshore natural gas reserves. APS owns or has an interest in underground storage fields in Kentucky and Louisiana. We also use these storage facilities to reduce the need to contract for additional pipeline capacity to meet customer demand during peak periods. Similar to our utility segment, our pipeline and storage segment is impacted by seasonal weather patterns, competitive factors in the energy industry and economic conditions in our service areas. Natural gas transportation requirements are affected by the winter heating season requirements of our customers. This generally results in higher operating revenues and net income during the period from October through March of each year and lower operating revenues and either lower net income or net losses during the period from April through September of each year. Further, as the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division operations supply all of the natural gas for our Mid-Tex Division, the results of this segment are highly dependent upon the natural gas requirements of the Mid-Tex Division. As a regulated pipeline, the operations of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division may be impacted by the timing of when costs and expenses are incurred and when these costs and expenses are recovered through its tariffs. 47 Table of Contents Operating income Gross profit margin for our pipeline and storage segment primarily consists of transportation margins earned from our Mid-Tex Division and from third parties, other ancillary pipeline services and asset management fees earned by APS. Our pipeline and storage segment gross profit margin was comprised of the following components for the year ended September 30, 2006 and 2005: Year Ended September 30 2006 2005 (In thousands) Mid-Tex transportation $ 69,925 $ 70,089 Third party transportation 58,490 55,376 Asset management fees 10,333 8,559 Storage and park and lend services 11,297 7,451 Unrealized gains (losses) 3,350 (4,730 ) Other 6,334 9,733 Gross profit $ 159,729 $ 146,478 Pipeline and storage gross profit increased to $159.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2006 from $146.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. Total pipeline transportation volumes were 591.0 Bcf during the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with 563.9 Bcf for the prior year. Excluding intersegment transportation volumes, total pipeline transportation volumes were 420.2 Bcf during the current year compared with 383.4 Bcf in the prior year. The increase in gross profit was primarily attributable to increased third-party throughput and ancillary services, coupled with increased margins on APS asset management contracts. Increased third-party throughput on Atmos Pipeline Texas was primarily attributable to increases in the electric-generation market due to the warmer than normal temperatures during the summer of 2006, increased demand for through-system transportation services due to a widening of pricing differentials between the pipeline hubs and the impact of Atmos Pipeline Texas North Side Loop and other compression projects that were placed into service in June 2006. Storage and parking and lending services on Atmos Pipeline Texas also increased during fiscal 2006 as a result of the widening of pricing differentials between the pipeline hubs, which increased the attractiveness of storing gas on the pipeline and our ability to obtain improved margins for these services. The increases on Atmos Pipeline Texas system were partially offset by a decrease in margins earned from intercompany transportation services to our Mid-Tex Division due to the significantly warmer than normal weather experienced during fiscal 2006. Additionally, these increases were partially offset by the absence of inventory sales of $3.0 million realized in the prior year. Increases in APS margins due to its ability to capture more favorable arbitrage spreads on its asset management contracts also contributed to this segment improved gross profit margin. These improved margins reflect an unrealized component as APS hedges its risk associated with these contracts. During fiscal 2006, favorable movements in the forward natural gas prices used to value the financial hedges designated against the physical inventory underlying these contracts resulted in an unrealized gain compared with an unrealized loss in the prior year. Operating expenses increased to $81.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2006 from $76.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 due to higher employee benefit costs associated with the increase in headcount, increased pension and postretirement costs resulting from changes in the assumptions used to determine our fiscal 2006 costs, higher facilities costs and higher pipeline integrity costs. As a result of the aforementioned factors, our pipeline and storage segment operating income for the year ended September 30, 2006 increased to $77.9 million from $70.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. 48 Table of Contents Other nonutility segment Our other nonutility businesses consist primarily of the operations of Atmos Energy Services, LLC, and Atmos Power Systems, Inc. Through AES, we provide natural gas management services to our utility operations, other than the Mid-Tex Division. These services, which began April 2004, include aggregating and purchasing gas supply, arranging transportation and storage logistics and ultimately delivering the gas to our utility service areas at competitive prices. The revenues of AES represent charges to our utility divisions equal to the costs incurred to provide those services. Through Atmos Power Systems, Inc., we have constructed electric peaking power-generating plants and associated facilities and have entered into agreements to lease these plants. Operating income for this segment primarily reflects the leasing income associated with two sales-type lease transactions completed in 2001 and 2002 and was essentially unchanged for the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with the prior year. Year ended September 30, 2005 compared with year ended September 30, 2004 Utility segment Operating income Utility gross profit increased to $907.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $503.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Total throughput for our utility business was 411.1 Bcf during the current year compared to 246.0 Bcf in the prior year. The increase in utility gross profit margin primarily reflects the impact of the acquisition of the Mid-Tex Division resulting in an increase in utility gross profit margin and total throughput of $398.2 million and 174.3 Bcf. The $6.1 million increase in the gross profit generated from our other utility operations primarily reflects rate increases in our Mississippi and West Texas divisions that were absent in the prior year coupled with the recognition of a $1.9 million refund to our customers in our Colorado service area in the prior year. Offsetting these increases was a $3.9 million reduction in gross profit in our Louisiana Division due to the impact of Hurricane Katrina. Gross profit margins, particularly in Louisiana, were also adversely impacted by weather (as adjusted for jurisdictions with weather-normalized operations) that was five percent warmer than normal and one percent warmer than the prior year period. Additionally, gross profit margin was adversely impacted by the lack of cold weather in patterns sufficient to encourage customers to increase their heat load consumption and lower irrigation throughput in our West Texas and Colorado-Kansas Divisions. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes other than income taxes, increased to $671.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $343.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 primarily as a result of the addition of the Mid-Tex Division. Excluding the impact of the Mid-Tex Division, operating expenses for our other utility operations increased $14.5 million primarily due to $2.3 million associated with the effects of Hurricane Katrina, a $7.7 million increase in taxes, other than income, a $2.4 million increase in operation and maintenance expense, including the provision for doubtful accounts, and a $2.1 million increase in depreciation and amortization. Included in taxes other than income taxes are franchise and state gross receipts taxes which are paid by our customers as a component of their monthly bills. Although these amounts are offset in revenues through customer billings, timing differences between when the expense is incurred and is recovered may impact our net income on a temporary basis. However, there is no permanent effect on net income. As a result of the aforementioned factors, our utility segment operating income for the year ended September 30, 2005 increased to $236.4 million from $159.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Miscellaneous income Miscellaneous income increased to $6.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $5.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase was attributable to an increase in interest income earned 49 Table of Contents on higher cash balances during the current year compared with the prior year partially offset by the recognition of a $0.8 million gain on the sale of a building during the year ended September 30, 2004. Interest charges Interest charges allocated to the utility segment for the year ended September 30, 2005 increased to $112.4 million from $65.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase was attributable to the interest expense associated with the issuance of long-term debt to finance the acquisition of the Mid-Tex Division in October 2004. On June 30, 2005, we repaid $72.5 million in principal on five series of our First Mortgage Bonds prior to their scheduled maturities. The early repayment of these bonds resulted in savings of $1.3 million in interest expense in fiscal 2005. Natural gas marketing segment Operating income Our natural gas marketing segment gross profit margin was comprised of the following for the years ended September 30, 2005 and 2004: Year Ended September 30 2005 2004 (In thousands, except physical position) Storage Activities Realized margin $ 28,008 $ (1,900 ) Unrealized margin (14,007 ) 357 Total Storage Activities 14,001 (1,543 ) Marketing Activities Realized margin 59,971 51,347 Unrealized margin (11,999 ) (3,173 ) Total Marketing Activities 47,972 48,174 Gross profit $ 61,973 $ 46,631 Net physical position (Bcf) 6.9 5.4 Our natural gas marketing segment gross profit margin was $62.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared to gross profit of $46.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Gross profit margin from our natural gas marketing segment for the year ended September 30, 2005 included an unrealized loss of $26.0 million compared with an unrealized loss of $2.8 million in the prior year. Natural gas marketing sales volumes were 273.2 Bcf during the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with 265.1 Bcf for the prior year. Excluding intersegment sales volumes, natural gas marketing sales volumes were 238.1 Bcf during the current year compared with 222.6 Bcf in the prior year. The increase in consolidated natural gas marketing sales volumes primarily was attributable to successfully executed marketing strategies into new market areas. The contribution to gross profit from our storage activities was a gain of $14.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared to a loss of $1.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The $15.5 million improvement primarily was attributable to a $29.9 million increase in the realized storage contribution for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared to the prior year due to more favorable arbitrage spread opportunities during the current year, partially offset by increased storage fees associated with 9.0 Bcf of newly contracted storage capacity during the third quarter of fiscal 2005. Annual demand charges for this new storage approximate $7.6 million. We may further increase the amount of our storage capacity in the future; therefore, the impact of price volatility on our unrealized storage contribution could become more significant in future periods. 50 Table of Contents A $14.4 million decrease in the unrealized storage contribution resulted from an unfavorable movement during the year ended September 30, 2005 in the forward indices used to value the storage financial instruments combined with greater physical natural gas storage quantities at September 30, 2005 compared to the prior year also. Our marketing activities contributed $48.0 million to our gross profit for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared to $48.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The decrease in the marketing contribution primarily was attributable to $12.0 million of unrealized marked-to-market losses associated with basis swaps that were put in place to capture margins in certain volatile market areas. The increase in unrealized marked-to-market losses was partially offset by an increase in our realized marketing margins due to focusing our marketing efforts on higher margin customers and successfully entering into new market areas. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes other than income taxes, increased to $21.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $18.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase in operating expense was attributable primarily to an increase in labor costs due to increased headcount and an increase in regulatory compliance costs. The increase in gross profit margin, combined with higher operating expenses, resulted in an increase in our natural gas marketing segment operating income to $41.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with operating income of $27.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Pipeline and storage segment Operating income Pipeline and storage gross profit increased to $146.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $10.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Total pipeline transportation volumes were 563.9 Bcf during the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with 9.4 Bcf for the prior year. Excluding intersegment transportation volumes, total pipeline transportation volumes were 383.4 Bcf during the current year. The increase in pipeline and storage gross profit margin primarily reflects the impact of the acquisition of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division resulting in an increase in pipeline and storage gross profit margin and total transportation volumes of $138.1 million and 375.6 Bcf. Also contributing to Atmos Pipeline Texas Division results were higher transportation and related services margin due to significant basis differentials at its three major Texas hubs. The $2.0 million decrease in the gross profit generated by APS primarily reflects a decrease in asset management fees received during fiscal 2005. Operating expenses increased to $76.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $5.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 due to the addition of $72.2 million in operating expenses associated with the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division. As the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division is a regulated entity, franchise and state gross receipts taxes are paid by our customers; thus, these amounts are offset in revenues through customer billings and have no permanent effect on net income. Included in operating expense was $8.9 million associated with taxes other than income taxes, of which $8.3 million was associated with our Atmos Pipeline Texas Division. As a result of the aforementioned factors, our pipeline and storage segment operating income for the year ended September 30, 2005 increased to $70.3 million from $5.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Interest charges Interest charges allocated to this segment for the year ended September 30, 2005 increased to $24.6 million from $1.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase was attributable to the interest expense associated with the issuance of long-term debt to finance the acquisition of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division in October 2004. 51 Table of Contents Other nonutility segment Operating income for our other nonutility segment primarily reflects the leasing income associated with two sales-type lease transactions completed in fiscal 2001 and 2002. The increase in operating income during the year ended September 30, 2005 reflects the absence of a one-time charge of $0.4 million associated with the wind-down of a noncore business during fiscal 2004. Miscellaneous income for the year ended September 30, 2005 was $2.6 million compared with $8.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The $5.7 million decrease was attributable primarily to the recognition of a $5.9 million pretax gain on the sale of all remaining limited partnership interests in Heritage Propane Partners, L.P. during fiscal 2004. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our working capital and liquidity for capital expenditure and other cash needs are provided from internally generated funds, borrowings under our credit facilities and commercial paper program and funds raised from the public debt and equity capital markets. We believe that these sources of funds will provide the necessary working capital and liquidity for capital expenditures and other cash needs for fiscal 2007. These facilities are described in greater detail below and in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. Capitalization The following presents our capitalization as of September 30, 2006 and 2005: September 30 2006 2005 (In thousands, except percentages) Short-term debt $ 382,416 9.1 % $ 144,809 3.7 % Long-term debt 2,183,548 51.8 % 2,186,368 55.6 % Shareholders equity 1,648,098 39.1 % 1,602,422 40.7 % Total capitalization, including short-term debt $ 4,214,062 100.0 % $ 3,933,599 100.0 % Total debt as a percentage of total capitalization, including short-term debt, was 60.9 percent and 59.3 percent at September 30, 2006 and 2005. The increase in the debt to capitalization ratio was primarily attributable to an increase in our short-term debt borrowings to fund our working capital needs partially offset by current-year net income. Our ratio of total debt to capitalization is typically greater during the winter heating season as we make additional short-term borrowings to fund natural gas purchases and meet our working capital requirements. Within three to five years, we intend to reduce our capitalization ratio to a target range of 50 to 55 percent through cash flow generated from operations, continued issuance of new common stock under our Direct Stock Purchase Plan and Retirement Savings Plan and access to the equity capital markets. Cash Flows Our internally generated funds may change in the future due to a number of factors, some of which we cannot control. These include regulatory changes, the price for our services, the demand for services, margin requirements resulting from significant changes in commodity prices, operational risks and other factors. Cash flows from operating activities Year-over-year changes in our operating cash flows are primarily attributable to working capital changes within our utility segment resulting from the impact of weather, the price of natural gas and the timing of customer collections, payments for natural gas purchases and deferred gas cost recoveries. For the year ended September 30, 2006, we generated operating cash flow of $311.4 million compared with $386.9 million in fiscal 2005 and $270.7 million in fiscal 2004. The significant factors impacting our operating cash flow for the last three fiscal years are summarized below. 52 Table of Contents Year ended September 30, 2006 Fiscal 2006 operating cash flows reflect the adverse impact of significantly higher natural gas prices. Year-over-year, unfavorable timing of payments for accounts payable and other accrued liabilities reduced operating cash flow by $523.0 million. Partially offsetting these outflows were higher customer collections ($245.1 million) and reduced payments for natural gas inventories ($102.1 million). Additionally, favorable movements in the market indices used to value our natural gas marketing segment risk management assets and liabilities reduced the amount that we were required to deposit in a margin account and therefore favorably affected operating cash flow by $126.3 million. Year ended September 30, 2005 Fiscal 2005 operating cash flows reflect the effects of a $49.6 million increase in net income and effective working capital management partially offset by higher natural gas prices. Working capital management efforts, which affected the timing of payments for accounts payable and other accrued liabilities, favorably affected operating cash flow by $354.1 million. However, these efforts were partially offset by reduced cash flow generated from accounts receivable changes by $168.9 million, primarily attributable to higher natural gas prices, and an increase in our natural gas inventories attributable to a 13 percent year-over-year increase in natural gas prices coupled with increased natural gas inventory levels, which reduced operating cash flow by $81.8 million. Operating cash flow was also adversely impacted by unfavorable movements in the indices used to value our natural gas marketing segment risk management assets and liabilities, which resulted in a net liability for the segment. Accordingly, under the terms of the associated derivative contracts, we were required to deposit $81.0 million into a margin account. Year ended September 30, 2004 Fiscal 2004 operating cash flows were favorably impacted by several items. Improved customer collections during fiscal 2004, compared with the prior year, resulted in a $62.2 million increase in operating cash flow. Further, cash used for natural gas inventories decreased by $33.8 million compared with the prior year. The decrease was attributable to lower injections of natural gas into storage, partially offset by higher prices. The reduction in the lag between the time period when we purchase our natural gas and the period in which we can include this cost in our gas rates improved operating cash flow by $65.7 million. Changes in cash held on deposit in margin accounts resulted in an increase in operating cash flow of $25.6 million. This account represents deposits recorded to collateralize certain of our financial derivatives purchased in support of our natural gas marketing activities. The favorable change was attributable to the fact that the fair value of financial instruments held by AEM represented a net asset position at September 30, 2004, which eliminated the need to place cash in margin accounts. Finally, other working capital and other changes improved operating cash flow by $33.9 million. These changes primarily related to various increases in deferred credits and other liabilities, other current liabilities and income taxes payable partially offset by lower deferred income tax expense as compared with the prior year. Cash flows from investing activities During the last three years, a substantial portion of our cash resources was used to fund acquisitions and growth projects, our ongoing construction program and improvements to information systems. Our ongoing construction program enables us to provide natural gas distribution services to our existing customer base, to expand our natural gas distribution services into new markets, to enhance the integrity of our pipelines and, more recently, to expand our intrastate pipeline network. In executing our current rate strategy, we are directing discretionary capital spending to jurisdictions that permit us to earn a return on our investment timely. Currently, our Mid-Tex, Louisiana, Mississippi and West Texas utility divisions and our Atmos Pipeline Texas Division have rate designs that provide the opportunity to include in their rate base approved capital costs on a periodic basis without being required to file a rate case. For the year ended September 30, 2006, we incurred $425.3 million for capital expenditures compared with $333.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 and $190.3 million for the year ended 53 Table of Contents September 30, 2004. The increase in capital expenditures in fiscal 2006 primarily reflects increased spending associated with our Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex North Side Loop project and other pipeline expansion projects in our Atmos Pipeline Texas Division, which were completed during the fiscal 2006 third quarter. Increased capital spending in our Mid-Tex Division for various projects also contributed to the increase in our capital expenditures. Our cash used for investing activities for the year ended September 30, 2005 reflects the $1.9 billion cash paid for the TXU Gas acquisition including related transaction costs and expenses. Cash flow from investing activities for the year ended September 30, 2004 reflects the receipt of $27.9 million from the sale of our limited and general partnership interests in USP and Heritage Propane Partners, L.P. and from the sale of a building. Cash flows from financing activities For the year ended September 30, 2006, our financing activities provided $155.3 million in cash compared with $1.7 billion and $80.4 million provided for the years ended September 30, 2005 and 2004. Our significant financing activities for the years ended September 30, 2006, 2005 and 2004 are summarized as follows: In October 2004, we sold 16.1 million shares of common stock, including the underwriters exercise of their overallotment option of 2.1 million shares, under a shelf registration statement declared effective in September 2004, generating net proceeds of $382 million. Additionally, we issued $1.39 billion of senior unsecured debt under our shelf registration statement with an initial weighted average effective interest rate on these notes of 4.76 percent. The net proceeds from these issuances, combined with the net proceeds from our July 2004 common stock offering were used to finance the acquisition of our Mid-Tex and Atmos Pipeline Texas divisions and settle Treasury lock agreements, into which we entered to fix the Treasury yield component of the interest cost of financing associated with $875 million of the $1.39 billion long-term debt we issued in October 2004 to fund the acquisition. During the years ended September 30, 2006 and 2005, we increased our borrowings under our short-term facilities by $237.6 million and $144.8 million whereas during the year ended September 30, 2004, we repaid a net $118.6 million under our short-term facilities. Net borrowings under our short-term facilities during fiscal 2006 and 2005 reflect the impact of seasonal natural gas purchases and the effect of higher natural gas prices than in prior years. We repaid $3.3 million of long-term debt during the year ended September 30, 2006 compared with $103.4 million during the year ended September 30, 2005 and $9.7 million during the year ended September 30, 2004. Fiscal 2005 payments reflected the repayment of $72.5 million of our First Mortgage Bonds. In connection with this repayment we paid a $25.0 million make-whole premium in accordance with the terms of the agreements and accrued interest of approximately $1.0 million. In accordance with regulatory requirements, the premium has been deferred and will be recognized over the remaining original lives of the First Mortgage Bonds that were repaid. The early repayment of these bonds resulted in interest savings of $4.8 million and $1.3 million in fiscal 2006 and 2005. During the year ended September 30, 2006, we paid $102.3 million in cash dividends compared with dividend payments of $99.0 million and $66.7 million for the years ended September 30, 2005 and 2004. The increase in dividends paid over the prior year reflects an increase in the dividend rate from $1.24 per share during the year ended September 30, 2005 to $1.26 per share during the year ended September 30, 2006 combined with new share issuances under our various plans. During the year ended September 30, 2006 we issued 0.9 million shares of common stock which generated net proceeds of $23.3 million. In addition, we granted 0.3 million shares of common stock under 54 Table of Contents our 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan to directors, officers and other participants in the plan. The following table shows the number of shares issued for the years ended September 30, 2006, 2005 and 2004: For the Year Ended September 30 2006 2005 2004 Shares issued: Direct stock purchase plan 387,833 450,212 556,856 Retirement savings plan 442,635 441,350 320,313 1998 Long-term incentive plan 366,905 745,788 498,230 Long-term stock plan for Mid-States Division 300 6,000 Outside directors stock-for-fee plan 2,442 2,341 3,133 October 2004 Offering 16,100,000 July 2004 Offering 9,939,393 Total shares issued 1,200,115 17,739,691 11,323,925 Shelf Registration In December 2001, we filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to issue, from time to time, up to $600.0 million in new common stock and/or debt. The registration statement was declared effective by the SEC in January 2002. In July 2004, we sold 9.9 million shares of our common stock, including the underwriters exercise of their overallotment option, which exhausted the remaining availability under this registration statement. In August 2004, we filed a registration statement with the SEC to issue, from time to time, up to $2.2 billion in new common stock and/or debt, which became effective in September 2004. In October 2004, we sold 16.1 million common shares, including the underwriters exercise of their overallotment option of 2.1 million shares, under this registration statement, generating net proceeds of $382.5 million before other offering costs. Additionally, we issued $1.39 billion of senior unsecured debt under the registration statement. After issuing the debt and equity in October 2004, we had approximately $401.5 million of availability remaining under this registration statement. However, we are no longer allowed to issue securities under that registration statement by applicable state regulatory commissions since we are in the process of securing their approval to issue a total of $900 million in securities under a new shelf registration statement, including the remaining $401.5 million of capacity carried over from the currently effective registration statement. We intend to file this new registration statement with the SEC in the near future. Credit Facilities As of September 30, 2006, we maintained three short-term committed credit facilities totaling $918 million. We also maintain one uncommitted credit facility totaling $25 million and, through AEM, a second uncommitted credit facility that can provide up to $580 million. Borrowings under our uncommitted credit facilities are made on a when-and-as-needed basis at the discretion of the banks. Our credit capacity and the amount of unused borrowing capacity are affected by the seasonal nature of the natural gas business and our short-term borrowing requirements, which are typically highest during colder winter months. Our working capital needs can vary significantly due to changes in the price of natural gas charged by suppliers and the increased gas supplies required to meet customers needs during periods of cold weather. Our cash needs for working capital have increased substantially as a result of the significant increase in the price of natural gas. In October 2005, our $600 million 364-day committed credit facility expired and was replaced with a $600 million three-year revolving credit facility. In addition, in November 2005, we entered into a new $300 million 364-day revolving credit facility with substantially the same terms as our $600 million credit facility. 55 Table of Contents In November 2006, we renewed our $300 million 364-day revolving credit facility and were in the process of replacing our three-year $600 million facility with a five-year $600 million revolving credit facility. Both facilities are being renewed with substantially the same terms as their predecessor facilities. In April 2006, our $18 million committed unsecured credit facility was renewed for one year with no material changes to its terms and pricing. At September 30, 2006, $3.1 million was outstanding under this facility. As of September 30, 2006, the amount available to us under these credit facilities, net of outstanding letters of credit, was $609.0 million. We believe these credit facilities, combined with our operating cash flows will be sufficient to fund our increased working capital needs. These facilities are described in further detail in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. In November 2005, AEM amended its uncommitted demand working capital credit facility to increase the amount of credit available from $250 million to a maximum of $580 million. In March 2006, AEM amended and extended this uncommitted demand working capital credit facility to March 2007. At September 30, 2006, there were no borrowings outstanding under this facility. Credit Ratings Our credit ratings directly affect our ability to obtain short-term and long-term financing, in addition to the cost of such financing. In determining our credit ratings, the rating agencies consider a number of quantitative factors, including debt to total capitalization, operating cash flow relative to outstanding debt, operating cash flow coverage of interest and pension liabilities and funding status. In addition, the rating agencies consider qualitative factors such as consistency of our earnings over time, the quality of our management and business strategy, the risks associated with our utility and nonutility businesses and the regulatory structures that govern our rates in the states where we operate. Our debt is rated by three rating agencies: Standard & Poor Corporation (S&P), Moody Investors Services, Inc. (Moody s) and Fitch Ratings, Ltd. (Fitch). Our current debt ratings are all considered investment grade and are as follows: S&P Moody Fitch Long-term debt BBB Baa3 BBB+ Commercial paper A-2 P-3 F-2 Currently, with respect to our unsecured senior long-term debt, S&P, Moody and Fitch maintain their stable outlook. None of our ratings is currently under review. A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. The highest investment grade credit rating for S&P is AAA, Moody is Aaa and Fitch is AAA. The lowest investment grade credit rating for S&P is BBB , Moody is Baa3 and Fitch is BBB . Our credit ratings may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agencies, and each rating should be evaluated independent of any other rating. There can be no assurance that a rating will remain in effect for any given period of time or that a rating will not be lowered, or withdrawn entirely, by a rating agency if, in its judgment, circumstances so warrant. Debt Covenants We were in compliance with all of our debt covenants as of September 30, 2006. If we do not comply with our debt covenants, we may be required to repay our outstanding balances on demand, provide additional collateral or take other corrective actions. Our two public debt indentures relating to our senior notes and debentures, as well as both our revolving credit agreements, each contain a default provision that is triggered if outstanding indebtedness arising out of any other credit agreements in amounts ranging from in excess of $15 million to in excess of $100 million becomes due by acceleration or is not paid at maturity. In addition, AEM credit agreement contains a cross-default provision whereby AEM would be in default if it defaults on other indebtedness, as defined, by at least $250 thousand in the aggregate. Additionally, this agreement 56 Table of Contents contains a provision that would limit the amount of credit available if Atmos were downgraded below an S&P rating of BBB and a Moody rating of Baa2. Except as described above, we have no triggering events in our debt instruments that are tied to changes in specified credit ratings or stock price, nor have we entered into any transactions that would require us to issue equity based on our credit rating or other triggering events. Additional information concerning our debt covenants and how we complied with those covenants is included in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments The following tables provide information about contractual obligations and commercial commitments at September 30, 2006. Payments Due by Period Less Than More Than Total 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years 5 Years (In thousands) Contractual Obligations Long-term debt (1) $ 2,186,878 $ 3,186 $ 305,865 $ 762,762 $ 1,115,065 Short-term debt (1) 382,416 382,416 Interest charges (2) 1,028,096 121,511 207,939 164,964 533,682 Gas purchase commitments (3) 708,217 560,461 110,793 17,035 19,928 Capital lease obligations (4) 2,777 433 673 477 1,194 Operating leases (4) 176,806 15,959 30,157 26,912 103,778 Demand fees for contracted storage (5) 17,989 8,832 7,257 1,900 Demand fees for contracted transportation (6) 27,818 4,269 5,944 5,788 11,817 Derivative obligations (7) 30,945 30,669 276 Postretirement benefit plan contributions (8) 145,198 11,408 21,584 26,141 86,065 Total contractual obligations $ 4,707,140 $ 1,139,144 $ 690,488 $ 1,005,979 $ 1,871,529 (1) See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. (2) Interest charges were calculated using the stated rate for each debt issuance, or in the case of floating rate debt, the rate that was in effect as of September 30, 2006. (3) Gas purchase commitments were determined based upon contractually determined volumes at prices estimated based upon the index specified in the contract, adjusted for estimated basis differentials and contractual discounts as of September 30, 2006. (4) See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements. (5) Represents third party contractual demand fees for contracted storage in our natural gas marketing and other utility segments. Contractual demand fees for contracted storage for our utility segment are excluded as these costs are fully recoverable through our purchase gas adjustment mechanisms. (6) Represents third party contractual demand fees for transportation in our natural gas marketing segment. (7) Represents liabilities for natural gas commodity derivative contracts that were valued as of September 30, 2006. The ultimate settlement amounts of these remaining liabilities are unknown because they are subject to continuing market risk until the derivative contracts are settled. (8) Represents expected contributions to our postretirement benefit plans. AEM has commitments to purchase physical quantities of natural gas under contracts indexed to the forward NYMEX strip or fixed price contracts. At September 30, 2006, AEM was committed to purchase 61.7 Bcf within one year, 51.2 Bcf between one to three years and 0.8 Bcf after three years under indexed 57 Table of Contents contracts. AEM was committed to purchase 2.4 Bcf within one year and 0.1 Bcf within one to three years under fixed price contracts with prices ranging from $3.40 to $12.00 per Mcf. With the exception of our Mid-Tex Division, our utility segment maintains supply contracts with several vendors that generally cover a period of up to one year. Commitments for estimated base gas volumes are established under these contracts on a monthly basis at contractually negotiated prices. Commitments for incremental daily purchases are made as necessary during the month in accordance with the terms of the individual contract. Our Mid-Tex Division maintains long-term supply contracts to ensure a reliable source of gas for our customers in its service area which obligate it to purchase specified volumes at market prices. The estimated commitments under these contract terms as of September 30, 2006 are reflected in the table above. In May 2006, we announced plans to form a joint venture with a local natural gas producer to construct a natural gas gathering system in Eastern Kentucky that will originate in Floyd County, Kentucky, and extend north approximately 60 miles to interconnect with the Tennessee Gas Pipeline in Carter County, Kentucky. Tennessee Gas Pipeline interstate system delivers natural gas to the northeastern United States, including New York City and Boston. Referred to as the Straight Creek Project, the new system is expected to relieve severe gas gathering and transportation constraints that historically have burdened natural gas producers in the area and should improve delivery reliability to natural gas customers. More than a dozen other producers have signed memoranda of understanding to commit gas volumes to the new system and to enter into agreements on commercially reasonable terms. As currently designed, the project is expected to cost between $75 million to $80 million. In October 2006, FERC issued a declaratory order finding that the Straight Creek Project will be exempt from FERC jurisdiction. Upon receiving all required regulatory approvals, construction is expected to begin in the first half of fiscal 2007, with operations expected to begin in fiscal 2008. Final terms of the joint venture are still being negotiated; however, we anticipate that we will have the ability to consolidate the joint venture. Risk Management Activities We conduct risk management activities through our utility, natural gas marketing and pipeline and storage segments. In our utility segment, we use a combination of storage, fixed physical contracts and fixed financial contracts to reduce our exposure to unusually large winter-period gas price increases. In our natural gas marketing and pipeline and storage segments, we manage our exposure to the risk of natural gas price changes and lock in our gross profit margin through a combination of storage and financial derivatives, including futures, over-the-counter and exchange-traded options and swap contracts with counterparties. To the extent our inventory cost and actual sales and actual purchases do not correlate with the changes in the market indices we use in our hedges, we could experience ineffectiveness or the hedges may no longer meet the accounting requirements for hedge accounting, resulting in the derivatives being treated as mark to market instruments through earnings. In our natural gas marketing segment, hedge ineffectiveness resulting from natural gas market price differences between the locations of the hedged inventory and the delivery location specified in the hedge instruments (referred to as basis ineffectiveness) for both fair value and cash flow hedges was an unrealized gain of approximately $35.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2006 and an unrealized loss of approximately $5.4 million and $1.1 million for the years ended September 30, 2005 and 2004. Actual hedge ineffectiveness resulting from the timing of settlement of physical contracts and the settlement of the derivative instruments (referred to as timing ineffectiveness) resulted in an unrealized gain of approximately $4.4 million and $0.5 million for the years ended September 30, 2006 and 2004 and an unrealized loss of approximately $2.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. In our pipeline and storage segment, timing ineffectiveness resulted in an unrealized loss of approximately $4.7 million and less than $0.1 million for the years ended September 30, 2006 and 2004 and an unrealized gain of approximately $5.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2005. Finally, during fiscal 2004, we entered into four Treasury lock agreements to fix the Treasury yield component of the interest cost of financing associated with the anticipated issuance of $875 million of long- 58 Table of Contents term debt. These Treasury lock agreements were settled in October 2004 with a net $43.8 million payment to the counterparties. Approximately $11.6 million of the $43.8 million obligation is being recognized as a component of interest expense over a five year period from the date of settlement, and the remaining amount, approximately $32.2 million, is being recognized as a component of interest expense over a ten year period from the date of settlement. Our risk management activities and related accounting treatment are described in further detail in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. We record our derivatives as a component of risk management assets and liabilities, which are classified as current or noncurrent based upon the anticipated settlement date of the underlying derivative. Substantially all of our derivative financial instruments are valued using external market quotes and indices. The following table shows the components of the change in fair value of our utility and natural gas marketing derivative contract activities for the year ended September 30, 2006 (in thousands): Natural Gas Utility Marketing Fair value of contracts at September 30, 2005 $ 93,310 $ (61,898 ) Contracts realized/settled 25,461 11,106 Fair value of new contracts (18,651 ) Other changes in value (127,329 ) 65,795 Fair value of contracts at September 30, 2006 $ (27,209 ) $ 15,003 The fair value of our utility and natural gas marketing derivative contracts at September 30, 2006, is segregated below by time period and fair value source. Fair Value of Contracts at September 30, 2006 Maturity in Years Less Greater Total Fair Source of Fair Value Than 1 1-3 4-5 Than 5 Value (In thousands) Prices actively quoted $ (17,421 ) $ 7,122 $ $ $ (10,299 ) Prices provided by other external sources (440 ) (936 ) (1,376 ) Prices based on models and other valuation methods (255 ) (276 ) (531 ) Total Fair Value $ (18,116 ) $ 5,910 $ $ $ (12,206 ) Storage and Hedging Outlook AEM participates in transactions in which it seeks to find and profit from pricing differences that occur over time. AEM purchases physical natural gas and then sells financial contracts at favorable prices to lock in a gross profit margin. AEM is able to capture gross profit margin through the arbitrage of pricing differences in various locations and by recognizing pricing differences that occur over time. Natural gas inventory is marked to market at the end of each month with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses in the period of change. Effective October 1, 2005, we changed the index used to value our physical natural gas from Inside FERC to Gas Daily to better reflect the prices of our physical commodity. This change had no material impact to the Company on the date of adoption. Derivatives associated with our natural gas inventory, which are designated as fair value hedges, are marked to market each month based upon the NYMEX price with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses in the period of change. The changes in the difference between the indices used to mark to market our physical inventory (Gas Daily) and the related fair-value hedge (NYMEX) are reported as a component of revenue and can result in volatility in our reported net income. Over time, gains and losses on the sale of storage gas inventory will be offset by gains and losses on the fair-value hedges; therefore, the economic gross profit AEM captured in the original transaction remains essentially unchanged. 59 Table of Contents AEM continually manages its positions to enhance the future economic profit it captured in the original transaction. Therefore, AEM may change its scheduled injection and withdrawal plans from one time period to another based on market conditions or adjust the amount of storage capacity it holds on a discretionary basis in an effort to achieve this objective. AEM monitors the impacts of these profit optimization efforts by estimating the gross profit that it captured and expects to collect through the purchase and sale of physical natural gas and the associated financial derivatives, which we refer to as the economic gross profit. The economic gross profit, combined with the effect of unrealized gains or losses recognized in the financial statements in prior periods, provides a measure of the gross profit that could occur in future periods if AEM optimization efforts are fully successful. The following table presents AEM economic gross profit and its potential gross profit for the last three fiscal years. Associated Net Economic Unrealized Potential Net Physical Gross Profit (Loss) Gross Profit Period Ending Position (Bcf) (In millions) (In millions) (In millions) September 30, 2006 14.5 $ 60.0 $ (16.0 ) $ 76.0 September 30, 2005 6.9 $ 13.1 $ (14.8 ) $ 27.9 September 30, 2004 5.4 $ 12.3 $ (0.8 ) $ 13.1 As of September 30, 2006, based upon AEM derivatives position and inventory withdrawal schedule, the economic gross profit was $60.0 million. In addition, $16.0 million of net unrealized losses were recorded in the financial statements as of September 30, 2006. Therefore, the potential gross profit was $76.0 million. This potential gross profit amount will not result in an equal increase in future net income as AEM will incur additional storage and other operational expenses to realize this amount. The economic gross profit is based upon planned injection and withdrawal schedules, and the realization of the economic gross profit is contingent upon the execution of this plan, weather and other execution factors. Since AEM actively manages and optimizes its portfolio to enhance the future profitability of its storage position, it may change its scheduled injection and withdrawal plans from one time period to another based on market conditions. Therefore, we cannot assure that the economic gross profit or the potential gross profit calculated as of September 30, 2006 will be fully realized in the future or in what time period. Further, if we experience operational or other issues which limit our ability to optimally manage our stored gas positions, our earnings could be adversely impacted. Pension and Postretirement Benefits Obligations Net Periodic Pension and Postretirement Benefit Costs For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006, our total net periodic pension and other benefits costs was $50.0 million, compared with $36.4 million and $26.1 million for the years ended September 30, 2005 and 2004. All of these costs are recoverable through our gas utility rates; however, a portion of these costs is capitalized into our utility rate base. The remaining costs are recorded as a component of operation and maintenance expense. The increase in total net periodic pension and other benefits cost during fiscal 2006 compared with the prior year primarily reflects changes in assumptions we made during our annual pension plan valuation completed June 30, 2005. The discount rate used to compute the present value of a plan liabilities generally is based on rates of high-grade corporate bonds with maturities similar to the average period over which the benefits will be paid. In the period leading up to our June 30, 2005 measurement date, these interest rates were declining, which resulted in a 125 basis point reduction in our discount rate to 5.0 percent. This reduction increased the present value of our plan liabilities and associated expenses. Additionally, we reduced the expected return on our pension plan assets by 25 basis points to 8.5 percent, which also increased our pension and postretirement benefit cost. The increase in total net periodic pension and other benefits cost during fiscal 2005 compared with fiscal 2004 primarily reflects an increase in our service cost associated with the increase in the number of employees 60 Table of Contents covered by our plans due to the TXU Gas acquisition. Although we did not assume the existing employee benefit liabilities or plans of TXU Gas, for purposes of determining our annual pension cost we agreed to give the transitioned employees credit for years of TXU Gas service under our pension plan. With respect to our postretirement medical plan, we received a credit of $18.9 million against the purchase price to permit us to provide partial past service credits for retiree medical benefits under our retiree medical plan. The $18.9 million credit approximated the actuarially determined present value of the accumulated benefits related to the past service of the transferred employees on the acquisition date. In addition to the increased number of employees covered by the plans, we changed the assumptions used to determine our fiscal 2005 benefit costs, which resulted in an increase in our net periodic pension and postretirement costs. We increased the discount rate by 25 basis points and we reduced our expected return on our pension plan assets by 25 basis points. These assumption changes decreased the service cost and interest cost and reduced the expected return components of our pension and postretirement benefits costs. Pension and Postretirement Plan Funding Generally, our funding policy is to contribute annually an amount in accordance with the requirements of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. However, additional voluntary contributions are made from time to time as considered necessary. Contributions are intended to provide not only for benefits attributed to service to date but also for those expected to be earned in the future. During fiscal 2006, we voluntarily contributed $2.9 million to the Atmos Energy Corporation Retirement Plan for Mississippi Valley Gas Union Employees. The current year contribution achieved a desired level of funding by satisfying the minimum funding requirements while maximizing the tax deductible contribution for this plan for plan year 2005. During fiscal 2005, we voluntarily contributed $3.0 million to the Master Trust to maintain the level of funding we desire relative to our accumulated benefit obligation. We made the contribution because declining high yield corporate bond yields in the period leading up to our June 30, 2005 measurement date resulted in an increase in the present value of our plan liabilities. We contributed $10.9 million, $10.0 million and $13.8 million to our postretirement benefits plans for the years ended September 30, 2006, 2005 and 2004. The contributions represent the portion of the postretirement costs we are responsible for under the terms of our plan and minimum funding required by our regulators. Outlook for Fiscal 2007 High grade corporate bond yields increased in the period leading up to our June 30, 2006 measurement date. Therefore, we increased the discount rate for determining our fiscal 2007 pension and benefit costs by 130 basis points to 6.3 percent. However, we reduced the expected return on our pension plan assets by 25 basis points to 8.25 percent. The effect of these assumption changes, coupled with the effects of updating our annual valuation should not significantly affect our fiscal 2007 net pension and postretirement costs compared to fiscal 2006. We are not required to make a minimum funding contribution to our pension plans during fiscal 2007; nor, at this time, do we intend to make voluntary contributions during 2007. However, we anticipate contributing approximately $11 million to our postretirement medical plans during fiscal 2007. The projected pension liability, future funding requirements and the amount of pension expense or income recognized for the Plan are subject to change, depending upon the actuarial value of plan assets and the determination of future benefit obligations as of each subsequent actuarial calculation date. These amounts are impacted by actual investment returns, changes in interest rates and changes in the demographic composition of the participants in the plan. 61 Table of Contents RECENT ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS Recent accounting developments and their impact on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows are described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. 
