CIK: 731802
Company Name: ATMOS ENERGY CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2005-11-18


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations INTRODUCTION This section provides management discussion of the financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations of Atmos Energy Corporation with specific information on results of operations and liquidity and capital resources. It includes management interpretation of our financial results, the factors affecting these results, the major factors expected to affect future operating results and future investment and financing plans. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. Cautionary Statement for the Purposes of the Safe Harbor under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 The statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report are forward-looking statements made in good faith by the Company and are intended to qualify for the safe harbor from liability established by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. When used in this Report, or any other of the Company documents or oral presentations, the words anticipate , believe , expect , estimate , forecast , goal , intend , objective , plan , projection , seek , strategy or similar words are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the statements relating to the Company strategy, operations, markets, services, rates, recovery of costs, availability of gas supply and other factors. These risks and uncertainties include the following: adverse weather conditions, such as warmer than normal weather in the Company utility service territories or colder than normal weather that could adversely affect our natural gas marketing activities; regulatory trends and decisions, including deregulation initiatives and the impact of rate proceedings before various state regulatory commissions; market risks beyond our control affecting our risk management activities including market liquidity, commodity price volatility and counterparty creditworthiness; national, regional and local economic conditions; the Company ability to continue to access the capital markets; the effects of inflation and changes in the availability and prices of natural gas, including the volatility of natural gas prices; increased competition from energy suppliers and alternative forms of energy; risks relating to the acquisition of the TXU Gas operations, including without limitation, the Company increased indebtedness resulting from the acquisition of the TXU Gas operations; the impact of recent natural disasters on our operations, especially Hurricane Katrina, and other uncertainties discussed herein, all of which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond the control of the Company. Accordingly, while the Company believes these forward-looking statements to be reasonable, there can be no assurance that they will approximate actual experience or that the expectations derived from them will be realized. Further, the Company undertakes no obligation to update or revise any of its forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. FACTORS THAT MAY AFFECT OUR FUTURE PERFORMANCE Our performance in the future will primarily depend on the results of our utility and nonutility operations. Several factors exist that could influence our future financial performance, some of which are described below. They should be considered in connection with evaluating forward-looking statements contained in this report or otherwise made by or on behalf of us since these factors could cause actual results and conditions to differ materially from those set out in these forward-looking statements. Our operations are weather sensitive. Weather is one of the most significant factors influencing our performance. Our natural gas utility sales volumes and related revenues are correlated with heating requirements that result from cold winter weather. Our agricultural sales volumes are associated with the rainfall levels during the growing season in our 30 Table of Contents West Texas and Kansas irrigation markets. Although weather normalized rates in effect in several of our jurisdictions should mitigate the adverse effects of warmer than normal weather on our utility operating results, approximately fifteen to twenty percent of our utility gross profit margin is sensitive to weather, particularly our Louisiana and Mid-Tex divisions. This means we will not be able to increase customers bills to offset lower gas usage when the weather is warmer than normal. Our Mid-Tex Division operations benefit from a rate structure that combines a monthly customer charge with a declining block rate schedule to partially mitigate the impact of warmer than normal weather on revenue. The combination of the monthly customer charge and the customer billing under the first block of the declining block rate schedule provides for the recovery of most of our fixed costs for such operations under most weather conditions. However, this rate structure is not as beneficial during periods where weather is significantly warmer than normal. Finally, sustained cold weather could adversely affect our natural gas marketing operations as we may be required to purchase gas at spot rates in a rising market to obtain sufficient volumes to fulfill some customer contracts. We are subject to regulation which can directly impact our operations. Our natural gas utility business is subject to various regulated returns on its rate base in each of the 12 states in which we operate. We monitor the allowed rates of return, our effectiveness in earning such rates and initiate rate proceedings or operating changes as needed. In addition, in the normal course of the regulatory environment, assets are placed in service and historical test periods are established before rate cases can be filed. Once rate cases are filed, regulatory bodies have the authority to suspend implementation of the new rates while studying the cases. Because of this process, we must temporarily suffer the negative financial effects of having placed assets in service without the benefit of rate relief, which is commonly referred to as regulatory lag . In addition, once our rates have been approved, they are still subject to challenge for their reasonableness by appropriate regulatory authorities. Also, our debt and equity financings are also subject to approval by regulatory bodies in certain states, which could limit our ability to take advantage of favorable short-term market conditions. Our business could also be affected by deregulation initiatives, including the development of unbundling initiatives in the natural gas industry. Unbundling is the separation of the provision and pricing of local distribution gas services into discrete components. It typically focuses on the separation of the distribution and gas supply components and the resulting opening of the regulated components of sales services to alternative unregulated suppliers of those services. Because of our enhanced technology and distribution system infrastructures, we believe that we are now positively positioned should unbundling evolve. Consequently, we expect there would be no significant adverse effect on our business should unbundling or further deregulation of the natural gas distribution service business occur. Finally, contractual limitations could adversely affect our ability to withdraw gas from storage, which could cause us to purchase gas at spot prices in a rising market to obtain sufficient volumes to fulfill customer contracts. We seek to minimize this risk by increasing our storage capacity and enhancing the flexibility of our natural gas marketing contracts. Our operations are exposed to market risks that are beyond our control, which could result in financial losses. Our risk management operations in our natural gas marketing segment are subject to market risks beyond our control including market liquidity, commodity price volatility and counterparty creditworthiness. Market liquidity is affected by the number of trading partners in the market. Although we maintain a risk management policy, we may not be able to completely offset the price risk associated with volatile gas prices or the risk in our gas trading activities which could lead to financial losses. Physical trading also introduces price risk on any net open positions at the end of each trading day, as well as a risk of loss resulting from intra-day fluctuations of gas prices and the potential for daily price movements 31 Table of Contents between the time natural gas is purchased or sold for future delivery and the time the related purchase or sale is hedged. Although we manage our business to maintain no open positions, at times, limited net open positions related to our physical storage may occur on a short-term basis. The determination of our net open position as of any day requires us to make assumptions as to future circumstances, including the use of gas by our customers in relation to our anticipated storage and market positions. Because the price risk associated with any net open position at the end of each day may increase if the assumptions are not realized, we review these assumptions as part of our daily monitoring activities. Net open positions may result in an adverse impact on our financial condition or results of operations if market prices move in an unfavorable manner. Our utility segment uses a combination of storage and financial hedges to partially insulate us against volatility in gas prices and to help moderate the effects of higher customer accounts receivable caused by higher gas prices. Our natural gas marketing segment manages margins and limits risk exposure on the sale of natural gas inventory or the offsetting fixed-price purchase or sale commitments for physical quantities of natural gas through the use of a variety of financial derivatives. We could realize financial losses on these activities as a result of volatility in the market value of the underlying commodities or if a counterparty fails to perform under a contract. Further, the use of financial instruments to conduct our hedging and market risk activities subjects us to counterparty risk. Adverse changes in the creditworthiness of our counterparties could limit the level of trading activities with these parties and increase the risk that these parties may not perform under a contract. We believe this risk is mitigated due to the large number of counterparties used in our risk management activities. Our net periodic pension and other postretirement costs are subject to market risk as the fluctuation in the fair value of the assets used to fund our various benefit plans could lead to significant fluctuations in these costs. Finally, we are subject to interest rate risk on our commercial paper borrowings and floating rate debt. We could experience higher interest expense if interest rates increase or increased volatility if short-term interest rates become volatile. National, regional and local economic conditions have a direct impact on our operations. Our operations are affected by the conditions and overall strength of the national, regional and local economies, including interest rates, changes in the capital markets and increases in the costs of our primary commodity, natural gas. These factors impact the amount of residential, industrial and commercial growth in our service territories. Additionally, these factors could adversely impact our customer collections. Further, AEM operations are concentrated in the natural gas industry, and its customers and suppliers may be subject to economic risks affecting that industry. The execution of our business plan could be affected by an inability to access financial markets. We rely upon access to both short-term and long-term capital markets as a source of liquidity to satisfy our liquidity requirements. Although we believe we will maintain sufficient access to these financial markets, adverse changes in the economy, the overall health of the industries in which we operate and changes to our credit ratings could limit access to these markets and restrict the execution of our business plan. Our long-term debt is currently rated as investment grade by Standard & Poor Corporation (S&P), Moody Investors Service (Moody s) and Fitch Ratings, Inc. (Fitch), the three credit rating agencies that rate our long-term debt securities. There can be no assurance that these rating agencies will maintain investment grade ratings for our long-term debt. If we were to lose our investment-grade rating, the commercial paper markets and the commodity derivatives markets could become unavailable to us. This would increase our borrowing costs for working capital and reduce the borrowing capacity of our gas marketing affiliate. In addition, if our commercial paper ratings were lowered, it would increase the cost of commercial paper financing and could reduce or eliminate our ability to access the commercial paper markets. If we are 32 Table of Contents unable to issue commercial paper, we intend to borrow under our bank credit facilities to meet our working capital needs. This would increase the cost of our working capital financing. Inflation and increased gas costs could adversely impact our customer base and customer collections and increase our level of indebtedness. Inflation has caused increases in certain operating expenses and has required assets to be replaced at higher costs. We have a process in place to continually review the adequacy of our utility gas rates in relation to the increasing cost of providing service and the inherent regulatory lag in adjusting those gas rates. Historically, we have been able to budget and control operating expenses and investments within the amounts authorized to be collected in rates and intend to continue to do so. The ability to control expenses is an important factor that will influence future results. Rapid increases in the price of purchased gas, which has occurred recently and in some prior years, causes us to experience a significant increase in short-term debt because we must pay suppliers for gas when it is purchased, which can be significantly in advance of when these costs may be recovered through the collection of monthly customer bills for gas delivered. Increases in purchased gas costs also slow our utility collection efforts as customers are more likely to delay the payment of their gas bills, leading to higher than normal accounts receivable. This situation could result in higher short-term debt levels and increased bad debt expense. Due to the significant increase in natural gas prices resulting primarily from the impact of recent natural disasters, we are anticipating increases in our short-term debt, accounts receivable and bad debt expense during fiscal 2006. Finally, higher costs of natural gas in recent years have already caused many of our utility customers to conserve in the use of our gas services and could lead to even more customers utilizing such conservation methods. Our operations are subject to increased competition. We are facing increased competition from other energy suppliers as well as electric companies and from energy marketing and trading companies. In the case of industrial customers, such as manufacturing plants, and agricultural customers, adverse economic conditions, including higher gas costs, could cause these customers to use alternative sources of energy, such as electricity, or bypass our systems in favor of special competitive contracts with lower per-unit costs. Our pipeline and storage operations currently face limited competition from other existing intrastate pipelines and gas marketers seeking to provide or arrange transportation, storage and other services for customers. However, competition may increase if new intrastate pipelines are constructed near our existing facilities. We have only limited recourse under the acquisition agreement for losses relating to the TXU Gas acquisition. The diligence conducted in connection with the TXU Gas acquisition and the indemnification provided in the acquisition agreement may not be sufficient to protect us from, or compensate us for, all losses resulting from the acquisition or TXU Gas prior operations. For example, under the terms of the acquisition agreement, the first $15 million of many indemnifiable losses are to be borne by us, and the agreement provides for sharing of losses with respect to unknown environmental matters that may affect the assets we acquired after we have borne $10 million in costs relating to such matters. In addition, under the terms of the acquisition agreement, the maximum aggregate amount of such losses for which TXU Gas will indemnify us is approximately $192.5 million. A material loss associated with the TXU Gas acquisition for which there is not adequate indemnification could negatively affect our results of operations, our financial condition and our reputation in the industry, thereby reducing the anticipated benefits of the acquisition. Recent natural disasters, especially Hurricane Katrina, have adversely impacted our operations. On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast, inflicting significant damage in our eastern Louisiana operations. The hardest hit areas in our service area were in Jefferson, St. Tammany, 33 Table of Contents St. Bernard and Plaquemines parishes. In total, approximately 230,000 of our natural gas customers were affected in these areas. A significant number of these customers will not require gas service for some time because of sustained damages. We cannot predict with certainty how many of these customers will return to these service areas and over what time period. Additionally, we cannot accurately determine what regulatory actions, if any, may be taken by the regulators with respect to these areas. Finally, although we believe our insurance will cover all losses in excess of our deductibles, it is possible that certain of these losses may not be fully recoverable. OVERVIEW In fiscal 2005, we earned $135.8 million in net income or $1.72 per diluted share, compared with net income of $86.2 million, or $1.58 per diluted share in fiscal 2004. The 58 percent year-over-year increase in net income was primarily attributable to the incremental results we achieved from our Mid-Tex and Atmos Pipeline Texas divisions that we acquired on October 1, 2004. Strong earnings in our natural gas marketing segment primarily attributable to favorable results from the management of our storage portfolio also contributed to the increase in net income. These positive factors helped overcome the adverse effects on our utility segment of weather (adjusted for WNA) that was 11 percent warmer than normal, which reduced our net income by $22.8 million, or $0.29 per diluted share, and the impact of Hurricane Katrina, which reduced our net income by $3.8 million, or $0.05 per diluted share. Fiscal 2005 was highlighted by our acquisition of the natural gas distribution and pipeline operations of TXU Gas Company. The TXU Gas operations we acquired are regulated businesses engaged in the purchase, transmission, distribution and sale of natural gas in the north-central, eastern and western parts of Texas. Through these newly acquired operations, we provide gas distribution services to approximately 1.5 million residential and business customers in Texas, including the Dallas/ Fort Worth metropolitan area. We also now own and operate a system consisting of 6,162 miles of gas transmission and gathering lines and five underground storage reservoirs in Texas. The purchase price of the TXU Gas acquisition was approximately $1.9 billion, before transaction costs and expenses, which we paid in cash. We funded the purchase price for the TXU Gas acquisition with approximately $235.7 million in net proceeds from our offering of approximately 9.9 million shares of common stock, which we completed on July 19, 2004, and approximately $1.7 billion in net proceeds from our issuance on October 1, 2004 of commercial paper backstopped by a senior unsecured revolving credit agreement, which we entered into on September 24, 2004 for bridge financing for the TXU Gas acquisition. In October 2004, we repaid the outstanding commercial paper used to fund the acquisition through the issuance of senior unsecured notes on October 22, 2004, which generated net proceeds of approximately $1.4 billion and the sale of 16.1 million shares of common stock on October 27, 2004, which generated net proceeds of approximately $381.6 million. As a result of the acquisition, effective October 1, 2004, we created the pipeline and storage segment which includes the regulated pipeline and storage operations of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division and the nonregulated pipeline and storage operations of Atmos Pipeline and Storage, LLC, which was previously included in our other nonutility segment. 34 Table of Contents The TXU Gas acquisition essentially doubled the size of the Company as measured by assets, revenues and customers. The following table presents selected financial information for the Mid-Tex Division and Atmos Pipeline Texas Division operations for the year ended September 30, 2005: Year Ended September 30, 2005 Atmos Pipeline Mid-Tex Texas Division Division (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Operating revenues $ 1,326,940 $ 154,405 Gross profit 398,234 149,487 Operation and maintenance 146,449 60,102 Depreciation and amortization 64,460 15,281 Taxes, other than income 102,360 8,264 Operating income 84,965 65,840 Miscellaneous income 2,272 150 Interest charges 47,668 23,344 Income tax expense 14,455 15,064 Net income $ 25,114 $ 27,582 Utility sales volumes MMcf 127,497 N/A Utility transportation volumes MMcf 46,757 N/A Total utility throughput MMcf 174,254 N/A Pipeline transportation volumes MMcf N/A 375,604 Heating Degree Days Percent of Normal 80% N/A The impact of the TXU Gas acquisition, combined with continued strong performance in our natural gas marketing segment contributed to the following financial results during the year ended September 30, 2005: Our utility segment net income increased by $18.0 million. The increase reflects the impact of the acquisition of the Mid-Tex operations ($25.1 million) and the effect of rate increases in our West Texas and Mississippi jurisdictions that were not in effect during the first six months of fiscal 2004, partially offset by weather (adjusted for WNA) in our other utility operations that was five percent warmer than normal and one percent warmer than the prior year. Our natural gas marketing segment net income increased $6.8 million during the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase in natural gas marketing net income primarily reflects favorable results from the management of our storage portfolio partially offset by an unfavorable movement in the forward indices used to value our storage financial instruments. Our pipeline and storage segment contributed $30.6 million in net income for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with $2.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2004, primarily reflecting the acquisition of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division ($27.6 million). Our total debt to capitalization ratio at September 30, 2005 was 59.3 percent compared with 43.3 percent at September 30, 2004 reflecting the impact of the financing for the TXU Gas acquisition, partially offset by the repayment of $72.5 million in principal of substantially all of our First Mortgage bonds in June 2005. 35 Table of Contents Operating cash flow provided $386.9 million compared with $270.7 million, reflecting increased net income and more effective net working capital management partially offset by lower than expected utility sales volumes due to the effect of warmer weather. Capital expenditures increased to $333.2 million from $190.3 million primarily reflecting spending for the Mid-Tex Division ($115.0 million) and the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division ($31.4 million). Our financial performance is discussed in greater detail below in Results of Operations. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES Our consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We based our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to risk management and trading activities, allowance for doubtful accounts, legal and environmental accruals, insurance accruals, pension and postretirement obligations, deferred income taxes and the valuation of goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets. Our critical accounting policies are reviewed by the Audit Committee quarterly. Actual results may differ from estimates. Regulation Our utility operations are subject to regulation with respect to rates, service, maintenance of accounting records and various other matters by the respective regulatory authorities in the states in which we operate. Our regulated utility operations are accounted for in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation. This statement requires cost-based, rate-regulated entities that meet certain criteria to reflect the financial effects of the ratemaking and accounting practices and policies of the various regulatory commissions in their financial statements. We record regulatory assets for costs that have been deferred for which future recovery through customer rates is considered probable. Regulatory liabilities are recorded when it is probable that revenues will be reduced for amounts that will be credited to customers through the ratemaking process. As a result, certain costs that would normally be expensed under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States are permitted to be capitalized because they can be recovered through rates. Further, regulation may impact the period in which revenues or expenses are recognized. The amounts to be recovered or recognized are based upon historical experience and our understanding of the regulations. The impact of regulation on our utility operations may be affected by decisions of the regulatory authorities or the issuance of new regulations. Revenue recognition Sales of natural gas to our utility customers are billed on a monthly cycle basis; however, the billing cycle periods for certain classes of customers do not necessarily coincide with accounting periods used for financial reporting purposes. We follow the revenue accrual method of accounting for utility segment revenues whereby revenues applicable to gas delivered to customers, but not yet billed under the cycle billing method, are estimated and accrued and the related costs are charged to expense. Rates established by regulatory authorities are adjusted for increases and decreases in our purchased gas cost through purchased gas adjustment mechanisms. Purchased gas adjustment mechanisms provide gas utility companies a method of recovering purchased gas costs on an ongoing basis without filing a rate case to address all of the utility non-gas costs. These mechanisms are commonly utilized when regulatory authorities recognize a particular type of expense, such as purchased gas costs, that (i) is subject to significant price fluctuations compared to the utility other costs, (ii) represents a large component of the utility cost of service and (iii) is generally outside the control of the gas utility. There is no gross profit generated through purchased gas adjustments, but they do provide a dollar-for-dollar offset to increases or decreases in utility gas costs. Although substantially all of our utility sales to our customers fluctuate with the cost of gas that we purchase, utility gross profit is generally not affected by fluctuations in the cost of gas due to the purchased gas adjustment mechanism. The effects of these purchased gas adjustment mechanisms are recorded as deferred gas costs on our balance sheet. 36 Table of Contents Energy trading contracts resulting in the delivery of a commodity where we are the principal in the transaction are recorded as natural gas marketing sales or purchases at the time of physical delivery. Realized gains and losses from the settlement of financial instruments that do not result in physical delivery related to our natural gas marketing energy trading contracts and unrealized gains and losses from changes in the market value of open contracts are included as a component of natural gas marketing revenues. Allowance for doubtful accounts For the majority of our receivables, we establish an allowance for doubtful accounts based on our collections experience. On certain other receivables where we are aware of a specific customer inability or reluctance to pay, we record an allowance for doubtful accounts against amounts due to reduce the net receivable balance to the amount we reasonably expect to collect. However, if circumstances change, our estimate of the recoverability of accounts receivable could be different. Circumstances which could affect our estimates include, but are not limited to, customer credit issues, the level of natural gas prices and general economic conditions. Derivatives and hedging activities In our utility segment, we use a combination of storage and financial derivatives to partially insulate us and our natural gas utility customers against gas price volatility during the winter heating season. The financial derivatives we use in our utility segment are accounted for under the mark-to-market method pursuant to SFAS 133, Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities. Changes in the valuation of these derivatives primarily result from changes in the valuation of the portfolio of contracts, maturity and settlement of contracts and newly originated transactions. However, because the costs of financial derivatives used in our utility segment will ultimately be recovered through our rates, current period changes in the assets and liabilities from these risk management activities are recorded as a component of deferred gas costs in accordance with SFAS 71. Accordingly, there is no earnings impact to our utility segment as a result of the use of financial derivatives. The changes in the assets and liabilities from risk management activities are recognized in purchased gas cost in the income statement when the related costs are recovered through our rates. Our natural gas marketing risk management activities are conducted through AEM. AEM is exposed to risks associated with changes in the market price of natural gas, which we manage through a combination of storage and financial derivatives, including futures, over-the-counter and exchange-traded options and swap contracts with counterparties. Option contracts provide the right, but not the requirement, to buy or sell the commodity at a fixed price. Swap contracts require receipt of payment for the commodity based on the difference between a fixed price and the market price on the settlement date. The use of these contracts is subject to our risk management policies, which are monitored for compliance daily. We participate in transactions in which we combine the natural gas commodity and transportation costs to minimize our costs incurred to serve our customers. Additionally, we engage in natural gas storage transactions in which we seek to find and profit from pricing differences that occur over time. We purchase or sell physical natural gas and then sell or purchase financial contracts at a price sufficient to cover our carrying costs and provide a gross profit margin. Through the use of transportation and storage services and derivatives, we are able to capture gross profit margin through the arbitrage of pricing differences in various locations and by recognizing pricing differences that occur over time. Under SFAS 133, natural gas inventory is the hedged item in a fair-value hedge and is marked to market monthly using the inside FERC (iFERC) price at the end of each month. Changes in fair value are recognized as unrealized gains and losses in the period of change. Costs to store the gas are recognized in the period the costs are incurred. We recognize revenue and the carrying value of the inventory as an associated purchased gas cost in our consolidated statement of income when we sell the gas and deliver it out of the storage facility. Derivatives associated with our natural gas inventory are marked to market each month based upon the NYMEX price with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses in the period of change. The difference in the indices used to mark to market our physical inventory (iFERC) and the related fair-value hedge (NYMEX) is reported as a component of revenue and can result in volatility in our reported net income. Over time, gains and losses on the sale of storage gas inventory will be offset by gains and losses on the fair-value hedges, resulting in the realization of the economic gross profit margin we anticipated at the 37 Table of Contents time we structured the original transaction. In addition, we continually manage our positions to optimize value as market conditions and other circumstances change. Similar to our inventory position, we attempt to mitigate substantially all of the commodity price risk associated with our fixed-price contracts with minimum volume requirements through the use of various offsetting derivatives. Prior to April 1, 2004, these derivatives were not designated as hedges under SFAS 133 because they naturally locked in the economic gross profit margin at the time we entered into the contract. The fixed-price forward and offsetting derivative contracts were marked to market each month with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses recorded in revenue in our consolidated statement of income. The unrealized gains and losses were realized as a component of revenue in the period in which we fulfilled the requirements of the fixed-price contract and the derivatives settled. To the extent that the unrealized gains and losses of the fixed-price forward contracts and the offsetting derivatives did not offset exactly, our earnings experienced some volatility. At delivery, the gains and losses on the fixed-price contracts were offset by gains and losses on the derivatives, resulting in the realization of the economic gross profit margin we anticipated at the time we structured the original transaction. In addition, we continually managed our positions to optimize value as market conditions and other circumstances changed. Effective April 1, 2004, we elected to treat our fixed-price forward contracts as normal purchases and sales. As a result, we ceased marking the fixed-price forward contracts to market. We designated the offsetting derivative contracts as cash flow hedges of anticipated transactions. As a result of this change, unrealized gains and losses on these open derivative contracts are now recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income and are recognized in earnings as a component of revenue when the hedged volumes are sold. Hedge ineffectiveness, to the extent incurred, is reported as a component of revenue. During fiscal 2004, we entered into four Treasury lock agreements to fix the Treasury yield component of the interest cost of financing associated with the anticipated issuance of $875 million of long-term debt. We designated these Treasury lock agreements as cash flow hedges of an anticipated transaction. Accordingly, unrealized gains and losses associated with the Treasury lock agreements were recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. These Treasury lock agreements were settled in October 2004 with a net $43.8 million payment to the counterparties. This realized loss will be recognized as a component of interest expense over the life of the related financing arrangements. The fair value of our financial derivatives is determined through a combination of prices actively quoted on national exchanges, prices provided by other external sources and prices based on models and other valuation methods. Changes in the valuation of our financial derivatives primarily result from changes in market prices, the valuation of the portfolio of our contracts, maturity and settlement of these contracts and newly originated transactions, each of which directly affect the estimated fair value of our derivatives. We believe the market prices and models used to value these derivatives represent the best information available with respect to closing exchange and over-the-counter quotations, time value and volatility factors underlying the contracts. Values are adjusted to reflect the potential impact of an orderly liquidation of our positions over a reasonable period of time under present market conditions. Impairment assessments We perform impairment assessments of our goodwill, intangible assets subject to amortization and long-lived assets. We currently have no indefinite-lived intangible assets. We annually evaluate our goodwill balances for impairment during our second fiscal quarter or as impairment indicators arise. We use a present value technique based on discounted cash flows to estimate the fair value of our reporting units. We have determined our reporting units to be each of our utility divisions and wholly-owned subsidiaries. Goodwill is allocated to the reporting units responsible for the acquisition that gave rise to the goodwill. The discounted cash flow calculations used to assess goodwill impairment are dependent on several subjective factors including the timing of future cash flows, future growth rates and the discount rate. An impairment charge is recognized if the carrying value of a reporting unit goodwill exceeds its fair value. We periodically evaluate whether events or circumstances have occurred that indicate that our intangible assets subject to amortization and other long-lived assets may not be recoverable or that the remaining useful 38 Table of Contents life may warrant revision. When such events or circumstances are present, we assess the recoverability of these assets by determining whether the carrying value will be recovered through expected future cash flows. These cash flow projections consider various factors such as the timing of the future cash flows and the discount rate and are based upon the best information available at the time the estimate is made. Changes in these factors could materially affect the cash flow projections and result in the recognition of an impairment charge. An impairment charge is recognized as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value if the sum of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value of the related asset. Pension and other postretirement plans Pension and other postretirement plan costs and liabilities are determined on an actuarial basis and are affected by numerous assumptions and estimates including the market value of plan assets, estimates of the expected return on plan assets, assumed discount rates and current demographic and actuarial mortality data. We review the estimates and assumptions underlying our pension and other postretirement plan costs and liabilities annually based upon a June 30 measurement date. The assumed discount rate and the expected return are the assumptions that generally have the most significant impact on our pension costs and liabilities. The assumed discount rate, the assumed health care cost trend rate and assumed rates of retirement generally have the most significant impact on our postretirement plan costs and liabilities. The discount rate is utilized principally in calculating the actuarial present value of our pension and postretirement obligation and net pension and postretirement cost. When establishing our discount rate, we consider absolute high quality corporate bond rates based on Moody Aa bond index, changes in those rates from the prior year and the implied discount rate that is derived from matching our projected benefit disbursements with a high quality corporate bond spot rate curve. The expected long-term rate of return on assets is utilized in calculating the expected return on plan assets component of our annual pension and postretirement plan cost. We estimate the expected return on plan assets by evaluating expected bond returns, equity risk premiums, asset allocations, the effects of active plan management, the impact of periodic plan asset rebalancing and historical performance. We also consider the guidance from our investment advisors in making a final determination of our expected rate of return on assets. To the extent the actual rate of return on assets realized over the course of a year is greater than or less than the assumed rate, that year annual pension or postretirement plan cost is not affected. Rather, this gain or loss reduces or increases future pension or postretirement plan cost over a period of approximately ten to twelve years. We estimate the assumed health care cost trend rate used in determining our postretirement net expense based upon our actual health care cost experience, the effects of recently enacted legislation and general economic conditions. Our assumed rate of retirement is estimated based upon our annual review of our participant census information as of the measurement date. Actual changes in the fair market value of plan assets and differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets could have a material effect on the amount of pension cost ultimately recognized. A 0.25 percent change in our discount rate will impact our pension and postretirement cost approximately $1.6 million. A 0.25 percent change in our expected rate of return will impact our pension and postretirement cost by approximately $0.8 million. 39 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following table presents our financial highlights for the three fiscal years ended September 30, 2005: For the Year Ended September 30 2005 2004 2003 (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Operating revenues $ 4,973,326 $ 2,920,037 $ 2,799,916 Gross profit 1,129,090 562,191 534,976 Operating expenses 780,435 368,496 347,136 Operating income 348,655 193,695 187,840 Miscellaneous income 2,021 9,507 2,191 Interest charges 132,658 65,437 63,660 Income before income taxes and cumulative effect of accounting change 218,018 137,765 126,371 Cumulative effect of accounting change, net of income tax benefit (7,773 ) Income tax expense 82,233 51,538 46,910 Net income $ 135,785 $ 86,227 $ 71,688 Utility sales volumes MMcf 296,283 173,219 184,512 Utility transportation volumes MMcf 114,851 72,814 63,453 Total utility throughput MMcf 411,134 246,033 247,965 Natural gas marketing sales volumes MMcf 238,097 222,572 225,961 Pipeline transportation volumes MMcf 375,604 Heating Degree Days (1) Actual (weighted average) 2,587 3,271 3,473 Percent of normal 89% 96 % 101 % Consolidated utility average transportation revenue per Mcf $ 0.51 $ 0.42 $ 0.47 Consolidated utility average cost of gas per Mcf sold $ 7.41 $ 6.55 $ 5.71 (1) Adjusted for service areas that have weather normalized operations. 40 Table of Contents The following table shows our operating income by utility division and by segment for the three fiscal years ended September 30, 2005. The presentation of our utility operating income is included for financial reporting purposes and may not be appropriate for ratemaking purposes. 2005 2004 2003 Heating Heating Heating Degree Degree Degree Days Days Days Operating Percent of Operating Percent of Operating Percent of Income Normal (1) Income Normal (1) Income Normal (1) (In thousands, except degree day information) Colorado-Kansas $ 25,157 99 % $ 20,876 99 % $ 23,756 101 % Kentucky 18,657 98 % 22,738 98 % 21,841 101 % Louisiana 24,819 78 % 40,762 93 % 41,672 106 % Mid-States 35,687 93 % 38,778 95 % 37,535 101 % Mid-Tex 84,965 80 % Mississippi 19,045 96 % 18,709 101 % 17,617 101 % West Texas 27,520 99 % 22,090 90 % 19,650 97 % Other 515 (4,063 ) (937 ) Utility segment 236,365 89 % 159,890 96 % 161,134 101 % Natural gas marketing segment 40,985 27,726 13,569 Pipeline and storage segment 70,286 5,293 11,814 Other nonutility segment 1,019 786 1,323 Consolidated operating income $ 348,655 89 % $ 193,695 96 % $ 187,840 101 % (1) Adjusted for service areas that have weather normalized operations. Year ended September 30, 2005 compared with year ended September 30, 2004 Utility segment Our utility segment has historically contributed 70 to 85 percent of our consolidated net income. The primary factors that impact the results of our utility operations are seasonal weather patterns, competitive factors in the energy industry and economic conditions in our service areas. Natural gas sales to residential, commercial and public-authority customers are affected by winter heating season requirements. This generally results in higher operating revenues and net income during the period from October through March of each year and lower operating revenues and either lower net income or net losses during the period from April through September of each year. Accordingly, our second fiscal quarter has historically been our most critical earnings quarter with an average of approximately 67 percent of our consolidated net income having been earned in the second quarter during the three most recently completed fiscal years. Additionally, we typically experience higher levels of accounts receivable, accounts payable, gas stored underground and short-term debt balances during the winter heating season due to the seasonal nature of our revenues and the need to purchase and store gas to support these operations. Utility sales to industrial customers are much less weather sensitive. Utility sales to agricultural customers, which typically use natural gas to power irrigation pumps during the period from March through September, are primarily affected by rainfall amounts and the price of natural gas. Changes in the cost of gas impact revenue but do not directly affect our gross profit from utility operations because the fluctuations in gas prices are passed through to our customers. Accordingly, we believe gross profit margin is a better indicator of our financial performance than revenues. However, higher gas costs may cause customers to conserve, or, in the case of industrial customers, to use alternative energy sources. Higher gas costs may also adversely impact our accounts receivable collections, resulting in higher bad debt expense and may require us to increase borrowings under our credit facilities resulting in higher interest expense. 41 Table of Contents The effects of weather that is above or below normal are partially offset through weather normalization adjustments in certain of our service areas. WNA allows us to increase the base rate portion of customers bills when weather is warmer than normal and decrease the base rate when weather is colder than normal. Our Mid-Tex Division does not have WNA. However, its operations benefit from a rate structure that combines a monthly customer charge with a declining block rate schedule to partially mitigate the impact of warmer-than-normal weather on revenue. The combination of the monthly customer charge and the customer billing under the first block of the declining block rate schedule provides for the recovery of a significant portion of our fixed costs for such operations under average weather conditions. However, this rate structure is not as beneficial during periods where weather is significantly warmer than normal. Operating income Utility gross profit increased to $907.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $503.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Total throughput for our utility business was 411.1 Bcf during the current year compared to 246.0 Bcf in the prior year. The increase in utility gross profit margin primarily reflects the impact of the acquisition of the Mid-Tex Division resulting in an increase in utility gross profit margin and total throughput of $398.2 million and 174.3 Bcf. The $6.1 million increase in the gross profit generated from our other utility operations primarily reflects rate increases in our Mississippi and West Texas divisions that were absent in the prior year coupled with the recognition of a $1.9 million refund to our customers in our Colorado service area in the prior year. Offsetting these increases was a $3.9 million reduction in gross profit in our Louisiana Division due to the impact of Hurricane Katrina. Gross profit margins, particularly in Louisiana, were also adversely impacted by weather (as adjusted for jurisdictions with weather-normalized operations) that was five percent warmer than normal and one percent warmer than the prior year period. Additionally, gross profit margin was adversely impacted by the lack of cold weather in patterns sufficient to encourage customers to increase their heat load consumption and lower irrigation throughput in our West Texas and Colorado-Kansas Divisions. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes other than income taxes, increased to $671.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $343.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 primarily as a result of the addition of the Mid-Tex Division. Excluding the impact of the Mid-Tex Division, operating expenses for our other utility operations increased $14.5 million primarily due to $2.3 million associated with the effects of Hurricane Katrina, a $7.7 million increase in taxes, other than income, a $2.4 million increase in operation and maintenance expense, including the provision for doubtful accounts, and a $2.1 million increase in depreciation and amortization. Included in taxes other than income taxes are franchise and state gross receipts taxes which are paid by our customers as a component of their monthly bills. Although these amounts are offset in revenues through customer billings, timing differences between when the expense is incurred and is recovered may impact our net income on a temporary basis. However, there is no permanent effect on net income. As a result of the aforementioned factors, our utility segment operating income for the year ended September 30, 2005 increased to $236.4 million from $159.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Miscellaneous income Miscellaneous income increased to $6.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $5.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase was attributable to an increase in interest income earned on higher cash balances during the current year compared with the prior year partially offset by the recognition of a $0.8 million gain on the sale of a building during the year ended September 30, 2004. Interest charges Interest charges allocated to the utility segment for the year ended September 30, 2005 increased to $112.4 million from $65.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase was attributable to the 42 Table of Contents interest expense associated with the issuance of long-term debt to finance the acquisition of the Mid-Tex Division in October 2004. On June 30, 2005, we repaid $72.5 million in principal on five series of our First Mortgage Bonds prior to their scheduled maturities. The early repayment of these bonds resulted in savings of $1.3 million in interest expense in fiscal 2005. Natural gas marketing segment Our natural gas marketing segment aggregates and purchases gas supply, arranges transportation and/or storage logistics and ultimately delivers gas to our customers at competitive prices. To facilitate this process, we utilize proprietary and customer-owned transportation and storage assets to provide the various services our customers request, including furnishing natural gas supplies at fixed and market-based prices, contract negotiation and administration, load forecasting, gas storage acquisition and management services, transportation services, peaking sales and balancing services, capacity utilization strategies and gas price hedging through the use of derivative products. As a result, our revenues arise from the types of commercial transactions we have structured with our customers and include the value we extract by optimizing the storage and transportation capacity we own or control as well as revenues for services we deliver. To optimize the storage and transportation capacity we own or control, we participate in transactions in which we combine the natural gas commodity and transportation costs to minimize our costs incurred to serve our customers by identifying the lowest cost alternative within the natural gas supplies, transportation and markets to which we have access. Additionally, we engage in natural gas storage transactions in which we seek to find and profit from the pricing differences that occur over time. We purchase physical natural gas and then sell financial contracts at favorable prices to lock in gross profit margins. Through the use of transportation and storage services and derivative contracts, we are able to capture gross profit margin through the arbitrage of pricing differences in various locations and by recognizing pricing differences that occur over time. Operating income Gross profit margin for our natural gas marketing segment consists primarily of marketing activities, which represent the utilization of proprietary and customer-owned transportation and storage assets to provide the various services our customers request, and storage activities, which are derived from the optimization of our managed proprietary and third party storage and transportation assets. Our natural gas marketing segment gross profit margin was comprised of the following for the year ended September 30, 2005 and 2004: Year Ended September 30 2005 2004 (In thousands, except storage balances) Storage Activities Realized margin $ 28,008 $ (1,900 ) Unrealized margin (14,007 ) 357 Total Storage Activities 14,001 (1,543 ) Marketing Activities Realized margin 59,971 51,347 Unrealized margin (11,999 ) (3,173 ) Total Marketing Activities 47,972 48,174 Gross profit $ 61,973 $ 46,631 Ending storage balance (Bcf) 6.9 5.5 Our natural gas marketing segment gross profit margin was $62.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared to gross profit of $46.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Gross 43 Table of Contents profit margin from our natural gas marketing segment for the year ended September 30, 2005 included an unrealized loss of $26.0 million compared with an unrealized loss of $2.8 million in the prior year. Natural gas marketing sales volumes were 273.2 Bcf during the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with 265.1 Bcf for the prior year. Excluding intersegment sales volumes, natural gas marketing sales volumes were 238.1 Bcf during the current year compared with 222.6 Bcf in the prior year. The increase in consolidated natural gas marketing sales volumes primarily was attributable to successfully executed marketing strategies into new market areas. The contribution to gross profit from our storage activities was a gain of $14.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared to a loss of $1.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The $15.5 million improvement primarily was attributable to a $29.9 million increase in the realized storage contribution for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared to the prior year due to more favorable arbitrage spread opportunities during the current year, partially offset by increased storage fees associated with 9.0 Bcf of newly contracted storage capacity during the third quarter of fiscal 2005. Annual demand charges for this new storage approximate $7.6 million. We may further increase the amount of our storage capacity in the future; therefore, the impact of price volatility on our unrealized storage contribution could become more significant in future periods. A $14.4 million decrease in the unrealized storage contribution resulted from an unfavorable movement during the year ended September 30, 2005 in the forward indices used to value the storage financial instruments combined with greater physical natural gas storage quantities at September 30, 2005 compared to the prior year also. Our marketing activities contributed $48.0 million to our gross profit for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared to $48.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The decrease in the marketing contribution primarily was attributable to $12.0 million of unrealized marked-to-market losses associated with basis swaps that were put in place to capture margins in certain volatile market areas. The increase in unrealized marked-to-market losses was partially offset by an increase in our realized marketing margins due to focusing our marketing efforts on higher margin customers and successfully entering into new market areas. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes other than income taxes, increased to $21.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $18.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase in operating expense was attributable primarily to an increase in labor costs due to increased headcount and an increase in regulatory compliance costs. The increase in gross profit margin, combined with higher operating expenses, resulted in an increase in our natural gas marketing segment operating income to $41.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with operating income of $27.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Pipeline and storage segment Our pipeline and storage segment consists of the regulated pipeline and storage operations of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division and the nonregulated pipeline and storage operations of Atmos Pipeline and Storage, LLC, which were previously included in our other nonutility segment. The Atmos Pipeline Texas Division transports natural gas to our Mid-Tex Division and for third parties and manages five underground storage reservoirs in Texas. We also provide ancillary services customary in the pipeline industry including parking arrangements, blending and sales of inventory on hand. These operations represent one of the largest intrastate pipeline operations in Texas with a heavy concentration in the established natural gas-producing areas of central, northern and eastern Texas, extending into or near the major producing areas of the Texas Gulf Coast and the Delaware and Val Verde Basins of West Texas. Nine basins located in Texas are estimated to contain a substantial portion of the nation remaining onshore natural gas reserves. This pipeline system provides access to all of these basins. 44 Table of Contents APS owns or has an interest in underground storage fields in Kentucky and Louisiana. We also use these storage facilities to reduce the need to contract for additional pipeline capacity to meet customer demand during peak periods. Similar to our utility segment, our pipeline and storage segment is impacted by seasonal weather patterns, competitive factors in the energy industry and economic conditions in our service areas. Natural gas transportation requirements are affected by the winter heating season requirements of our customers. This generally results in higher operating revenues and net income during the period from October through March of each year and lower operating revenues and either lower net income or net losses during the period from April through September of each year. Further, as the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division operations provide all of the natural gas for our Mid-Tex Division, the results of this segment are highly dependent upon the natural gas requirements of this division. As a regulated pipeline, the operations of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division may be impacted by the timing of when costs and expenses are incurred and when these costs and expenses are recovered through its tariffs. Operating income Pipeline and storage gross profit increased to $157.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $10.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Total pipeline transportation volumes were 563.9 Bcf during the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with 9.4 Bcf for the prior year. Excluding intersegment transportation volumes, total pipeline transportation volumes were 375.6 Bcf during the current year. The increase in pipeline and storage gross profit margin primarily reflects the impact of the acquisition of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division resulting in an increase in pipeline and storage gross profit margin and total transportation volumes of $149.5 million and 375.6 Bcf. Also contributing to Atmos Pipeline Texas Division results were higher transportation and related services margin due to significant basis differentials at its three major Texas hubs. The $2.0 million decrease in the gross profit generated by APS primarily reflects a decrease in asset management fees received during fiscal 2005. Operating expenses increased to $87.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2005 from $5.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 due to the addition of $83.6 million in operating expenses associated with the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division. As the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division is a regulated entity, franchise and state gross receipts taxes are paid by our customers; thus, these amounts are offset in revenues through customer billings and have no permanent effect on net income. Included in operating expense was $8.9 million associated with taxes other than income taxes, of which $8.3 million was associated with our Atmos Pipeline Texas Division. As a result of the aforementioned factors, our pipeline and storage segment operating income for the year ended September 30, 2005 increased to $70.3 million from $5.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. Interest charges Interest charges allocated to this segment for the year ended September 30, 2005 increased to $24.6 million from $1.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The increase was attributable to the interest expense associated with the issuance of long-term debt to finance the acquisition of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division in October 2004. Other nonutility segment Our other nonutility businesses consist primarily of the operations of Atmos Energy Services, LLC, and Atmos Power Systems, Inc. Through AES, we provide natural gas management services to our utility operations, other than the Mid-Tex Division. These services, which began April 1, 2004, include aggregating and purchasing gas supply, arranging transportation and storage logistics and ultimately delivering the gas to our utility service areas at competitive prices. The revenues of AES represent charges to our utility divisions 45 Table of Contents equal to the costs incurred to provide those services. Through Atmos Power Systems, Inc., we construct gas-fired electric peaking power-generating plants and associated facilities and may enter into agreements to either lease or sell these plants. Operating income for our other nonutility segment primarily reflects the leasing income associated with two sales-type lease transactions completed in fiscal 2001 and 2002. The increase in operating income during the year ended September 30, 2005 reflects the absence of a one-time charge of $0.4 million associated with the wind-down of a noncore business during fiscal 2004. Miscellaneous income for the year ended September 30, 2005 was $2.6 million compared with $8.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2004. The $5.7 million decrease was attributable primarily to the recognition of a $5.9 million pretax gain on the sale of all remaining limited partnership interests in Heritage Propane Partners, L.P. during fiscal 2004. Year ended September 30, 2004 compared with year ended September 30, 2003 Utility segment Operating income Utility gross profit margin increased to $503.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 from $491.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. Total throughput for our utility business was 261.0 Bcf during the year compared to 254.7 Bcf in the prior year. Excluding intercompany throughput, consolidated throughput for our utility business was 246.0 Bcf during the year, compared with 248.0 Bcf in the prior year. The increase in utility gross profit margin primarily reflects the impact of the acquisition of Mississippi Valley Gas Company whose operations are included for the entire first quarter in fiscal year 2004, compared with one month in the first quarter of the prior fiscal year resulting in an increase in utility gross profit margin and total throughput of $12.8 million and 5.0 Bcf. Utility gross profit margin was also favorably impacted by rate increases received in Kansas, Texas and Mississippi and a $10.2 million year-over-year increase in the effect of WNA in our WNA service areas. These increases were partially offset by the impact of weather that was six percent warmer than that of the prior year and four percent warmer than normal, resulting in a decrease of approximately $13.8 million and lower irrigation sales in our West Texas Division resulting in a decrease of approximately $2.1 million. Warmer than normal weather particularly impacted our service areas in our Louisiana, Mid-States and West Texas divisions. The decrease in throughput also reflects a decrease in consumption attributable to the impact of conservation and the continued introduction of more efficient gas appliances in our service areas. Finally, our utility gross profit margin for the year ended September 30, 2004 reflects a one-time reduction resulting from a regulatory ruling to refund $1.9 million to our customers in our Colorado service area. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes other than income taxes, increased 3.9 percent to $343.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 from $330.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. Operation and maintenance expense increased, primarily due to the addition of $6.1 million related to the MVG acquisition in December 2002 and higher labor and benefit costs. Taxes other than income taxes increased $1.5 million, primarily due to additional franchise, payroll and property taxes associated with the MVG assets acquired in December 2002. Franchise and state gross receipts taxes are paid by our customers as a component of their monthly bills; thus, these amounts are offset in revenues through customer billings and have no effect on net income. Depreciation and amortization expense increased $9.1 million, which primarily reflects MVG depreciation for the full year of fiscal 2004 compared with ten months in the prior year. These increases were partially offset by a $7.9 million reduction in our provision for doubtful accounts attributable to continued improvement in accounts receivable collections during fiscal 2004. As a result of the aforementioned factors, our utility segment operating income for the year ended September 30, 2004 decreased to $159.9 million from $161.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. 46 Table of Contents Miscellaneous income (expense) Miscellaneous income for the year ended September 30, 2004 was $5.8 million, compared with expense of $0.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The $6.0 million change was attributable primarily to the absence in 2004 of weather insurance amortization totaling $5.0 million, which was recognized in the prior year due to the termination of our weather insurance policy in the third quarter of fiscal 2003 and the recognition of a $0.8 million gain on the sale of real property during fiscal 2004. Interest charges Interest charges increased 3.5 percent for the year ended September 30, 2004 to $65.4 million from $63.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The increase was attributable primarily to a higher average outstanding debt balance resulting from the financing obtained to fund the acquisition of MVG in December 2002. Natural gas marketing segment Operating income Our natural gas marketing segment gross profit margin was comprised of the following for the years ended September 30, 2004 and 2003: Year Ended September 30 2004 2003 (In thousands, except storage balances) Storage Activities Realized margin $ (1,900 ) $ (7,250 ) Unrealized margin 357 5,362 Total Storage Activities (1,543 ) (1,888 ) Marketing Activities Realized margin 51,347 25,077 Unrealized margin (3,173 ) 976 Total Marketing Activities 48,174 26,053 Gross profit $ 46,631 $ 24,165 Ending storage balance (Bcf) 5.5 5.7 Our natural gas marketing segment gross profit was $46.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 compared to gross profit margin of $24.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. Natural gas marketing sales volumes were 265.1 Bcf during the current year compared with 294.8 Bcf for the prior year. Excluding intercompany sales volumes, natural gas marketing sales volumes were 222.6 Bcf during the current year compared with 226.0 Bcf in the prior year. The decrease in consolidated natural gas marketing sales volumes was primarily due to overall warmer temperatures during the 2003-2004 heating season compared with the prior year. Our natural gas marketing gross profit margin for the year ended September 30, 2004 included an unrealized loss on open contracts of $2.8 million compared with an unrealized gain on open contracts of $6.3 million in the prior year. The contribution to gross profit from our storage activities was a loss of $1.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 compared to a loss of $1.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The $0.4 million improvement primarily was attributable to a $5.4 million improvement in the realized storage contribution for the year ended September 30, 2004 compared to the prior year offset by a $5.0 million decrease in unrealized income associated with our storage portfolio compared to the prior year. The improvement in the realized storage contribution for the year ended September 30, 2004 primarily was due to 47 Table of Contents our inability during the 2002-2003 heating season to withdraw planned volumes from storage to meet our customer requirements caused by operational, contractual and regulatory limitations relating to our storage facilities, which reduced our realized storage contributions during fiscal 2003. This situation did not recur in fiscal 2004. The decrease in unrealized income in the current year was primarily attributable to a less favorable movement during the year ended September 30, 2004 in the forward indices used to value the storage financial instruments than in the prior year combined with slightly lower physical natural gas storage quantities at September 30, 2004 compared to the prior year. Our marketing activities contributed $48.2 million to our gross profit margin for the year ended September 30, 2004 compared to $26.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The increase in the marketing contribution primarily was attributable to our continued efforts to amend contracts with third parties to transfer risk to our customers and to provide higher gross profit margins and improved position management during the current year. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes other than income taxes, increased to $18.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 from $10.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The increase in operating expense was attributable primarily to higher labor and benefit costs resulting from the improvement in earnings for the fiscal year and an increase in temporary and permanent personnel due to systems and process improvements in the marketing segment. The improved gross profit margin resulted in an increase in our natural gas marketing segment operating income to $27.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 compared with operating income of $13.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. Miscellaneous income Miscellaneous income for the year ended September 30, 2004 was $0.8 million, compared with income of $1.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The $1.1 million decrease was attributable primarily to lower interest income earned on cash held on deposit in margin accounts due to favorable valuations on our financial derivatives, which reduced the need to deposit cash into margin accounts. Pipeline and storage segment Operating income Our pipeline and storage operating income decreased to $5.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 from $11.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The decrease in our pipeline and storage operating income was primarily attributable to a decrease in demand charges recognized by Atmos Pipeline and Storage, L.L.C. for storage services provided during the year ended September 30, 2004 compared to the prior year and lower transported volumes of approximately 2.3 Bcf by APS due to overall warmer weather during the winter heating season. The decrease was also attributable to a $1.5 million decrease in monthly facilities fees charged by Trans Louisiana Gas Pipeline, Inc. as a result of a settlement reached with the Louisiana Public Service Commission in October 2003. Our pipeline and storage operating income for the year ended September 30, 2004 also included an unrealized loss on open contracts of $1.1 million compared with no unrealized gain our loss in the prior year as APS started to hedge its storage inventory during the fourth quarter of 2004. Other nonutility segment Operating income Our other nonutility operating income decreased to $0.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 from $1.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The decrease in our other nonutility operating income was attributable primarily to a one-time charge of $0.4 million associated with the wind-down of a noncore business. 48 Table of Contents Miscellaneous income Miscellaneous income for the year ended September 30, 2004 was $8.3 million, compared with income of $6.5 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. The $1.8 million increase was attributable primarily to a $5.9 million pretax gain associated with the sale in January 2004 of our general and limited partnership interests in USP and the sale in June 2004 of the remaining limited partnership units in Heritage Propane Partners, L.P. formerly owned by USP. This increase was offset partially by lower equity earnings from our investment in USP resulting from the sale and the absence in 2004 of a $3.9 million gain recorded in 2003 associated with a sales-type lease of a distributed electric generation plant. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our working capital and liquidity for capital expenditure and other cash needs are provided from internally generated funds, borrowings under our credit facilities and commercial paper program and funds raised from the public debt and equity capital markets. We believe that these sources of funds will provide the necessary working capital and liquidity for capital expenditures and other cash needs for fiscal 2006. However, during fiscal 2006, we anticipate that higher natural gas prices primarily resulting from the recent natural disasters will increase our need to utilize our short-term credit facilities to temporarily finance the purchase of natural gas to fulfill our contractual obligations. These facilities are described in greater detail below and in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. Capitalization The following presents our capitalization as of September 30, 2005 and 2004: September 30 2005 2004 (In thousands, except percentages) Short-term debt $ 144,809 3.7 % $ Long-term debt 2,186,368 55.6 % 867,219 43.3 % Shareholders equity 1,602,422 40.7 % 1,133,459 56.7 % Total capitalization, including short-term debt $ 3,933,599 100.0 % $ 2,000,678 100.0 % Total debt as a percentage of total capitalization, including short-term debt, was 59.3 percent and 43.3 percent at September 30, 2005 and 2004. The increase in the debt to capitalization ratio was attributable to the issuance of $1.39 billion in senior unsecured long-term debt, partially offset by the issuance of 16.1 million shares of our common stock in October 2004 to partially finance the TXU Gas acquisition. Our ratio of total debt to capitalization is typically greater during the winter heating season as we make additional short-term borrowings to fund natural gas purchases and meet our working capital requirements. Within three to five years from the closing of the TXU Gas acquisition, we intend to reduce our capitalization ratio to a target range of 50 to 55 percent through cash flow generated from operations, continued issuance of new common stock under our Direct Stock Purchase Plan and Retirement Savings Plan, access to the equity capital markets and reduced annual maintenance and capital expenditures. Cash Flows Our internally generated funds may change in the future due to a number of factors, some of which we cannot control. These include regulatory changes, the price for our products and services, the demand for such products and services, margin requirements resulting from significant changes in commodity prices, operational risks and other factors. 49 Table of Contents Cash flows from operating activities Year-over-year changes in our operating cash flows are attributable primarily to working capital changes within our utility segment resulting from the impact of weather, the price of natural gas and the timing of customer collections, payments for natural gas purchases and deferred gas cost recoveries. For the year ended September 30, 2005, we generated operating cash flow of $386.9 million compared with $270.7 million in fiscal 2004 and $49.5 million in fiscal 2003. The significant factors impacting our operating cash flow for the last three fiscal years are summarized below. Year ended September 30, 2005 Fiscal 2005 operating cash flows reflect the effects of a $49.6 million increase in net income and effective working capital management partially offset by higher natural gas prices. Working capital management efforts, which affected the timing of payments for accounts payable and other accrued liabilities, favorably affected operating cash flow by $354.1 million. However, these efforts were partially offset by reduced cash flow generated from accounts receivable changes by $168.9 million, primarily attributable to higher natural gas prices, and an increase in our natural gas inventories attributable to a 13 percent year-over-year increase in natural gas prices coupled with increased natural gas inventory levels, which reduced operating cash flow by $81.8 million. Operating cash flow was also adversely impacted by unfavorable movements in the indices used to value our natural gas marketing segment risk management assets and liabilities, which resulted in a net liability for the segment. Accordingly, under the terms of the associated derivative contracts, we were required to deposit $81.0 million into a margin account. Year ended September 30, 2004 Fiscal 2004 operating cash flows were favorably impacted by several items. Improved customer collections during fiscal 2004, compared with the prior year, resulted in a $62.2 million increase in operating cash flow. Further, cash used for natural gas inventories decreased by $33.8 million compared with the prior year. The decrease was attributable to lower injections of natural gas into storage, partially offset by higher prices. The reduction in the lag between the time period when we purchase our natural gas and the period in which we can include this cost in our gas rates improved operating cash flow by $65.7 million. Changes in cash held on deposit in margin accounts resulted in an increase in operating cash flow of $25.6 million. This account represents deposits recorded to collateralize certain of our financial derivatives purchased in support of our natural gas marketing activities. The favorable change was attributable to the fact that the fair value of financial instruments held by AEM represented a net asset position at September 30, 2004, which eliminated the need to place cash in margin accounts. Finally, other working capital and other changes improved operating cash flow by $33.9 million. These changes primarily related to various increases in deferred credits and other liabilities, other current liabilities and income taxes payable partially offset by lower deferred income tax expense as compared with the prior year. Year ended September 30, 2003 Fiscal 2003 operating cash flow was adversely impacted by a $60.0 million increase in accounts receivable due to higher revenues and the timing of customer account collections. The increase in revenues was attributable to a 19 percent increase in consolidated utility throughput as a result of the impact of our MVG acquisition. Operating cash flow was also adversely impacted by a significant increase in natural gas prices. These increases resulted in a $64.9 million increase in gas stored underground and a $24.2 million increase in deferred gas costs. Finally, operating cash flow reflects the impact of the funding of our pension plan in June 2003, which included a $48.6 million cash payment. Cash flows from investing activities During the last three years, a substantial portion of our cash resources was used to fund acquisitions, our ongoing construction program to provide natural gas services to our customer base, enhance the integrity of our pipelines and improvements to information systems. 50 Table of Contents For the year ended September 30, 2005, we incurred $333.2 million for capital expenditures compared with $190.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2004 and $159.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2003. Capital expenditures for the year ended September 30, 2005 include approximately $115.0 million for the Atmos Energy Mid-Tex Division and $31.4 million for the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division. Our cash used for investing activities for the year ended September 30, 2005 reflects the $1.9 billion cash paid for the TXU Gas acquisition including related transaction costs and expenses. Cash flow from investing activities for the year ended September 30, 2004 reflect the receipt of $27.9 million from the sale of our limited and general partnership interests in USP and Heritage Propane Partners, L.P. and from the sale of a building. Cash flows from financing activities For the year ended September 30, 2005, our financing activities provided $1.7 billion in cash compared with $80.4 million and $151.6 million provided for the years ended September 30, 2004 and 2003. Our significant financing activities for the years ended September 30, 2005, 2004 and 2003 are summarized as follows: In October 2004, we sold 16.1 million common shares, including the underwriters exercise of their overallotment option of 2.1 million shares, under a new registration statement declared effective in September 2004, generating net proceeds of $381.6 million. Additionally, we issued senior unsecured debt under the registration statement consisting of $400 million of 4.00% senior notes due 2009, $500 million of 4.95% senior notes due 2014, $200 million of 5.95% senior notes due 2034 and $300 million of floating rate senior notes due 2007. The floating rate notes bear interest at a rate equal to the three-month LIBOR rate plus 0.375 percent per year. The net proceeds received from the sale of these senior notes were $1.39 billion. The net proceeds from these issuances, combined with the net proceeds from our July 2004 offering were used to repay the approximately $1.7 billion in outstanding commercial paper backstopped by a senior unsecured revolving credit agreement, which we entered into on September 24, 2004 for bridge financing for the TXU Gas acquisition. During the year ended September 30, 2005 we borrowed a net $144.8 million under our short-term facilities whereas during the year ended September 30, 2004 and 2003, we repaid a net $118.6 million and $27.2 million under our short-term facilities. Borrowings under our short-term facilities during fiscal 2005 reflect the impact of seasonal natural gas purchases and the effect of higher natural gas prices than in prior years. Prior year repayments under our short-term facilities reflected the timing of cash receipts which enabled us to reduce our short-term debt. We repaid $103.4 million of long-term debt during the year ended September 30, 2005 compared with $9.7 million during the year ended September 30, 2004 and $73.2 million during the year ended September 30, 2003. Fiscal 2005 payments reflected the repayment of $72.5 million of our First Mortgage Bonds. In connection with this repayment we paid a $25.0 million make-whole premium in accordance with the terms of the agreements and accrued interest of approximately $1.0 million. In accordance with regulatory requirements, the premium has been deferred and will be recognized over the remaining original lives of the First Mortgage Bonds that were repaid. The early repayment of these bonds resulted in interest savings of $1.3 million in fiscal 2005 and should result in interest savings of $4.8 million in fiscal 2006. During the year ended September 30, 2005 we paid $99.0 million in cash dividends compared with dividend payments of $66.7 million and $55.3 million for the years ended September 30, 2004 and 2003. The increase in dividends paid over the prior year reflects the 17.7 million increase in the number of common shares outstanding and an increase in the dividend rate from $1.22 per share during the year ended September 30, 2004 to $1.24 per share during the year ended September 30, 2005. 51 Table of Contents During the year ended September 30, 2005 we issued 1.6 million shares of common stock through various plans in addition to the 16.1 million common shares issued in our October 2004 public offering, which generated net proceeds of $37.2 million. The following table shows the number of shares issued for the years ended September 30, 2005, 2004 and 2003: For the Year Ended September 30 2005 2004 2003 Shares issued: Direct stock purchase plan 450,212 556,856 585,743 Retirement savings plan 441,350 320,313 360,725 Long-term incentive plan 745,788 498,230 181,429 Long-term stock plan for Mid-States Division 6,000 13,000 Outside directors stock-for-fee plan 2,341 3,133 2,969 October 2004 Offering 16,100,000 July 2004 Offering 9,939,393 Acquisition of MVG 3,386,287 Pension account plan funding 1,169,700 2003 Offering 4,100,000 Total shares issued 17,739,691 11,323,925 9,799,853 Shelf Registration In December 2001, we filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to issue, from time to time, up to $600.0 million in new common stock and/or debt. The registration statement was declared effective by the SEC on January 30, 2002. On January 16, 2003, we issued $250.0 million of 5.125% Senior Notes due in 2013 under the registration statement. The net proceeds of $249.3 million were used to repay debt under an acquisition credit facility used to finance our acquisition of MVG, to repay $54.0 million in unsecured senior notes held by institutional lenders and short-term debt under our commercial paper program and for general corporate purposes. Additionally, we sold 4.1 million shares of our common stock in connection with our 2003 Offering under the registration statement to provide additional funding for our Pension Account Plan. In July 2004, we sold 9.9 million shares of our common stock, including the underwriters exercise of their overallotment option, which exhausted the remaining availability under this registration statement. In August 2004, we filed a registration statement with the SEC to issue, from time to time, up to $2.2 billion in new common stock and/or debt, which became effective on September 15, 2004. In October 2004, we sold 16.1 million common shares, including the underwriters exercise of their overallotment option of 2.1 million shares, under the new registration statement, generating net proceeds of $382.5 million before other offering costs. Additionally, we issued senior unsecured debt under the registration statement consisting of $400 million of 4.00% Senior Notes due 2009, $500 million of 4.95% Senior Notes due 2014, $200 million of 5.95% Senior Notes due 2034 and $300 million of floating rate Senior Notes due 2007. The floating rate notes bear interest at a rate equal to the three-month LIBOR rate plus 0.375 percent per year. The initial weighted average effective interest rate on these notes was 4.76 percent. The net proceeds from the sale of these senior notes were $1.39 billion. The net proceeds from the October 2004 common stock and senior notes offerings, combined with the net proceeds from our July 2004 offering were used to pay off the $1.7 billion in outstanding commercial paper backstopped by a senior unsecured revolving credit agreement, which we entered into on September 24, 2004 for bridge financing for the TXU Gas acquisition. After issuing the debt and equity in October 2004 we have approximately $401.5 million of availability remaining under this registration statement. 52 Table of Contents Credit Facilities We maintain both committed and uncommitted credit facilities. Borrowings under our uncommitted credit facilities are made on a when-and-as-needed basis at the discretion of the bank. Our credit capacity and the amount of unused borrowing capacity are affected by the seasonal nature of the natural gas business and our short-term borrowing requirements, which are typically highest during colder winter months. Our working capital needs can vary significantly due to changes in the price of natural gas charged by suppliers and the increased gas supplies required to meet customers needs during periods of cold weather. Our cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures have increased substantially as a result of the acquisition of the natural gas distribution and pipeline operations of TXU Gas. On October 22, 2004, we replaced our $350.0 million credit facility with a new $600.0 million committed credit facility that serves as a backup liquidity facility for our commercial paper program. We believe this facility, combined with our operating cash flow will be sufficient to fund these increased working capital needs. On March 30, 2005, AEM amended and extended its uncommitted demand working capital credit facility to March 31, 2006. At September 30, 2005, there was $129.9 million outstanding under our commercial paper program and $14.9 million outstanding under our bank credit facilities. These facilities are described in further detail in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. In anticipation of increased short-term liquidity needs due to the recent increases in natural gas prices, we worked with our regulators, who approved an increase in the amounts available to our utility operations under short-term credit facilities to $968.0 million, consisting of a new $600.0 million 3-year revolving credit facility to replace our existing $600.0 million 364-day credit facility that expired in October 2005, a new $300.0 million 364-day revolving credit facility, a new $25.0 million uncommitted facility and our existing $25.0 million uncommitted and $18.0 million committed credit facilities. Additionally, we are working with our lenders to obtain up to an additional $330.0 million of capacity under our uncommitted demand working capital credit facility to provide additional short-term liquidity to support our natural gas marketing operations. Credit Ratings Our credit ratings directly affect our ability to obtain short-term and long-term financing, in addition to the cost of such financing. In determining our credit ratings, the rating agencies consider a number of quantitative factors, including debt to total capitalization, operating cash flow relative to outstanding debt, operating cash flow coverage of interest and pension liabilities and funding status. In addition, the rating agencies consider qualitative factors such as consistency of our earnings over time, the quality of our management and business strategy, the risks associated with our utility and nonutility businesses and the regulatory structures that govern our rates in the states where we operate. Our debt is rated by three rating agencies: Standard & Poor Corporation, Moody Investors Service and Fitch Ratings, Inc. Our current debt ratings are all considered investment grade and are as follows: S&P Moody Fitch Long-term debt BBB Baa3 BBB+ Commercial paper A-2 P-3 F-2 Currently, S&P and Moody maintain a stable outlook and Fitch maintains a negative outlook. None of our ratings are currently under review. A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. All of our current ratings for long-term debt are categorized as investment grade. The highest investment grade credit rating for S&P is AAA, Moody is Aaa and Fitch is AAA. The lowest investment grade credit rating for S&P is BBB-, Moody is Baa3 and Fitch is BBB-. Our credit ratings may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agencies, and each rating should be evaluated independent of any other rating. There can be no assurance that a rating will remain in effect for any given period of time or that a rating will not be lowered, or withdrawn entirely, by a rating agency if, in its judgment, circumstances so warrant. 53 Table of Contents Debt Covenants We are required by the financial covenants in both of our revolving credit facilities to maintain, at the end of each fiscal quarter, a ratio of total debt to total capitalization of no greater than 70 percent. At September 30, 2005, our total-debt-to-total-capitalization ratio, as defined in such facility, was 61 percent. AEM is required by the financial covenants in its uncommitted demand working capital facility to maintain a maximum ratio of total liabilities to tangible net worth of 5 to 1, along with minimum levels of net working capital ranging from $20 million to $50 million. Additionally, AEM must maintain a minimum tangible net worth ranging from $21 million to $51 million, and its maximum cumulative loss from March 30, 2005 cannot exceed $4 million to $10 million, depending on the total amount of borrowing elected from time to time by AEM. At September 30, 2005, AEM ratio of total liabilities to tangible net worth, as defined in such facility, was 2.18 to 1. Our Series P First Mortgage Bonds provide for certain cash flow requirements and restrictions on additional indebtedness, sale of assets and payment of dividends. Under the most restrictive of such covenants, cumulative cash dividends paid after December 31, 1985 may not exceed the sum of our accumulated net income for periods after December 31, 1985 plus $9.0 million. At September 30, 2005, approximately $157.9 million of retained earnings was unrestricted with respect to the payment of dividends. We were in compliance with all of our debt covenants as of September 30, 2005. If we do not comply with our debt covenants, we may be required to repay our outstanding balances on demand, provide additional collateral or take other corrective actions. Our two public debt indentures relating to our senior notes and debentures, as well as our two revolving credit agreements, each contain a default provision that is triggered if outstanding indebtedness arising out of any other credit agreements in amounts ranging from in excess of $15 million to in excess of $100 million becomes due by acceleration or is not paid at maturity. In addition, AEM credit agreement contains a cross-default provision whereby AEM would be in default if it defaults on other indebtedness, as defined, by at least $250 thousand in the aggregate. Additionally, this agreement contains a provision that would limit the amount of credit available if Atmos were downgraded below an S&P rating of BBB and a Moody rating of Baa2. Except as described above, we have no triggering events in our debt instruments that are tied to changes in specified credit ratings or stock price, nor have we entered into any transactions that would require us to issue equity based on our credit rating or other triggering events. 54 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments The following tables provide information about contractual obligations and commercial commitments at September 30, 2005. Payments Due by Period Less Than More Than Total 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years 5 Years (In thousands) Contractual Obligations Long-term debt (1) $ 2,190,142 $ 3,264 $ 307,017 $ 403,415 $ 1,476,446 Short-term debt (1) 144,809 144,809 Interest charges 1,155,103 118,488 222,554 191,500 622,561 Gas purchase commitments (2) 1,275,427 890,856 319,141 25,491 39,939 Capital lease obligations (3) 3,404 631 795 602 1,376 Operating leases (3) 163,434 15,327 29,461 26,193 92,453 Demand fees for contracted storage (4) 15,037 7,440 6,218 1,068 311 Derivative obligations (5) 77,236 61,920 15,316 Postretirement benefit plan contributions (6) 164,455 14,896 24,477 29,162 95,920 Total contractual obligations $ 5,189,047 $ 1,257,631 $ 924,979 $ 677,431 $ 2,329,006 (1) See Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements. (2) Gas purchase commitments were determined based upon contractually determined volumes at prices estimated based upon the index specified in the contract, adjusted for estimated basis differentials and contractual discounts as of September 30, 2005. (3) See Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements. (4) Represents third party contractual demand fees for contracted storage in our natural gas marketing and other utility segments. Contractual demand fees for contracted storage for our utility segment are excluded as these costs are fully recoverable through our purchase gas adjustment mechanisms. (5) Represents liabilities for natural gas commodity derivative contracts that were valued as of September 30, 2005. The ultimate settlement amounts of these remaining liabilities are unknown because they are subject to continuing market risk. (6) Represents expected contributions to our postretirement benefit plans. AEM has commitments to purchase physical quantities of natural gas under contracts indexed to the forward NYMEX strip or fixed price contracts. At September 30, 2005, AEM was committed to purchase 32.3 Bcf within one year, 29.2 Bcf between one to three years and 9.9 Bcf after three years under indexed contracts. AEM was committed to purchase 1.3 Bcf within one year and 0.4 Bcf within one to three years under fixed price contracts with prices ranging from $5.24 to $17.50. With the exception of our Mid-Tex Division, our utility segment maintains supply contracts with several vendors that generally cover a period of up to one year. Commitments for estimated base gas volumes are established under these contracts on a monthly basis at contractually negotiated prices. Commitments for incremental daily purchases are made as necessary during the month in accordance with the terms of the individual contract. Our Mid-Tex Division maintains long-term supply contracts to ensure a reliable source of gas for our customers in its service area which obligate it to purchase specified volumes at market prices. The estimated commitments under these contract terms as of September 30, 2005 are reflected in the table above. In January 2005, we signed a letter of intent with a third party to jointly construct, own and operate a 45-mile large diameter natural gas pipeline in the northern portion of the Dallas/ Fort Worth Metroplex. Under terms of the letter of intent, the third party will provide the initial capital to build the pipeline and we expect to contribute $45.0 million within two years of signing a definitive agreement. We expect to execute 55 Table of Contents this agreement during the first quarter of fiscal 2006 and the pipeline is currently expected to be placed into service in fiscal 2006. Additionally, during the third quarter of 2005, we entered into two agreements with third parties to transport natural gas through our Texas intrastate pipeline system beginning in fiscal 2006. To handle the increased volumes for these projects, we will install compression equipment and other pipeline infrastructure. We expect to spend approximately $32.0 million in 2006 for these projects. Risk Management Activities We conduct risk management activities through both our utility and natural gas marketing segments. In our utility segment, we use a combination of storage, fixed physical contracts and fixed financial contracts to partially insulate us and our customers against gas price volatility during the winter heating season. In our natural gas marketing segment, we manage our exposure to the risk of natural gas price changes and lock in our gross profit margin through a combination of storage and financial derivatives, including futures, over-the-counter and exchange-traded options and swap contracts with counterparties. Finally, during fiscal 2004, we entered into four Treasury lock agreements to fix the Treasury yield component of the interest cost of financing associated with the anticipated issuance of $875 million of long-term debt. These Treasury lock agreements were settled in October 2004 with a net $43.8 million payment to the counterparties. Approximately $11.6 million of the $43.8 million obligation will be recognized as a component of interest expense over a five year period from the date of settlement, and the remaining amount, approximately $32.2 million, will be recognized as a component of interest expense over a ten year period from the date of settlement. Our risk management activities and related accounting treatment are described in further detail in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. We record our derivatives as a component of risk management assets and liabilities, which are classified as current or noncurrent based upon the anticipated settlement date of the underlying derivative. Substantially all of our derivative financial instruments are valued using external market quotes and indices. The following table shows the components of the change in fair value of our utility and natural gas marketing derivative contract activities for the year ended September 30, 2005 (in thousands): Natural Gas Utility Marketing Fair value of contracts at September 30, 2004 $ (8,612 ) $ 13,018 Contracts realized/settled (43,233 ) (24,589 ) Fair value of new contracts (18,998 ) Other changes in value 164,153 (50,327 ) Fair value of contracts at September 30, 2005 $ 93,310 $ (61,898 ) The fair value of our utility and natural gas marketing derivative contracts at September 30, 2005, is segregated below by time period and fair value source. Fair Value of Contracts at September 30, 2005 Maturity in Years Less Greater Total Fair Source of Fair Value Than 1 1-3 4-5 Than 5 Value (In thousands) Prices actively quoted $ 44,039 $ (14,795 ) $ $ $ 29,244 Prices provided by other external sources 2,021 723 2,744 Prices based on models and other valuation methods (67 ) (509 ) (576 ) Total Fair Value $ 45,993 $ (14,581 ) $ $ $ 31,412 56 Table of Contents Storage and Hedging Outlook AEM participates in transactions in which it seeks to find and profit from pricing differences that occur over time. AEM purchases physical natural gas and then sells financial contracts at favorable prices to lock in gross profit margins. AEM is able to capture gross profit margin through the arbitrage of pricing differences in various locations and by recognizing pricing differences that occur over time. Natural gas inventory is marked to market monthly using the iFERC price at the end of each month with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses in the period of change. Derivatives associated with our natural gas inventory, which are designated as fair value hedges, are marked to market each month based upon the NYMEX price with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses in the period of change. The changes in the difference between the indices used to mark to market our physical inventory (iFERC) and the related fair-value hedge (NYMEX) is reported as a component of revenue and can result in volatility in our reported net income. Over time, gains and losses on the sale of storage gas inventory will be offset by gains and losses on the fair-value hedges; therefore, the economic gross profit AEM captured in the original transaction remains essentially unchanged. AEM continually manages its positions to enhance the future economic profit it captured in the original transaction. Therefore, AEM may change its scheduled injection and withdrawal plans from one time period to another based on market conditions or adjust the amount of storage capacity it holds on a discretionary basis in an effort to achieve this objective. AEM monitors the impacts of these profit optimization efforts by estimating the forecasted gross profit margin that it captured through the purchase and sale of physical natural gas and the associated financial derivatives. The forecasted gross profit margin, less the effect of unrealized gains or losses recognized in the financial statements, provides a measure of the net increase or decrease in the gross profit margin that could occur in future periods if AEM optimization efforts are fully successful. As of September 30, 2005, based upon AEM derivatives position and inventory withdrawal schedule, the forecasted gross profit margin was approximately $13.0 million. Approximately $14.8 million of net unrealized losses were recorded in the financial statements as of September 30, 2005. Therefore, the projected increase in future gross profit margin is approximately $27.8 million. The forecasted gross profit margin calculation is based upon planned injection and withdrawal schedules, and the realization of the forecasted gross profit margin is contingent upon the execution of this plan, weather and other execution factors. Since AEM actively manages and optimizes its portfolio to enhance the future profitability of its storage position, it may change its scheduled injection and withdrawal plans from one time period to another based on market conditions. Therefore, we cannot assure that the forecasted gross profit margin or the projected increase in future gross profit margin calculated as of September 30, 2005 will be fully realized in the future or in what time period. Further, if we experience operational or other issues which limit our ability to optimally manage our stored gas positions, permanent impacts on earnings may result. Pension and Postretirement Benefits Obligations Net Periodic Pension and Postretirement Benefit Costs For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2005, our total net periodic pension and other benefits costs was $36.4 million, compared with $26.1 million and $28.0 million for the years ended September 30, 2004 and 2003. A portion of these costs is capitalized into our utility rate base, as these costs are recoverable through our gas utility rates. Costs that are not capitalized are recorded as a component of operation and maintenance expense. The increase in total net periodic pension and other benefits cost during fiscal 2005 compared with the prior year primarily reflects an increase in our service cost associated with the increase in the number of employees covered by our plans due to the TXU Gas acquisition. Although we did not assume the existing employee benefit liabilities or plans of TXU Gas, for purposes of determining our annual pension cost we agreed to give the transitioned employees credit for years of TXU Gas service under our pension plan. With respect to our postretirement medical plan, we received a credit of $18.9 million against the purchase price to permit us to provide partial past service credits for retiree medical benefits under our retiree medical plan. The 57 Table of Contents $18.9 million credit approximates the actuarially determined present value of the accumulated benefits related to the past service of the transferred employees on the acquisition date. In addition to the increased number of employees covered by the plans, we changed the assumptions used to determine our fiscal 2005 benefit costs, which resulted in an increase in our net periodic pension and postretirement costs. We increased the discount rate by 25 basis points and we reduced our expected return on our pension plan assets by 25 basis points. These assumption changes decreased the service cost and interest cost and reduced the expected return components of our pension and postretirement benefits costs. The decrease in total net periodic pension and other benefits cost during fiscal 2004 compared with fiscal 2003 primarily reflects the impact of adopting the provisions of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 (the Act), beginning with the second quarter of 2004, which reduced our accumulated postretirement benefit obligation by $24.3 million and our net postretirement benefit obligation costs by $4.1 million. The total income statement impact was $2.3 million as a portion of this benefit was capitalized. Further, the expected return on plan assets, which reduces our net pension and postretirement costs, increased as compared with the prior year primarily due to an increase in total assets attributable to the full year effect of the contributions we made to the Atmos Pension Account Plan in fiscal 2003 and the inclusion of the MVG pension plan assets during fiscal 2003 partially offset by a 25 basis point decrease in the expected return on plan asset assumption used to determine fiscal 2004 net periodic pension cost. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in the service cost and the recognized actuarial loss attributable to a 125 basis point decrease in the discount rate used to determine our fiscal 2004 net periodic pension and other benefits costs compared with the discount rate used to determine our fiscal 2003 costs, resulting from a decrease in interest rates in the period leading up to our June 30 measurement date. Pension and Postretirement Plan Funding Generally, our funding policy is to contribute annually an amount in accordance with the requirements of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. However, additional voluntary contributions are made from time to time as considered necessary. Contributions are intended to provide not only for benefits attributed to service to date but also for those expected to be earned in the future. During fiscal 2005, we voluntarily contributed $3.0 million to the Atmos Energy Corporation Master Retirement Trust (the Trust) to maintain the level of funding we desire relative to our accumulated benefit obligation. We elected to contribute to the Trust because declining high yield corporate bond yields in the period leading up to our June 30, 2005 measurement date resulted in an increase in the present value of our plan liabilities. In June 2003, we contributed to the Trust for the benefit of the Atmos Energy Corporation Pension Account Plan $48.6 million in cash and 1,169,700 shares of Atmos restricted common stock with the-then market value of $28.8 million. We did not contribute to our pension plans during fiscal 2004. We contributed $10.0 million, $13.8 million and $18.6 million to our postretirement benefits plans for the years ended September 30, 2005, 2004 and 2003. The contributions represent the portion of the postretirement costs we are responsible for under the terms of our plan and minimum funding required by our regulators. Outlook for Fiscal 2006 As noted above, high grade corporate bond yields were decreasing in the period leading up to our June 30, 2005 measurement date. Therefore, we reduced the discount rate for determining our fiscal 2006 pension and benefit costs by 125 basis points to 5 percent. Additionally, we reduced the expected return on our pension plan assets by 25 basis points to 8.5 percent. The effect of these assumption changes, coupled with the effects of updating our annual valuation will result in an increase in our net pension and postretirement costs of approximately $15 million. 58 Table of Contents We are not required to make a minimum funding contribution to our pension plans during fiscal 2006 nor, at this time, do we intend to make voluntary contributions during 2006. However, we anticipate contributing approximately $11.9 million to our postretirement medical plans during fiscal 2006. The projected pension liability, future funding requirements and the amount of pension expense or income recognized for the Plan are subject to change, depending upon the actuarial value of plan assets and the determination of future benefit obligations as of each subsequent actuarial calculation date. These amounts are impacted by actual investment returns, changes in interest rates and changes in the demographic composition of the participants in the plan. RECENT ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS Recent accounting developments and their impact on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows are described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. 
