CIK: 731802
Company Name: ATMOS ENERGY CORP
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-11-19


ITEM 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. INTRODUCTION This section provides management discussion of the financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations of Atmos Energy Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries with specific information on results of operations and liquidity and capital resources. It includes management interpretation of our financial results, the factors affecting these results, the major factors expected to affect future operating results and future investment and financing plans. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. Several factors exist that could influence our future financial performance, some of which are described in Item 1A above, Risk Factors . They should be considered in connection with evaluating forward-looking statements contained in this report or otherwise made by or on behalf of us since these factors could cause actual results and conditions to differ materially from those set out in such forward-looking statements. Cautionary Statement for the Purposes of the Safe Harbor under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 The statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report are forward-looking statements made in good faith by us and are intended to qualify for the safe harbor from liability established by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. When used in this Report, or any other of our documents or oral presentations, the words anticipate , believe , estimate , expect , forecast , goal , intend , objective , plan , projection , seek , strategy or similar words are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the statements relating to our strategy, operations, markets, services, rates, recovery of costs, availability of gas supply and other factors. These risks and uncertainties include the following: our ability to continue to access the credit markets to satisfy our liquidity requirements; the impact of recent economic conditions on our customers; increased costs of providing pension and postretirement health care benefits and increased funding requirements; market risks beyond our control affecting our risk management activities including market liquidity, commodity price volatility, increasing interest rates and counterparty creditworthiness; regulatory trends and decisions, including the impact of rate proceedings before various state regulatory commissions; increased federal regulatory oversight and potential penalties; the impact of environmental regulations on our business; the concentration of our distribution, pipeline and storage operations in Texas; adverse weather conditions; the effects of inflation and changes in the availability and price of natural gas; the capital-intensive nature of our gas distribution business; increased competition from energy suppliers and alternative forms of energy; the inherent hazards and risks involved in operating our gas distribution business, natural disasters, terrorist activities or other events, and other risks and uncertainties discussed herein, especially those discussed in Item 1A above, all of which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control. Accordingly, while we believe these forward-looking statements to be reasonable, there can be no assurance that they will approximate actual experience or that the expectations derived from them will be realized. Further, we undertake no obligation to update or revise any of our forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES Our consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We based our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to risk management and trading activities, allowance for doubtful 34 Table of Contents accounts, legal and environmental accruals, insurance accruals, pension and postretirement obligations, deferred income taxes and valuation of goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets. Our critical accounting policies are reviewed by the Audit Committee quarterly. Actual results may differ from estimates. Regulation Our natural gas distribution and regulated transmission and storage operations are subject to regulation with respect to rates, service, maintenance of accounting records and various other matters by the respective regulatory authorities in the states in which we operate. Our regulated operations are accounted for in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 71, Accounting for the Effects of Certain Types of Regulation . This statement requires cost-based, rate-regulated entities that meet certain criteria to reflect the financial effects of the ratemaking and accounting practices and policies of the various regulatory commissions in their financial statements. We record regulatory assets for costs that have been deferred for which future recovery through customer rates is considered probable. Regulatory liabilities are recorded when it is probable that revenues will be reduced for amounts that will be credited to customers through the ratemaking process. As a result, certain costs that would normally be expensed under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States are permitted to be capitalized or deferred on the balance sheet because they can be recovered through rates. Discontinuing the application of SFAS 71 could significantly increase our operating expenses as fewer costs would likely be capitalized or deferred on the balance sheet, which could reduce our net income. Further, regulation may impact the period in which revenues or expenses are recognized. The amounts to be recovered or recognized are based upon historical experience and our understanding of the regulations. The impact of regulation on our natural gas distribution operations may be affected by decisions of the regulatory authorities or the issuance of new regulations. Revenue recognition Sales of natural gas to our natural gas distribution customers are billed on a monthly basis; however, the billing cycle periods for certain classes of customers do not necessarily coincide with accounting periods used for financial reporting purposes. We follow the revenue accrual method of accounting for natural gas distribution segment revenues whereby revenues applicable to gas delivered to customers, but not yet billed under the cycle billing method, are estimated and accrued and the related costs are charged to expense. On occasion, we are permitted to implement new rates that have not been formally approved by our regulatory authorities, which are subject to refund. As permitted by SFAS No. 71, we recognize this revenue and establish a reserve for amounts that could be refunded based on our experience for the jurisdiction in which the rates were implemented. Rates established by regulatory authorities are adjusted for increases and decreases in our purchased gas costs through purchased gas adjustment mechanisms. Purchased gas adjustment mechanisms provide gas utility companies a method of recovering purchased gas costs on an ongoing basis without filing a rate case to address all of the utility company non-gas costs. These mechanisms are commonly utilized when regulatory authorities recognize a particular type of cost, such as purchased gas costs, that (i) is subject to significant price fluctuations compared to the utility company other costs, (ii) represents a large component of the utility company cost of service and (iii) is generally outside the control of the gas utility company. There is no gross profit generated through purchased gas adjustments, but they provide a dollar-for-dollar offset to increases or decreases in utility gas costs. Although substantially all natural gas distribution sales to our customers fluctuate with the cost of gas that we purchase, our gross profit is generally not affected by fluctuations in the cost of gas as a result of the purchased gas adjustment mechanism. The effects of these purchased gas adjustment mechanisms are recorded as deferred gas costs on our balance sheet. Operating revenues for our regulated transmission and storage and pipeline, storage and other segments are recognized in the period in which actual volumes are transported and storage services are provided. Operating revenues for our natural gas marketing segment and the associated carrying value of natural gas inventory (inclusive of storage costs) are recognized when we sell the gas and physically deliver it to our customers. Operating revenues include realized gains and losses arising from the settlement of financial instruments used in our natural gas marketing activities and unrealized gains and losses arising from changes 35 Table of Contents in the fair value of natural gas inventory designated as a hedged item in a fair value hedge and the associated financial instruments. Allowance for doubtful accounts Accounts receivable consist of natural gas sales to residential, commercial, industrial, municipal and other customers. For the majority of our receivables, we establish an allowance for doubtful accounts based on our collections experience. On certain other receivables where we are aware of a specific customer inability or reluctance to pay, we record an allowance for doubtful accounts against amounts due to reduce the net receivable balance to the amount we reasonably expect to collect. However, if circumstances change, our estimate of the recoverability of accounts receivable could be affected. Circumstances which could affect our estimates include, but are not limited to, customer credit issues, the level of natural gas prices, customer deposits and general economic conditions. Accounts are written off once they are deemed to be uncollectible. Financial instruments and hedging activities We currently use financial instruments to mitigate commodity price risk. Additionally, we periodically use financial instruments to manage interest rate risk. The objectives and strategies for using financial instruments have been tailored to meet the needs of our regulated and nonregulated businesses. We record all of our financial instruments on the balance sheet at fair value as required by SFAS 133, Accounting for Derivatives and Hedging Activities, with changes in fair value ultimately recorded in the income statement. We determine fair values primarily through prices actively quoted on national exchanges, which we believe correspond to the market in which transactions involving these financial instruments are executed. We utilize models and other valuation methods to determine fair value in those limited circumstances where external sources are not available. Values are adjusted accordingly to reflect the potential impact of an orderly liquidation of our positions over a reasonable period of time under then current market conditions. Amounts reported at fair value are subject to potentially significant volatility based upon changes in market prices, the valuation of the portfolio of our contracts, maturity and settlement of these contracts and newly originated transactions, each of which directly affect the estimated fair value of our financial instruments. We believe the market prices and models used to value these financial instruments represent the best information available with respect to closing exchange and over-the-counter quotations, time value and volatility factors underlying the contracts. Values are adjusted to reflect the potential impact of an orderly liquidation of our positions over a reasonable period of time under then current market conditions. Fair value estimates also consider the creditworthiness of our counterparties. Our counterparties consist primarily of financial institutions and major energy companies. This concentration of counterparties may materially impact our exposure to credit risk resulting from market, economic or regulatory conditions. Recent adverse developments in the global financial and credit markets have made it more difficult and more expensive for companies to access the short-term capital markets, which may negatively impact the creditworthiness of our counterparties. We seek to minimize counterparty credit risk through an evaluation of their financial condition and credit ratings and collateral requirements under certain circumstances, including the use of master netting agreements in our natural gas marketing segment. The timing of when changes in fair value of our financial instruments are recorded in the income statement depends on whether the financial instrument has been designated and qualifies as a part of a hedging relationship or if regulatory rulings require a different accounting treatment. Changes in fair value for financial instruments that do not meet one of these criteria are recognized in the income statement as they occur. Financial Instruments Associated with Commodity Price Risk In our natural gas distribution segment, our customers are exposed to the effect of volatile natural gas prices. We manage this exposure through a combination of physical storage, fixed-price forward contracts and financial instruments, primarily over-the-counter swap and option contracts, in an effort to minimize the impact of natural gas price volatility on our customers during the winter heating season. The costs associated with and the gains and losses arising from the use of financial instruments to mitigate commodity price risk in this segment are included in our purchased gas adjustment mechanisms in accordance with regulatory requirements. Therefore, changes in the fair value of these financial instruments are initially recorded as a 36 Table of Contents component of deferred gas costs and recognized in the consolidated statement of income as a component of purchased gas cost when the related costs are recovered through our rates and recognized in revenue in accordance with SFAS 71. Accordingly, there is no earnings impact to our natural gas distribution segment as a result of the use of financial instruments. Our natural gas marketing segment aggregates and purchases gas supply, arranges transportation and/or storage logistics and ultimately delivers gas to our customers at competitive prices. We also perform asset optimization activities in both our natural gas marketing segment and pipeline, storage and other segment. As a result of these activities, our nonregulated operations are exposed to risks associated with changes in the market price of natural gas. We manage our exposure to the risk of natural gas price changes through a combination of physical storage and financial instruments, including futures, over-the-counter and exchange-traded options and swap contracts with counterparties. In our natural gas marketing and pipeline, storage and other segments, we have designated the natural gas inventory held by these operating segments as the hedged item in a fair-value hedge. This inventory is marked to market at the end of each month based on the Gas Daily index, with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains or losses in revenue in the period of change. The financial instruments associated with this natural gas inventory have been designated as fair-value hedges and are marked to market each month based upon the NYMEX price with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains or losses in revenue in the period of change. Changes in the spreads between the forward natural gas prices used to value the financial instruments designated against our physical inventory (NYMEX) and the market (spot) prices used to value our physical storage (Gas Daily) result in unrealized margins until the underlying physical gas is withdrawn and the related financial instruments are settled. The difference in the spot price used to value our physical inventory and the forward price used to value the related financial instruments can result in volatility in our reported income as a component of unrealized margins. We have elected to exclude this spot/forward differential for purposes of assessing the effectiveness of these fair-value hedges. Once the gas is withdrawn and the financial instruments are settled, the previously unrealized margins associated with these net positions are realized. Over time, we expect gains and losses on the sale of storage gas inventory to be offset by gains and losses on the fair-value hedges, resulting in the realization of the economic gross profit margin we anticipated at the time we structured the original transaction. We have elected to treat fixed-price forward contracts used in our natural gas marketing segment to deliver gas as normal purchases and normal sales. As such, these deliveries are recorded on an accrual basis in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. Financial instruments used to mitigate the commodity price risk associated with these contracts have been designated as cash flow hedges of anticipated purchases and sales at indexed prices. Accordingly, unrealized gains and losses on open financial instruments are recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income and are recognized in earnings as a component of revenue when the hedged volumes are sold. Hedge ineffectiveness, to the extent incurred, is reported as a component of revenue. We also use storage swaps and futures to capture additional storage arbitrage opportunities in our natural gas marketing segment that arise after the execution of the original fair value hedge associated with our physical natural gas inventory, basis swaps to insulate and protect the economic value of our fixed price and storage books and various over-the-counter and exchange-traded options. These financial instruments have not been designated as hedges in accordance with SFAS 133. Financial Instruments Associated with Interest Rate Risk We periodically manage interest rate risk, typically when we issue new or refinance existing long-term debt. Currently, we do not have any financial instruments in place to manage interest rate risk. However, in prior years, we entered into Treasury lock agreements to fix the Treasury yield component of the interest cost associated with anticipated financings. We designated these Treasury lock agreements as a cash flow hedge of an anticipated transaction at the time the agreements were executed. Accordingly, unrealized gains and losses associated with the Treasury lock agreements were recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). The realized gain or loss recognized upon settlement of each Treasury lock agreement was 37 Table of Contents initially recorded as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and is recognized as a component of interest expense over the life of the related financing arrangement. Impairment assessments We perform impairment assessments of our goodwill, intangible assets subject to amortization and long-lived assets. We currently have no indefinite-lived intangible assets. We annually evaluate our goodwill balances for impairment during our second fiscal quarter or as impairment indicators arise. We use a present value technique based on discounted cash flows to estimate the fair value of our reporting units. We have determined our reporting units to be each of our natural gas distribution divisions and wholly-owned subsidiaries and goodwill is allocated to the reporting units responsible for the acquisition that gave rise to the goodwill. The discounted cash flow calculations used to assess goodwill impairment are dependent on several subjective factors including the timing of future cash flows, future growth rates and the discount rate. An impairment charge is recognized if the carrying value of a reporting unit goodwill exceeds its fair value. We annually assess whether the cost of our intangible assets subject to amortization or other long-lived assets is recoverable or that the remaining useful lives may warrant revision. We perform this assessment more frequently when specific events or circumstances have occurred that suggest the recoverability of the cost of the intangible and other long-lived assets is at risk. When such events or circumstances are present, we assess the recoverability of these assets by determining whether the carrying value will be recovered through expected future cash flows from the operating division or subsidiary to which these assets relate. These cash flow projections consider various factors such as the timing of the future cash flows and the discount rate and are based upon the best information available at the time the estimate is made. Changes in these factors could materially affect the cash flow projections and result in the recognition of an impairment charge. An impairment charge is recognized as the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value if the sum of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value of the related asset. Pension and other postretirement plans Pension and other postretirement plan costs and liabilities are determined on an actuarial basis and are affected by numerous assumptions and estimates including the market value of plan assets, estimates of the expected return on plan assets, assumed discount rates and current demographic and actuarial mortality data. Through fiscal 2008, we reviewed the estimates and assumptions underlying our pension and other postretirement plan costs and liabilities annually based upon a June 30 measurement date. Effective October 1, 2008, we changed our measurement date to September 30. The assumed discount rate and the expected return are the assumptions that generally have the most significant impact on our pension costs and liabilities. The assumed discount rate, the assumed health care cost trend rate and assumed rates of retirement generally have the most significant impact on our postretirement plan costs and liabilities. The discount rate is utilized principally in calculating the actuarial present value of our pension and postretirement obligations and net pension and postretirement costs. When establishing our discount rate, we consider high quality corporate bond rates based on Moody Aa bond index, changes in those rates from the prior year and the implied discount rate that is derived from matching our projected benefit disbursements with a high quality corporate bond spot rate curve. The expected long-term rate of return on assets is utilized in calculating the expected return on plan assets component of our annual pension and postretirement plan costs. We estimate the expected return on plan assets by evaluating expected bond returns, equity risk premiums, asset allocations, the effects of active plan management, the impact of periodic plan asset rebalancing and historical performance. We also consider the guidance from our investment advisors in making a final determination of our expected rate of return on assets. To the extent the actual rate of return on assets realized over the course of a year is greater than or less than the assumed rate, that year annual pension or postretirement plan costs are not affected. Rather, this gain or loss reduces or increases future pension or postretirement plan costs over a period of approximately ten to twelve years. 38 Table of Contents We estimate the assumed health care cost trend rate used in determining our postretirement net expense based upon our actual health care cost experience, the effects of recently enacted legislation and general economic conditions. Our assumed rate of retirement is estimated based upon our annual review of our participant census information as of the measurement date. Actual changes in the fair market value of plan assets and differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets could have a material effect on the amount of pension costs ultimately recognized. A 0.25 percent change in our discount rate would impact our pension and postretirement costs by approximately $0.9 million. A 0.25 percent change in our expected rate of return would impact our pension and postretirement costs by approximately $0.9 million. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview Atmos Energy Corporation is involved in the distribution, marketing and transportation of natural gas. Accordingly, our results of operations are impacted by the demand for natural gas, particularly during the winter heating season, and the volatility of the natural gas markets. This generally results in higher operating revenues and net income during the period from October through March of each fiscal year and lower operating revenues and either lower net income or net losses during the period from April through September of each fiscal year. As a result of the seasonality of the natural gas industry, our second fiscal quarter has historically been our most critical earnings quarter with an average of approximately 62 percent of our consolidated net income having been earned in the second quarter during the three most recently completed fiscal years. Additionally, the seasonality of our business impacts our working capital differently at various times during the year. Typically, our accounts receivable, accounts payable and short-term debt balances peak by the end of January and then start to decline, as customers begin to pay their winter heating bills. Gas stored underground, particularly in our natural gas distribution segment, typically peaks in November and declines as we utilize storage gas to serve our customers. During the current year, prices for several world energy commodities rose to historic levels, most significantly seen in unprecedented oil prices. While natural gas prices did not reach historic levels, they were impacted by financial speculators and large hedge fund trading, particularly during the summer months. As a result, our natural gas distribution segment cost of natural gas per Mcf sold increased 12 percent to $9.05 for the current fiscal year compared with $8.09 in the prior fiscal year. Despite these higher prices, we experienced lower price volatility, which reduced our natural gas marketing segment opportunity to earn arbitrage gains. Although gas costs do not directly impact our natural gas distribution gross profit margin, higher natural gas prices could cause our natural gas distribution customers and customers served by our other operating segments to conserve, or in the case of industrial customers, switch to less expensive fuel sources. Further, higher natural gas prices may adversely impact our accounts receivable collections, resulting in higher bad debt expense, and may require us to increase borrowings under our credit facilities resulting in higher interest expense. We normally access the commercial paper markets to finance our working capital needs and growth. However, recent adverse developments in global financial and credit markets have made it more difficult and more expensive for the Company to access the short-term capital markets, including the commercial paper market, to satisfy our liquidity requirements. Despite these conditions, we believe the amounts available to us under our credit facilities coupled with our operating cash flows will provide the necessary liquidity to fund our working capital needs for fiscal year 2009. 39 Table of Contents Consolidated Results The following table presents our consolidated financial highlights for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008, 2007 and 2006. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 2006 (In thousands, except per share data) Operating revenues $ 7,221,305 $ 5,898,431 $ 6,152,363 Gross profit 1,321,326 1,250,082 1,216,570 Operating expenses 893,431 851,446 833,954 Operating income 427,895 398,636 382,616 Miscellaneous income 2,731 9,184 881 Interest charges 137,922 145,236 146,607 Income before income taxes 292,704 262,584 236,890 Income tax expense 112,373 94,092 89,153 Net income $ 180,331 $ 168,492 $ 147,737 Earnings per diluted share $ 2.00 $ 1.92 $ 1.82 Historically, our regulated operations arising from our natural gas distribution and regulated transmission and storage operations contributed 65 to 85 percent of our consolidated net income. Regulated operations contributed 74 percent, 64 percent and 54 percent to our consolidated net income for fiscal years 2008, 2007, and 2006. Our consolidated net income during the last three fiscal years was earned across our business segments as follows: For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 2006 (In thousands) Natural gas distribution segment $ 92,648 $ 73,283 $ 53,002 Regulated transmission and storage segment 41,425 34,590 26,547 Natural gas marketing segment 29,989 45,769 58,566 Pipeline, storage and other segment 16,269 14,850 9,622 Net income $ 180,331 $ 168,492 $ 147,737 The following table segregates our consolidated net income and diluted earnings per share between our regulated and nonregulated operations: For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 2006 (In thousands, except per share data) Regulated operations $ 134,073 $ 107,873 $ 79,549 Nonregulated operations 46,258 60,619 68,188 Consolidated net income $ 180,331 $ 168,492 $ 147,737 Diluted EPS from regulated operations $ 1.49 $ 1.23 $ 0.98 Diluted EPS from nonregulated operations 0.51 0.69 0.84 Consolidated diluted EPS $ 2.00 $ 1.92 $ 1.82 Year-over-year, net income during fiscal 2008 increased seven percent. Net income from our regulated operations increased 24 percent during fiscal 2008. The increase primarily reflects a net $53.8 million increase in gross profit resulting from our ratemaking efforts, coupled with higher per-unit transportation margins and an 18 percent increase in consolidated throughput in our Atmos Pipeline Texas Division. These increases were partially offset by a four percent increase in operating expenses. Net income in our nonregulated 40 Table of Contents operations experienced a 24 percent decline as less volatile natural gas market conditions significantly reduced our asset optimization margins. However, higher delivered gas margins in our natural gas marketing segment and unrealized margins partially offset this decrease. The 14 percent year-over-year increase in net income during fiscal 2007 reflects improvements across all business segments. Results from our regulated operations reflect the net favorable impact of various ratemaking rulings in our natural gas distribution segment, including the implementation of WNA in our Mid-Tex and Louisiana Divisions coupled with increased throughput and incremental gross profit margins from our North Side Loop project and other pipeline compression projects completed in fiscal 2006. The decrease in net income from our nonregulated operations primarily reflects the impact of a less volatile natural gas market, which reduced delivered gas margins despite a 31 percent increase in sales volumes. However, our nonregulated operations benefited from higher asset optimization margins, primarily in the pipeline, storage and other segment. Other key financial and significant events for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008 include the following: For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008, we generated $370.9 million in operating cash flow compared with $547.1 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007, primarily reflecting the unfavorable timing of gas cost collections from our customers and cash payments to collateralize our risk management liabilities. Capital expenditures increased to $472.3 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008 from $392.4 million in the prior year. The increase primarily reflects an increase in compliance spending and main replacements in our Mid-Tex Division, spending in the natural gas distribution segment for our new automated meter reading initiative and spending for two nonregulated growth projects. We repaid $10.3 million of long-term debt during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008 compared with a net reduction of long-term debt of $56.0 million during the prior year. The decreased payments during the current year reflect regularly scheduled maturity payments compared with the prior fiscal year, which reflect the repayment of $303.2 million of unsecured floating rate senior notes with $247.2 million of net proceeds received from the issuance of ten year senior notes. We maintained our capitalization ratio within our targeted range of 50 to 55 percent despite higher short-term borrowings under our existing 5-year credit facility to fund seasonal natural gas purchases at higher prices. See the following discussion regarding the results of operations for each of our business operating segments. Fiscal year ended September 30, 2008 compared with fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 Natural Gas Distribution Segment The primary factors that impact the results of our natural gas distribution operations are our ability to earn our authorized rates of return, the cost of natural gas, competitive factors in the energy industry and economic conditions in our service areas. Our ability to earn our authorized rates is based primarily on our ability to improve the rate design in our various ratemaking jurisdictions by reducing or eliminating regulatory lag and, ultimately, separating the recovery of our approved margins from customer usage patterns. Improving rate design is a long-term process and is further complicated by the fact that we operate in multiple rate jurisdictions. The Ratemaking Activity section of this Form 10-K describes our current rate strategy and recent ratemaking initiatives in more detail. Our natural gas distribution operations are also affected by the cost of natural gas. The cost of gas is passed through to our customers without markup. Therefore, increases in the cost of gas are offset by a corresponding increase in revenues. Accordingly, we believe gross profit is a better indicator of our financial performance than revenues. However, gross profit in our Texas and Mississippi service areas include franchise 41 Table of Contents fees and gross receipts taxes, which are calculated as a percentage of revenue (inclusive of gas costs). Therefore, the amount of these taxes included in revenues is influenced by the cost of gas and the level of gas sales volumes. We record the tax expense as a component of taxes, other than income. Although changes in revenue-related taxes arising from changes in gas costs affect gross profit, over time the impact is offset within operating income. Timing differences exist between the recognition of revenue for franchise fees collected from our customers and the recognition of expense of franchise taxes. The effect of these timing differences can be significant in periods of volatile gas prices, particularly in our Mid-Tex Division. These timing differences may favorably or unfavorably affect net income; however, these amounts should offset over time with no permanent impact on net income. Higher gas costs may also adversely impact our accounts receivable collections, resulting in higher bad debt expense, and may require us to increase borrowings under our credit facilities resulting in higher interest expense. Finally, higher gas costs, as well as competitive factors in the industry and general economic conditions may cause customers to conserve or use alternative energy sources. Review of Financial and Operating Results Financial and operational highlights for our natural gas distribution segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008 and 2007 are presented below. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 Change (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Gross profit $ 1,006,066 $ 952,684 $ 53,382 Operating expenses 744,901 731,497 13,404 Operating income 261,165 221,187 39,978 Miscellaneous income 9,689 8,945 744 Interest charges 117,933 121,626 (3,693 ) Income before income taxes 152,921 108,506 44,415 Income tax expense 60,273 35,223 25,050 Net income $ 92,648 $ 73,283 $ 19,365 Consolidated natural gas distribution sales volumes MMcf 292,676 297,327 (4,651 ) Consolidated natural gas distribution transportation volumes MMcf 136,678 130,542 6,136 Total consolidated natural gas distribution throughput MMcf 429,354 427,869 1,485 Consolidated natural gas distribution average transportation revenue per Mcf $ 0.44 $ 0.45 $ (0.01 ) Consolidated natural gas distribution average cost of gas per Mcf sold $ 9.05 $ 8.09 $ 0.96 42 Table of Contents The following table shows our operating income by natural gas distribution division for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008 and 2007. The presentation of our natural gas distribution operating income is included for financial reporting purposes and may not be appropriate for ratemaking purposes. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 Change (In thousands) Mid-Tex $ 115,009 $ 68,574 $ 46,435 Kentucky/Mid-States 48,731 42,161 6,570 Louisiana 39,090 44,193 (5,103 ) West Texas 13,843 21,036 (7,193 ) Mississippi 19,970 23,225 (3,255 ) Colorado-Kansas 20,615 22,392 (1,777 ) Other 3,907 (394 ) 4,301 Total $ 261,165 $ 221,187 $ 39,978 The $53.4 million increase in natural gas distribution gross profit primarily reflects a $40.7 million net increase in rates. The net increase in rates primarily was attributable to the Mid-Tex Division which increased $29.2 million as a result of its 2006 GRIP filing, the previous and current year Mid-Tex rate cases and the absence of a one time GRIP refund that occurred in the prior year. The current year also reflects $14.4 million in rate increases in our Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Tennessee and West Texas service areas. In addition, the prior year includes a $7.5 million accrual for estimated unrecoverable gas costs that did not recur in the current year. Gross profit also increased approximately $8.6 million from revenue-related taxes primarily due to higher revenues, on which the tax is calculated, in the current year compared to the prior year. This increase, partially offset by a $7.2 million period-over-period increase in the associated franchise and state gross receipts tax expense recorded as a component of taxes other than income, resulted in a $1.4 million increase in operating income, when compared with the prior year. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes, other than income, increased by a net $13.4 million. The net increase was primarily reflected in our operation and maintenance expense, excluding the provision for doubtful accounts, which increased $13.3 million compared with the prior year. The increase principally reflects higher employee and administrative costs in addition to increased natural gas odorization and fuel costs attributable to higher commodity prices. The increase in operation and maintenance expense also reflects the absence in the current-year period of a nonrecurring $4.3 million deferral of hurricane-related operation and maintenance expenses in the prior year. The provision for doubtful accounts decreased $3.2 million to $16.6 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008, which reflects our continued effective collection efforts, despite a 12 percent rise in our average cost of gas per Mcf sold. As a result of these efforts, our provision for doubtful accounts as a percentage of revenue decreased from 0.61 percent in fiscal 2007 to 0.47 percent in fiscal 2008. Operating expenses for the prior year also include a $3.3 million noncash charge associated with the write-off of software costs. The decrease in operating expenses attributable to the lower provision for doubtful accounts and the absence of the prior year charge were offset by the aforementioned increase in franchise and gross receipt taxes. Miscellaneous Income The increase in miscellaneous income primarily reflects the recognition of a $1.2 million gain on the sale of irrigation assets in our West Texas Division during the fiscal 2008 second quarter. 43 Table of Contents Interest charges Interest charges allocated to the natural gas distribution segment decreased $3.7 million due to lower average outstanding short-term debt balances in the current year compared with the prior year. Regulated Transmission and Storage Segment Our regulated transmission and storage segment consists of the regulated pipeline and storage operations of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division. The Atmos Pipeline Texas Division transports natural gas to our Mid-Tex Division and third parties and manages five underground storage reservoirs in Texas. We also provide ancillary services customary in the pipeline industry including parking arrangements, lending and sales of inventory on hand. Similar to our natural gas distribution segment, our regulated transmission and storage segment is impacted by seasonal weather patterns, competitive factors in the energy industry and economic conditions in our service areas. Natural gas prices do not directly impact the results of this segment as revenues are derived from the transportation of natural gas. However, natural gas prices could influence the level of drilling activity in the markets that we serve, which may influence the level of throughput we may be able to transport on our pipeline. Further, as the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division operations supply all of the natural gas for our Mid-Tex Division, the results of this segment are highly dependent upon the natural gas requirements of the Mid-Tex Division. Finally, as a regulated pipeline, the operations of the Atmos Pipeline Texas Division may be impacted by the timing of when costs and expenses are incurred and when these costs and expenses are recovered through its tariffs. Review of Financial and Operating Results Financial and operational highlights for our regulated transmission and storage segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008 and 2007 are presented below. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 Change (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Mid-Tex Division transportation $ 86,665 $ 77,090 $ 9,575 Third-party transportation 85,256 65,158 20,098 Storage and park and lend services 9,746 9,374 372 Other 14,250 11,607 2,643 Gross profit 195,917 163,229 32,688 Operating expenses 106,172 83,399 22,773 Operating income 89,745 79,830 9,915 Miscellaneous income 1,354 2,105 (751 ) Interest charges 27,049 27,917 (868 ) Income before income taxes 64,050 54,018 10,032 Income tax expense 22,625 19,428 3,197 Net income $ 41,425 $ 34,590 $ 6,835 Gross pipeline transportation volumes MMcf 782,876 699,006 83,870 Consolidated pipeline transportation volumes MMcf 595,542 505,493 90,049 The $32.7 million increase in gross profit primarily was attributable to a $13.1 million increase from rate adjustments resulting from our 2006 and 2007 GRIP filings and an $8.3 million increase from transportation volumes. Consolidated throughput increased 18 percent primarily due to increased transportation in the Barnett Shale region of Texas. The improvement in gross profit also reflects increased service fees and per-unit transportation margins due to favorable market conditions which contributed $8.0 million. New compression 44 Table of Contents contracts and transportation capacity enhancements also contributed $1.5 million. In addition, sales of excess gas increased $1.3 million compared to the prior year. Operating expenses increased $22.8 million primarily due to increased pipeline integrity and maintenance costs. Natural Gas Marketing Segment Our natural gas marketing activities are conducted through AEM, which aggregates and purchases gas supply, arranges transportation and/or storage logistics and ultimately delivers gas to our customers at competitive prices. To facilitate this process, we utilize proprietary and customer-owned transportation and storage assets to provide the various services our customers request, including furnishing natural gas supplies at fixed and market-based prices, contract negotiation and administration, load forecasting, gas storage acquisition and management services, transportation services, peaking sales and balancing services, capacity utilization strategies and gas price hedging through the use of financial instruments. As a result, our revenues arise from the types of commercial transactions we have structured with our customers and include the value we extract by optimizing the storage and transportation capacity we own or control as well as revenues for services we deliver. Our asset optimization activities seek to maximize the economic value associated with the storage and transportation capacity we own or control. We attempt to meet this objective by engaging in natural gas storage transactions in which we seek to find and profit from the pricing differences that occur over time. We purchase physical natural gas and then sell financial instruments at advantageous prices to lock in a gross profit margin. We also seek to participate in transactions in which we combine the natural gas commodity and transportation costs to minimize our costs incurred to serve our customers by identifying the lowest cost alternative within the natural gas supplies, transportation and markets to which we have access. Through the use of transportation and storage services and financial instruments, we also seek to capture gross profit margin through the arbitrage of pricing differences that exist in various locations and by recognizing pricing differences that occur over time. AEM continually manages its net physical position to attempt to increase the future economic profit that was created when the original transaction was executed. Therefore, AEM may subsequently change its originally scheduled storage injection and withdrawal plans from one time period to another based on market conditions and recognize any associated gains or losses at that time. If AEM elects to accelerate the withdrawal of physical gas, it will execute new financial instruments to hedge the original financial instruments. If AEM elects to defer the withdrawal of gas, it will reset its financial instruments to correspond to the revised withdrawal schedule and execute new financial instruments to offset the original financial instruments. We use financial instruments, designated as fair value hedges, to hedge our natural gas inventory used in our natural gas marketing storage activities. These financial instruments are marked to market each month based upon the NYMEX price with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses in the period of change. The hedged natural gas inventory is marked to market at the end of each month based on the Gas Daily index with changes in fair value recognized as unrealized gains and losses in the period of change. Changes in the spreads between the forward natural gas prices used to value the financial hedges designated against our physical inventory and the market (spot) prices used to value our physical storage result in unrealized margins until the underlying physical gas is withdrawn and the related financial instruments are settled. Once the gas is withdrawn and the financial instruments are settled, the previously unrealized margins associated with these net positions are realized. AEM also uses financial instruments to capture additional storage arbitrage opportunities that may arise after the original physical inventory hedge and to attempt to insulate and protect the economic value within its asset optimization activities. Changes in fair value associated with these financial instruments are recognized as a component of unrealized margins until they are settled. 45 Table of Contents Due to the nature of these operations, natural gas prices have a significant impact on our natural gas marketing operations. Within our delivered gas activities, higher natural gas prices may adversely impact our accounts receivable collections, resulting in higher bad debt expense, and may require us to increase borrowings under our credit facilities resulting in higher interest expense. Higher gas prices, as well as competitive factors in the industry and general economic conditions may also cause customers to conserve or use alternative energy sources. Within our asset optimization activities, higher gas prices could also lead to increased borrowings under our credit facilities resulting in higher interest expense. Volatility in natural gas prices also has a significant impact on our natural gas marketing segment. Increased price volatility often has a significant impact on the spreads between the market (spot) prices and forward natural gas prices, which creates opportunities to earn higher arbitrage spreads within our asset optimization activities. However, increased volatility impacts the amounts of unrealized margins recorded in our gross profit and could impact the amount of cash required to collateralize our risk management liabilities. Review of Financial and Operating Results Financial and operational highlights for our natural gas marketing segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008 and 2007 are presented below. Gross profit margin consists primarily of margins earned from the delivery of gas and related services requested by our customers and margins earned from asset optimization activities, which are derived from the utilization of our proprietary and managed third party storage and transportation assets to capture favorable arbitrage spreads through natural gas trading activities. Unrealized margins represent the unrealized gains or losses on our net physical position and the related financial instruments used to manage commodity price risk as described above. These margins fluctuate based upon changes in the spreads between the physical and forward natural gas prices. Generally, if the physical/financial spread narrows, we will record unrealized gains or lower unrealized losses. If the physical/financial spread widens, we will record unrealized losses or lower unrealized gains. The magnitude of the unrealized gains and losses is also dependent upon the levels of our net physical position at the end of the reporting period. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 Change (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Realized margins Delivered gas $ 73,627 $ 57,054 $ 16,573 Asset optimization (6,135 ) 28,827 (34,962 ) 67,492 85,881 (18,389 ) Unrealized margins 25,529 18,430 7,099 Gross profit 93,021 104,311 (11,290 ) Operating expenses 36,629 29,271 7,358 Operating income 56,392 75,040 (18,648 ) Miscellaneous income 2,022 6,434 (4,412 ) Interest charges 9,036 5,767 3,269 Income before income taxes 49,378 75,707 (26,329 ) Income tax expense 19,389 29,938 (10,549 ) Net income $ 29,989 $ 45,769 $ (15,780 ) Gross natural gas marketing sales volumes MMcf 457,952 423,895 34,057 Consolidated natural gas marketing sales volumes MMcf 389,392 370,668 18,724 Net physical position (Bcf) 8.0 12.3 (4.3 ) The $11.3 million decrease in our natural gas marketing segment gross profit primarily reflects a $35.0 million decrease in realized asset optimization margins. As a result of less volatile natural gas market conditions experienced during the current year, AEM regularly deferred storage withdrawals and reset the 46 Table of Contents associated financial instruments to increase the potential gross profit it could realize from its asset optimization activities in future periods. As a result, AEM recognized settlement losses without corresponding storage withdrawal gains during the current year. Additionally, AEM experienced increased storage fees charged by third parties during the current year. In the prior year, AEM was able to recognize arbitrage gains as changes in its originally scheduled storage injection and withdrawal plans had a significantly smaller impact than in the current year. The decrease in realized asset optimization margins was partially offset by a $16.6 million increase in realized delivered gas margins. The increase reflects both increased sales volumes and increased per-unit margins. Gross sales volumes increased eight percent compared with the prior year. The increase in sales volumes reflects the successful execution of our marketing strategies. Our per-unit margin increased 19 percent, which reflects increased basis gains on certain contracts coupled with improved marketing efforts. Excluding the impact of these basis gains, our per-unit margins increased seven percent in the current year. Gross profit margin was also favorably impacted by a $7.1 million increase in unrealized margins attributable to a narrowing of the spreads between current cash prices and forward natural gas prices. The change in unrealized margins also reflects the recognition of previously unrealized margins as a component of realized margins as a result of injecting and withdrawing gas and settling financial instruments as a part of AEM asset optimization activities. Operating expenses increased $7.4 million primarily reflecting a $2.4 million increase associated with property taxes coupled with a $5.0 million increase in other administrative costs. Economic Gross Profit AEM monitors the impact of its asset optimization efforts by estimating the gross profit, before associated storage fees, that it captured through the purchase and sale of physical natural gas and the execution of the associated financial instruments. This economic gross profit, combined with the effect of the future reversal of unrealized gains or losses currently recognized in the income statement is referred to as the potential gross profit. (1) The following table presents AEM economic gross profit and its potential gross profit at September 30, 2008, 2007 and 2006. Associated Net Net Physical Economic Gross Unrealized Gain Potential Gross Period Ending Position Profit (Loss) Profit (Bcf) (In millions) (In millions) (In millions) September 30, 2008 8.0 $ 48.5 $ 36.4 $ 12.1 September 30, 2007 12.3 $ 40.8 $ 10.8 $ 30.0 September 30, 2006 14.5 $ 60.0 $ (16.0 ) $ 76.0 (1) Potential gross profit represents the increase in AEM gross profit in future periods if its optimization efforts are executed as planned. This amount does not include storage and other operating expenses and increased income taxes that will be incurred to realize this amount. Therefore, it does not represent an estimated increase in future net income. There is no assurance that the economic gross profit or the potential gross profit will be fully realized in the future. We consider this measure a non-GAAP financial measure as it is calculated using both forward-looking storage injection/withdrawal and hedge settlement estimates and historical financial information. This measure is presented because we believe it provides a more comprehensive view to investors of our asset optimization efforts and thus a better understanding of these activities than would be presented by GAAP measures alone. As of September 30, 2008, based upon AEM planned inventory withdrawal schedule and associated planned settlement of financial instruments, the economic gross profit was $48.5 million. This amount will be reduced by $36.4 million of net unrealized gains recorded in the financial statements as of September 30, 2008 that will reverse when the inventory is withdrawn and the accompanying financial instruments are settled. Therefore, the potential gross profit was $12.1 million at September 30, 2008. 47 Table of Contents The economic gross profit is based upon planned storage injection and withdrawal schedules and its realization is contingent upon the execution of this plan, weather and other execution factors. Since AEM actively manages and optimizes its portfolio to attempt to enhance the future profitability of its storage position, it may change its scheduled storage injection and withdrawal plans from one time period to another based on market conditions. Therefore, we cannot ensure that the economic gross profit or the potential gross profit calculated as of September 30, 2008 will be fully realized in the future nor can we predict in what time periods such realization may occur. Further, if we experience operational or other issues which limit our ability to optimally manage our stored gas positions, our earnings could be adversely impacted. Assuming AEM fully executes its plan in place on September 30, 2008, without encountering operational or other issues, we anticipate the majority of the potential gross profit as of September 30, 2008 will be recognized during the first quarter of fiscal 2009 with the remainder recognized over the remaining months in fiscal 2009. Pipeline, Storage and Other Segment Our pipeline, storage and other segment primarily consists of the operations of Atmos Pipeline and Storage, LLC (APS), Atmos Energy Services, LLC (AES) and Atmos Power Systems, Inc., which are each wholly-owned by AEH. APS owns and operates a 21 mile pipeline located in New Orleans, Louisiana. This pipeline is primarily used to aggregate gas supply for our regulated natural gas distribution division in Louisiana and for AEM. However, it also provides limited third party transportation services. APS also owns or has an interest in underground storage fields in Kentucky and Louisiana. We use these storage facilities to reduce the need to contract for additional pipeline capacity to meet customer demand during peak periods. Finally, beginning in fiscal 2006, APS initiated activities in the natural gas gathering business. As of September 30, 2008, these activities were limited in nature. APS also engages in limited asset optimization activities whereby it seeks to maximize the economic value associated with the storage and transportation capacity it owns or controls. Most of these arrangements are with regulated affiliates of the Company and have been approved by applicable state regulatory commissions. Generally, these arrangements require APS to share with our regulated customers a portion of the profits earned from these arrangements. AES, through December 31, 2006, provided natural gas management services to our natural gas distribution operations, other than the Mid-Tex Division. These services included aggregating and purchasing gas supply, arranging transportation and storage logistics and ultimately delivering the gas to our natural gas distribution service areas at competitive prices. Effective January 1, 2007, our shared services function began providing these services to our natural gas distribution operations. AES continues to provide limited services to our natural gas distribution divisions, and the revenues AES receives are equal to the costs incurred to provide those services. Through Atmos Power Systems, Inc., we have constructed electric peaking power-generating plants and associated facilities and lease these plants through lease agreements that are accounted for as sales under generally accepted accounting principles. Results for this segment are primarily impacted by seasonal weather patterns and, similar to our natural gas marketing segment, volatility in the natural gas markets. Additionally, this segment results include an unrealized component as APS hedges its risk associated with its asset optimization activities. 48 Table of Contents Review of Financial and Operating Results Financial and operational highlights for our pipeline, storage and other segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008 and 2007 are presented below. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 Change (In thousands) Storage and transportation services $ 13,469 $ 13,532 $ (63 ) Asset optimization 5,178 11,868 (6,690 ) Other 4,961 5,111 (150 ) Unrealized margins 4,705 2,097 2,608 Gross profit 28,313 32,608 (4,295 ) Operating expenses 8,064 10,373 (2,309 ) Operating income 20,249 22,235 (1,986 ) Miscellaneous income 8,428 8,173 255 Interest charges 2,322 6,055 (3,733 ) Income before income taxes 26,355 24,353 2,002 Income tax expense 10,086 9,503 583 Net income $ 16,269 $ 14,850 $ 1,419 Pipeline, storage and other gross profit decreased $4.3 million primarily due to a $6.7 million decrease in asset optimization margins as a result of a less volatile natural gas market. The decrease in asset optimization margins was partially offset by an increase of $2.6 million in unrealized margins associated with asset optimization activities. Operating expenses decreased $2.3 million primarily due to the absence in the current year of a $3.0 million noncash charge recorded in the prior year related to the write-off of costs associated with a natural gas gathering project. 49 Table of Contents Fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 compared with fiscal year ended September 30, 2006 Natural Gas Distribution Segment Financial and operational highlights for our natural gas distribution segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2007 and 2006 are presented below. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2007 2006 Change (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Gross profit $ 952,684 $ 925,057 $ 27,627 Operating expenses 731,497 723,163 8,334 Operating income 221,187 201,894 19,293 Miscellaneous income 8,945 9,506 (561 ) Interest charges 121,626 126,489 (4,863 ) Income before income taxes 108,506 84,911 23,595 Income tax expense 35,223 31,909 3,314 Net income $ 73,283 $ 53,002 $ 20,281 Consolidated natural gas distribution sales volumes MMcf 297,327 272,033 25,294 Consolidated natural gas distribution transportation volumes MMcf 130,542 121,962 8,580 Total consolidated natural gas distribution throughput MMcf 427,869 393,995 33,874 Consolidated natural gas distribution average transportation revenue per Mcf $ 0.45 $ 0.50 $ (0.05 ) Consolidated natural gas distribution average cost of gas per Mcf sold $ 8.09 $ 10.02 $ (1.93 ) The following table shows our operating income by natural gas distribution division for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2007 and 2006. The presentation of our natural gas distribution operating income is included for financial reporting purposes and may not be appropriate for ratemaking purposes. 2007 2006 Heating Degree Heating Degree Operating Days Percent Operating Days Percent Income of Normal (1) Income of Normal (1) (In thousands, except degree day information) Mid-Tex $ 68,574 100 % $ 71,703 72 % Kentucky/Mid-States 42,161 97 % 49,893 98 % Louisiana 44,193 105 % 27,772 78 % West Texas 21,036 99 % 2,215 100 % Mississippi 23,225 101 % 23,276 102 % Colorado-Kansas 22,392 104 % 22,524 99 % Other (394 ) 4,511 Total $ 221,187 100 % $ 201,894 87 % (1) Adjusted for service areas that have weather-normalized operations. For service areas that have weather normalized operations, normal degree days are used instead of actual degree days in computing the total number of heating degree days. The $27.6 million increase in natural gas distribution gross profit primarily reflects a nine percent increase in throughput and the impact of having WNA coverage for more than 90 percent of our residential 50 Table of Contents and commercial customers, partially offset by an accrual for estimated unrecoverable gas costs and lower irrigation margins discussed below. The impact of higher throughput and greater WNA coverage increased gross profit by $38.6 million. Included in this amount was a $10.8 million increase associated with the implementation of WNA in our Mid-Tex and Louisiana Divisions beginning with the 2006-2007 winter heating season. As a result of the Mid-Tex rate case, our gas distribution gross profit increased by $5.4 million compared to the prior year. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in Mid-Tex transportation revenue as the rate case reduced the transportation rates for certain customer classes. The Mid-Tex rate case also required the refund of $2.9 million collected under GRIP, which reduced gross profit in the current year. Favorable regulatory activity in the current year increased gross profit by $24.4 million, primarily due to an $11.8 million increase in GRIP-related recoveries and a $10.2 million increase from our Rate Stabilization Clause (RSC) filings in our Louisiana service areas. These increases were partially offset by an $11.6 million decrease in gross profit associated with regulatory rulings in our Tennessee, Louisiana and Virginia jurisdictions. Offsetting these increases in gross profit was a reduction in revenue-related taxes. Due to a significant decline in the cost of gas in the current-year period compared with the prior-year period, franchise and state gross receipts taxes included in gross profit decreased approximately $2.7 million; however, franchise and state gross receipts tax expense recorded as a component of taxes, other than income decreased $5.4 million, which resulted in a $2.7 million increase in operating income when compared with the prior-year period. Natural gas distribution gross profit also reflects a $7.5 million accrual for estimated unrecoverable gas costs. The remaining decrease in gross profit primarily is attributable to lower irrigation margins and a reduction in pass-through surcharges used to recover various costs as these costs were fully recovered by the end of fiscal 2006 and during fiscal 2007. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense, taxes, other than income, and impairment of long-lived assets, increased to $731.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 from $723.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. Operation and maintenance expense, excluding the provision for doubtful accounts, increased $22.4 million, primarily due to increased employee and other administrative costs. These increases include the personnel and other operating costs associated with the transfer of our gas supply function from our pipeline, storage and other segment to our natural gas distribution segment effective January 1, 2007. Partially offsetting these increases was the deferral of $4.3 million of operation and maintenance expense in our Louisiana Division resulting from the Louisiana Public Service Commission ruling to allow recovery of all incremental operation and maintenance expense incurred in fiscal 2005 and 2006 in connection with our Hurricane Katrina recovery efforts. The provision for doubtful accounts decreased $0.8 million to $19.8 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007. The decrease primarily was attributable to reduced collection risk as a result of lower natural gas prices. In the natural gas distribution segment, the average cost of natural gas for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 was $8.09 per Mcf, compared with $10.02 per Mcf for the year ended September 30, 2006. Depreciation and amortization expense increased $12.7 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 compared with the prior-year period. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in assets placed in service during fiscal 2007. Additionally, the increase was partially attributable to the absence in the current-year period of a $2.8 million reduction in depreciation expense recorded in the prior-year period arising from the Mississippi Public Service Commission decision to allow certain deferred costs in our rate base. Operating expenses for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 included a $3.3 million noncash charge associated with the write-off of costs for software that will no longer be used. Fiscal 2006 results included a $22.9 million noncash charge to impair the West Texas Division irrigation properties. 51 Table of Contents Interest charges Interest charges allocated to the natural gas distribution segment for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 decreased to $121.6 million from $126.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. The decrease primarily was attributable to lower average outstanding short-term debt balances in the current-year period compared with the prior-year period. Regulated Transmission and Storage Segment Financial and operational highlights for our regulated transmission and storage segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2007 and 2006 are presented below. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2007 2006 Change (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Mid-Tex Division transportation $ 77,090 $ 69,925 $ 7,165 Third-party transportation 65,158 56,813 8,345 Storage and park and lend services 9,374 8,047 1,327 Other 11,607 6,348 5,259 Gross profit 163,229 141,133 22,096 Operating expenses 83,399 77,807 5,592 Operating income 79,830 63,326 16,504 Miscellaneous income (expense) 2,105 (153 ) 2,258 Interest charges 27,917 22,787 5,130 Income before income taxes 54,018 40,386 13,632 Income tax expense 19,428 13,839 5,589 Net income $ 34,590 $ 26,547 $ 8,043 Gross pipeline transportation volumes MMcf 699,006 581,272 117,734 Consolidated pipeline transportation volumes MMcf 505,493 410,505 94,988 The $22.1 million increase in gross profit primarily is attributable to a 23 percent increase in throughput due to colder weather in the current year and incremental volumes from the North Side Loop and other compression projects. These activities increased gross profit by $16.2 million, of which, $10.8 million was associated with our North Side Loop and other compression projects completed in fiscal 2006. Increases in gross profit also include a $3.1 million increase from rate adjustments resulting from our 2005 GRIP filing, a $2.1 million increase from the sale of excess gas inventory and a $2.0 million increase from new or renegotiated blending and capacity enhancement contracts. Operating expenses increased to $83.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 from $77.8 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006 due to higher administrative and other operating costs primarily associated with the North Side Loop and other compression projects that were completed in fiscal 2006. Interest charges Interest charges allocated to the pipeline and storage segment for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 increased to $27.9 million from $22.8 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. The increase was attributable to the use of updated allocation factors for fiscal 2007. These factors are reviewed and updated on an annual basis. 52 Table of Contents Natural Gas Marketing Segment Financial and operational highlights for our natural gas marketing segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2007 and 2006 are presented below. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2007 2006 Change (In thousands, unless otherwise noted) Realized margins Delivered gas $ 57,054 $ 87,236 $ (30,182 ) Asset optimization 28,827 26,225 2,602 85,881 113,461 (27,580 ) Unrealized margins 18,430 17,166 1,264 Gross profit 104,311 130,627 (26,316 ) Operating expenses 29,271 28,392 879 Operating income 75,040 102,235 (27,195 ) Miscellaneous income 6,434 2,598 3,836 Interest charges 5,767 8,510 (2,743 ) Income before income taxes 75,707 96,323 (20,616 ) Income tax expense 29,938 37,757 (7,819 ) Net income $ 45,769 $ 58,566 $ (12,797 ) Gross natural gas marketing sales volumes MMcf 423,895 336,516 87,379 Consolidated natural gas marketing sales volumes MMcf 370,668 283,962 86,706 Net physical position (Bcf) 12.3 14.5 (2.2 ) The $26.3 million decrease in our natural gas marketing segment gross profit primarily reflects a $30.2 million decrease in delivered gas margins. This decrease reflects the impact of a less volatile market, which reduced opportunities to take advantage of pricing differences between hubs, partially offset by a 31 percent increase in sales volumes attributable to successful execution of our marketing strategies and colder weather in the 2007 fiscal year compared with the 2006 fiscal year. Asset optimization margins increased $2.6 million compared with the 2006 fiscal year. The increase reflects greater cycled storage volumes as a result of accelerating storage withdrawals scheduled in future periods to capture greater arbitrage gains during the current-year period, partially offset by an increase in storage fees and park and loan fees which reduced the arbitrage spreads available. Gross profit margin was also favorably impacted by a $1.3 million increase in unrealized margins attributable to a narrowing of the spreads between current cash prices and forward natural gas prices. The change in unrealized margins also reflects the recognition of previously unrealized margins as a component of realized margins as a result of injecting and withdrawing gas and settling financial instruments as a part of AEM asset optimization activities. Operating expenses, which include operation and maintenance expense, provision for doubtful accounts, depreciation and amortization expense and taxes other than income taxes, increased to $29.3 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 from $28.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. The increase in operating expense primarily was attributable to an increase in employee and other administrative costs. Miscellaneous income Miscellaneous income increased to $6.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 from $2.6 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. The increase primarily was attributable to increased investment income earned on overnight investments during the current-year period combined with increased 53 Table of Contents interest income earned on our margin account associated with increased margin requirements during the current year. Interest charges Interest charges for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 decreased to $5.8 million from $8.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. The decrease was attributable to lower borrowing requirements during the current-year period. Pipeline, Storage and Other Segment Financial and operational highlights for our pipeline, storage and other segment for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2007 and 2006 are presented below. For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2007 2006 Change (In thousands) Storage and transportation services $ 13,532 $ 8,683 $ 4,849 Asset optimization 11,868 4,874 6,994 Other 5,111 7,587 (2,476 ) Unrealized margins 2,097 3,350 (1,253 ) Gross profit 32,608 24,494 8,114 Operating expenses 10,373 9,570 803 Operating income 22,235 14,924 7,311 Miscellaneous income 8,173 6,858 1,315 Interest charges 6,055 6,512 (457 ) Income before income taxes 24,353 15,270 9,083 Income tax expense 9,503 5,648 3,855 Net income $ 14,850 $ 9,622 $ 5,228 Gross profit increased $8.1 million primarily due to APS ability to capture more favorable arbitrage spreads from its asset optimization activities, an increase in asset optimization contracts and increased transportation margins. Operating expenses increased to $10.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 from $9.6 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006 primarily due to a $3.0 million noncash charge associated with the write-off of costs associated with a natural gas gathering project. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in employee and other administrative costs associated with the transfer of gas supply operations from the pipeline, storage and other segment to our natural gas distribution segment effective January 1, 2007. Miscellaneous income Miscellaneous income increased to $8.2 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 from $6.9 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. The increase was primarily attributable to $2.1 million received from leasing certain mineral interests coupled with an increase in interest income recorded in the pipeline, storage and other segment. Interest charges Interest charges allocated to the pipeline, storage and other segment for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 decreased to $6.1 million from $6.5 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. 54 Table of Contents The decrease was attributable to the use of updated allocation factors for fiscal 2007. These factors are reviewed and updated on an annual basis. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our internally generated funds and borrowings under our credit facilities and commercial paper program generally provide the liquidity needed to fund our working capital, capital expenditures and other cash needs. Additionally, from time to time, we raise funds from the public debt and equity capital markets to fund our liquidity needs. We normally access the commercial paper markets to finance our working capital needs and growth. However, recent adverse developments in global financial and credit markets, including the recent failure of a major investment bank and the bailout of or merger between several large financial institutions, have made it more difficult and more expensive for the Company to access the short-term capital markets, including the commercial paper market, to satisfy our liquidity requirements. Consequently, as of September 30, 2008, we had borrowed $330.5 million directly under our five-year committed credit facility that backstops our commercial paper program to fund most of our working capital. Until recently, our five-year committed credit facility allowed us to borrow up to $600 million. However, one lender with a 5.55% share of the commitments has ceased funding under the facility. This has effectively limited the amount that we can borrow to approximately $567 million. The amounts borrowed under the credit facility have been primarily used to purchase large volumes of natural gas in preparation for the upcoming winter heating season. Although our natural gas marketing operations have not been impacted directly in a significant manner yet, continued disruptions in the capital markets could adversely affect the availability of the uncommitted demand credit facility on which such operations substantially relies to conduct its business. A significant reduction in such availability would mean that the Company would need to provide extra liquidity to support the activities of our natural gas marketing business and other nonregulated businesses. Our ability to provide extra liquidity is limited by the terms of our existing lending arrangements with AEH. We have historically supplemented our commercial paper program with a short-term $300 million committed credit facility that must be renewed annually. There were no borrowings under this facility as of September 30, 2008. In October 2008, we replaced this facility upon its termination with a new facility that will allow borrowings up to $212.5 million and expires in October 2009. Additionally, as more fully described in Note 5, the borrowing costs under the new facility will be significantly higher than under the prior facility. We believe the amounts available to us under our existing and new credit facilities coupled with operating cash flow will provide the necessary liquidity to fund our working capital needs, capital expenditures and other expenditures for fiscal year 2009. Cash Flows Our internally generated funds may change in the future due to a number of factors, some of which we cannot control. These include regulatory changes, the price for our services, the demand for our services, margin requirements resulting from significant changes in commodity prices, operational risks and other factors. Cash flows from operating activities Year-over-year changes in our operating cash flows primarily are attributable to changes in net income, working capital changes, particularly within our natural gas distribution segment resulting from the price of natural gas and the timing of customer collections, payments for natural gas purchases and deferred gas cost recoveries. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008, we generated operating cash flow of $370.9 million compared with $547.1 million in fiscal 2007 and $311.4 million in fiscal 2006. The significant factors impacting our operating cash flow for the last three fiscal years are summarized below. 55 Table of Contents Fiscal Year ended September 30, 2008 Operating cash flows were $176.2 million lower in fiscal 2008 compared to fiscal 2007. The decrease primarily reflects an increase in cash required to collateralize risk management liabilities in our natural gas marketing segment, which reduced operating cash flow by $95.7 million and the unfavorable timing of gas cost collections in our natural gas distribution segment, which reduced operating cash flow by $92.6 million. Fiscal Year ended September 30, 2007 Fiscal 2007 operating cash flows reflect the favorable timing of payments for accounts payable and accrued liabilities, which increased operating cash flow by $107.6 million. Additionally, improved management of our deferred gas costs balances increased operating cash flow by $125.2 million. Finally, increased net income and other favorable working capital changes contributed to the increase in operating cash flow. Partially offsetting these increases in operating cash flow was a decrease in customer collections of $84.8 million due to the decrease in the price of natural gas during the fiscal year. Fiscal Year ended September 30, 2006 Fiscal 2006 operating cash flows reflect the adverse impact of significantly higher natural gas prices. Year-over-year, unfavorable timing of payments for accounts payable and other accrued liabilities reduced operating cash flow by $523.0 million. Partially offsetting these outflows were higher customer collections ($245.1 million) and reduced payments for natural gas inventories ($102.1 million). Additionally, favorable movements in the market indices used to value our natural gas marketing segment risk management assets and liabilities reduced the amount that we were required to deposit in margin accounts and therefore favorably affected operating cash flow by $126.3 million. Cash flows from investing activities In recent fiscal years, a substantial portion of our cash resources has been used to fund acquisitions and growth projects, our ongoing construction program and improvements to information systems. Our ongoing construction program enables us to provide natural gas distribution services to our existing customer base, expand our natural gas distribution services into new markets, enhance the integrity of our pipelines and, more recently, expand our intrastate pipeline network. In executing our current rate strategy, we are directing discretionary capital spending to jurisdictions that permit us to earn a timely return on our investment. Currently, our Mid-Tex, Louisiana, Mississippi and West Texas natural gas distribution divisions and our Atmos Pipeline Texas Division have rate designs that provide the opportunity to include in their rate base approved capital costs on a periodic basis without being required to file a rate case. For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008, we incurred $472.3 million for capital expenditures compared with $392.4 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 and $425.3 million for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. The increase in fiscal 2008 primarily reflects an increase in compliance spending and main replacements in our Mid-Tex Division, spending in the natural gas distribution segment for our new automated meter reading initiative and spending for two nonregulated growth projects. The decrease in capital expenditures in fiscal 2007 primarily reflects the absence of capital expenditures associated with our North Side Loop and other pipeline compression projects, which were completed during the fiscal 2006 third quarter. Cash flows from financing activities For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008 and 2006, our financing activities provided $98.1 million and $155.3 million in cash compared with cash of $159.3 million used for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007. Our significant financing activities for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008, 2007 and 2006 are summarized as follows: During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008 and 2006, we increased our borrowings under our short-term facilities by $200.2 million and $237.6 million whereas during the fiscal year ended 56 Table of Contents September 30, 2007 we repaid a net $213.2 million under our short-term facilities. Net borrowings under our short-term facilities during fiscal 2008 and 2006 reflect the impact of seasonal natural gas purchases and the effect of higher natural gas prices. We repaid $10.3 million of long-term debt during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008, compared with $303.2 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2007 and $3.3 million during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2006. The increased payments during fiscal 2007 reflect the repayment of our $300 million unsecured floating rate senior notes discussed below. In June 2007, we issued $250 million of 6.35% Senior Notes due 2017. The effective interest rate of this offering, inclusive of all debt issue costs, was 6.45 percent. After giving effect to the settlement of our $100 million Treasury lock agreement in June 2007, the effective rate on these senior notes was reduced to 6.26 percent. We used the net proceeds of $247 million, together with $53 million of available cash, to repay our $300 million unsecured floating rate senior notes, which were redeemed on July 15, 2007. In December 2006, we sold 6.3 million shares of common stock in an offering, including the underwriters exercise of their overallotment option of 0.8 million shares, generating net proceeds of approximately $192 million. The net proceeds from this issuance were used to reduce our short-term debt. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008, we paid $117.3 million in cash dividends compared with dividend payments of $111.7 million and $102.3 million for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2007 and 2006. The increase in dividends paid over the prior-year reflects the increase in our dividend rate from $1.28 per share during fiscal 2007 to $1.30 per share during fiscal 2008, combined with a 1.5 million increase in shares outstanding due to new share issuances under our various equity plans. During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008 we issued 1.0 million shares of common stock which generated net proceeds of $25.5 million. In addition, we granted 0.5 million shares of common stock under our 1998 Long-Term Incentive Plan to directors, officers and other participants in the plan. The following table shows the number of shares issued for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008, 2007 and 2006: For the Fiscal Year Ended September 30 2008 2007 2006 Shares issued: Direct stock purchase plan 388,485 325,338 387,833 Retirement savings plan 558,014 422,646 442,635 1998 Long-term incentive plan 538,450 511,584 366,905 Long-term stock plan for Mid-States Division 300 Outside directors stock-for-fee plan 3,197 2,453 2,442 December 2006 equity offering 6,325,000 Total shares issued 1,488,146 7,587,021 1,200,115 Credit Facilities As of September 30, 2008, we had three committed credit facilities totaling $918 million. These facilities included (1) a five-year $600 million unsecured facility expiring December 2011, (2) a $300 million unsecured 364-day facility expiring October 2008, and (3) an $18 million unsecured facility expiring March 2009. However, one lender with a 5.55% share of the commitments under our $600 million and $300 million facilities has ceased funding under these facilities. Further, in October 2008, we replaced our $300 million facility at its termination with a new $212.5 million unsecured 364-day facility. After giving effect to these changes, the amount available to us under our committed credit facilities was $797.2 million. As of September 30, 2008, we had no outstanding letters of credit under these facilities. 57 Table of Contents AEM has an uncommitted credit facility that can provide up to $580 million. As of September 30, 2008, the amount available to us under this credit facility, net of outstanding letters of credit, was $212.1 million. Borrowings under our uncommitted credit facilities are made on a when-and-as-needed basis at the discretion of the banks. Our credit capacity and the amount of unused borrowing capacity are affected by the seasonal nature of the natural gas business and our short-term borrowing requirements, which are typically highest during colder winter months. Our working capital needs can vary significantly due to changes in the price of natural gas charged by suppliers and the increased gas supplies required to meet customers needs during periods of cold weather. However, we believe these credit facilities, combined with our operating cash flows will be sufficient to fund our working capital needs, our fiscal 2009 capital expenditure program and our common stock dividends. These facilities are described in further detail in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. Shelf Registration On December 4, 2006, we filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to issue, from time to time, up to $900 million in new common stock and/or debt securities available for issuance. As of September 30, 2008, we had approximately $450 million available for issuance under the registration statement. Due to certain restrictions imposed by one state regulatory commission on our ability to issue securities under the registration statement, we are permitted to issue a total of approximately $200 million of equity securities and $250 million of senior debt securities. In addition, due to restrictions imposed by another state regulatory commission, if the credit ratings on our senior unsecured debt were to fall below investment grade from either Standard & Poor Corporation (BBB-), Moody Investors Services, Inc. (Baa3) or Fitch Ratings, Ltd. (BBB-), our ability to issue any type of debt securities under the registration statement would be suspended until an investment grade rating from all three credit rating agencies was achieved. Credit Ratings Our credit ratings directly affect our ability to obtain short-term and long-term financing, in addition to the cost of such financing. In determining our credit ratings, the rating agencies consider a number of quantitative factors, including debt to total capitalization, operating cash flow relative to outstanding debt, operating cash flow coverage of interest and pension liabilities and funding status. In addition, the rating agencies consider qualitative factors such as consistency of our earnings over time, the quality of our management and business strategy, the risks associated with our regulated and nonregulated businesses and the regulatory structures that govern our rates in the states where we operate. Our debt is rated by three rating agencies: Standard & Poor Corporation (S&P), Moody Investors Services, Inc. (Moody s) and Fitch Ratings, Ltd. (Fitch). Our current debt ratings are all considered investment grade and are as follows: S&P Moody Fitch Unsecured senior long-term debt BBB Baa3 BBB+ Commercial paper A-2 P-3 F-2 Currently, with respect to our unsecured senior long-term debt, S&P maintains its positive outlook and Fitch maintains its stable outlook. Moody recently reaffirmed its stable outlook. None of our ratings are currently under review. However, a significant reduction in our liquidity caused by more limited access to the private and public credit markets as a result of the recent adverse global financial and credit conditions could trigger a negative change in our ratings outlook or even a reduction in our credit ratings by the three credit rating agencies. This would mean even more limited access to the private and public credit markets and an increase in the costs of such borrowings. A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities. The highest investment grade credit rating for S&P is AAA, Moody is Aaa and Fitch is AAA. The lowest investment grade credit rating for S&P is BBB-, Moody is Baa3 and Fitch is BBB-. Our credit ratings may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agencies, and each rating should be evaluated independent of any other rating. There can be 58 Table of Contents no assurance that a rating will remain in effect for any given period of time or that a rating will not be lowered, or withdrawn entirely, by a rating agency if, in its judgment, circumstances so warrant. Debt Covenants We were in compliance with all of our debt covenants as of September 30, 2008. Our debt covenants are described in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. Capitalization The following table presents our capitalization as of September 30, 2008 and 2007: September 30 2008 2007 (In thousands, except percentages) Short-term debt $ 350,542 7.7 % $ 150,599 3.5 % Long-term debt 2,120,577 46.9 % 2,130,146 50.2 % Shareholders equity 2,052,492 45.4 % 1,965,754 46.3 % Total capitalization, including short-term debt $ 4,523,611 100.0 % $ 4,246,499 100.0 % Total debt as a percentage of total capitalization, including short-term debt, was 54.6 percent and 53.7 percent at September 30, 2008 and 2007. The increase in the debt to capitalization ratio primarily reflects an increase in natural gas prices as of September 30, 2008 compared to the prior year. Our ratio of total debt to capitalization is typically greater during the winter heating season as we make additional short-term borrowings to fund natural gas purchases and meet our working capital requirements. We intend to maintain our capitalization ratio in a target range of 50 to 55 percent through cash flow generated from operations, continued issuance of new common stock under our Direct Stock Purchase Plan and Retirement Savings Plan and access to the equity capital markets. 59 Table of Contents Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments The following table provides information about contractual obligations and commercial commitments at September 30, 2008. Payments Due by Period Less Than More Than Total 1 Year 1-3 Years 3-5 Years 5 Years (In thousands) Contractual Obligations Long-term debt (1) $ 2,123,612 $ 785 $ 760,262 $ 252,565 $ 1,110,000 Short-term debt (1) 350,542 350,542 Interest charges (2) 939,048 118,858 196,040 143,226 480,924 Gas purchase commitments (3) 550,029 418,949 109,454 18,648 2,978 Capital lease obligations (4) 1,752 186 372 372 822 Operating leases (4) 180,317 18,374 33,925 30,924 97,094 Demand fees for contracted storage (5) 33,411 11,511 14,315 6,698 887 Demand fees for contracted transportation (6) 104,202 35,522 40,864 14,763 13,053 Financial instrument obligations (7) 64,283 58,914 5,369 Postretirement benefit plan contributions (8) 163,089 12,703 22,083 28,111 100,192 Uncertain tax positions (including interest) (9) 6,731 6,731 Total contractual obligations $ 4,517,016 $ 1,026,344 $ 1,189,415 $ 495,307 $ 1,805,950 (1) See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements. (2) Interest charges were calculated using the stated rate for each debt issuance. (3) Gas purchase commitments were determined based upon contractually determined volumes at prices estimated based upon the index specified in the contract, adjusted for estimated basis differentials and contractual discounts as of September 30, 2008. (4) See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements. (5) Represents third party contractual demand fees for contracted storage in our natural gas marketing and pipeline, storage and other segments. Contractual demand fees for contracted storage for our natural gas distribution segment are excluded as these costs are fully recoverable through our purchase gas adjustment mechanisms. (6) Represents third party contractual demand fees for transportation in our natural gas marketing segment. (7) Represents liabilities for natural gas commodity financial instruments that were valued as of September 30, 2008. The ultimate settlement amounts of these remaining liabilities are unknown because they are subject to continuing market risk until the financial instruments are settled. (8) Represents expected contributions to our postretirement benefit plans. (9) Represents liabilities associated with uncertain tax positions claimed or expected to be claimed on tax returns. AEM has commitments to purchase physical quantities of natural gas under contracts indexed to the forward NYMEX strip or fixed price contracts. At September 30, 2008, AEM was committed to purchase 55.8 Bcf within one year, 35.6 Bcf within one to three years and 0.5 Bcf after three years under indexed contracts. AEM was committed to purchase 1.5 Bcf within one year and less than 0.1 Bcf within one to three years under fixed price contracts with prices ranging from $3.58 to $13.20 per Mcf. 60 Table of Contents With the exception of our Mid-Tex Division, our natural gas distribution segment maintains supply contracts with several vendors that generally cover a period of up to one year. Commitments for estimated base gas volumes are established under these contracts on a monthly basis at contractually negotiated prices. Commitments for incremental daily purchases are made as necessary during the month in accordance with the terms of the individual contract. Our Mid-Tex Division maintains long-term supply contracts to ensure a reliable source of gas for our customers in its service area which obligate it to purchase specified volumes at market prices. The estimated commitments under these contract terms as of September 30, 2008 are reflected in the table above. Risk Management Activities We conduct risk management activities through our natural gas distribution, natural gas marketing and pipeline, storage and other segments. In our natural gas distribution segment, we use a combination of physical storage, fixed physical contracts and fixed financial contracts to reduce our exposure to unusually large winter-period gas price increases. In our natural gas marketing and pipeline, storage and other segments, we manage our exposure to the risk of natural gas price changes and lock in our gross profit margin through a combination of storage and financial instruments, including futures, over-the-counter and exchange-traded options and swap contracts with counterparties. To the extent our inventory cost and actual sales and actual purchases do not correlate with the changes in the market indices we use in our hedges, we could experience ineffectiveness or the hedges may no longer meet the accounting requirements for hedge accounting, resulting in the financial instruments being treated as mark to market instruments through earnings. We record our financial instruments as a component of risk management assets and liabilities, which are classified as current or noncurrent based upon the anticipated settlement date of the underlying financial instrument. Substantially all of our financial instruments are valued using external market quotes and indices. The following table shows the components of the change in fair value of our natural gas distribution segment financial instruments for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008 (in thousands): Fair value of contracts at September 30, 2007 $ (21,053 ) Contracts realized/settled (27,580 ) Fair value of new contracts (28,308 ) Other changes in value 13,264 Fair value of contracts at September 30, 2008 $ (63,677 ) The fair value of our natural gas distribution segment financial instruments at September 30, 2008, is presented below by time period and fair value source: Fair Value of Contracts at September 30, 2008 Maturity in Years Less Greater Total Fair Source of Fair Value Than 1 1-3 4-5 Than 5 Value (In thousands) Prices actively quoted $ (58,566 ) $ (5,111 ) $ $ $ (63,677 ) Prices based on models and other valuation methods Total Fair Value $ (58,566 ) $ (5,111 ) $ $ $ (63,677 ) 61 Table of Contents The following table shows the components of the change in fair value of our natural gas marketing segment financial instruments for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008 (in thousands): Fair value of contracts at September 30, 2007 $ 26,808 Contracts realized/settled 20,363 Fair value of new contracts Other changes in value (30,629 ) Fair value of contracts at September 30, 2008 16,542 Netting of cash collateral 56,616 Cash collateral and fair value of contracts at September 30, 2008 $ 73,158 The fair value of our natural gas marketing segment financial instruments at September 30, 2008, is presented below by time period and fair value source. Fair Value of Contracts at September 30, 2008 Maturity in Years Less Greater Total Fair Source of Fair Value Than 1 1-3 4-5 Than 5 Value (In thousands) Prices actively quoted $ 12,356 $ 5,566 $ $ $ 17,922 Prices based on models and other valuation methods (1,029 ) (351 ) (1,380 ) Total Fair Value $ 11,327 $ 5,215 $ $ $ 16,542 Pension and Postretirement Benefits Obligations Net Periodic Pension and Postretirement Benefit Costs For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2008, our total net periodic pension and other benefits costs was $47.9 million, compared with $48.6 million and $50.0 million for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2007 and 2006. These costs relating to our natural gas distribution operations are recoverable through our gas distribution rates; however, a portion of these costs is capitalized into our gas distribution rate base. The remaining costs are recorded as a component of operation and maintenance expense. Our total net periodic pension and other benefit costs remained relatively unchanged during the current-year period when compared with the prior-year period as the assumptions we made during our annual pension plan valuation completed June 30, 2007 were consistent with the prior year. The discount rate used to compute the present value of a plan liabilities generally is based on rates of high-grade corporate bonds with maturities similar to the average period over which the benefits will be paid. At our June 30, 2007 measurement date, the interest rates were consistent with rates at our prior-year measurement date, which resulted in no change to our 6.30 percent discount rate used to determine our fiscal 2008 net periodic and post-retirement cost. In addition, our expected return on our pension plan assets remained constant at 8.25 percent. The decrease in total net periodic pension and other benefits costs during fiscal 2007 compared with fiscal 2006 primarily reflects changes in assumptions we made during our annual pension plan valuation completed June 30, 2006. The discount rate used to compute the present value of a plan liabilities generally is based on rates of high-grade corporate bonds with maturities similar to the average period over which the benefits will be paid. In the period leading up to our June 30, 2006 measurement date, these interest rates were increasing, which resulted in a 130 basis point increase in our discount rate used to determine our fiscal 2007 net periodic and post-retirement cost to 6.30 percent. This increase had the effect of decreasing the present value of our plan liabilities and associated expenses. This favorable impact was partially offset by the unfavorable impact of reducing the expected return on our pension plan assets by 25 basis points to 8.25 percent, which has the effect of increasing our pension and postretirement benefit costs. 62 Table of Contents Pension and Postretirement Plan Funding Generally, our funding policy is to contribute annually an amount that will at least equal the minimum amount required to comply with the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. However, additional voluntary contributions are made from time to time as considered necessary. Contributions are intended to provide not only for benefits attributed to service to date but also for those expected to be earned in the future. During fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2006, we voluntarily contributed $2.3 million and $2.9 million to the Atmos Energy Corporation Retirement Plan for Mississippi Valley Gas Union Employees. These contributions achieved a desired level of funding for this plan for plan years 2007 and 2005. During fiscal 2007, we did not contribute to our pension plans. We contributed $9.6 million, $11.8 million and $10.9 million to our postretirement benefits plans for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2008, 2007 and 2006. The contributions represent the portion of the postretirement costs we are responsible for under the terms of our plan and minimum funding required by state regulatory commissions. Outlook for Fiscal 2009 Effective October 1, 2008, the Company adopted the requirement under SFAS 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans, an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R), that the measurement date used to determine our projected benefit and postretirement obligations and net periodic pension and postretirement costs must correspond to a fiscal year end. In accordance with the transition rules, the fiscal 2009 expense will be based upon market conditions as of September 30, 2008. As of September 30, 2008, interest and corporate bond rates utilized to determine our discount rates, which will impact our fiscal 2009 net periodic pension and postretirement costs, were significantly higher than the interest and corporate bond rates as of June 30, 2007, the measurement date for our fiscal 2008 net periodic cost. Accordingly, we increased our discount rate used to determine our fiscal 2009 pension and benefit costs to 7.57%. We maintained the expected return on our pension plan assets at 8.25 percent, despite the recent decline in the financial markets as we believe this rate reflects the average rate of expected earnings on plan assets that will fund our projected benefit obligation. Although the fair value of our plan assets has declined as the financial markets have declined, the impact of this decline is mitigated by the fact that assets are smoothed for purposes of determining net periodic pension cost. Accordingly, asset gains and losses are recognized over time as a component of net periodic pension and benefit costs for our Pension Account Plan, our largest funded plan. Accordingly, we expect our fiscal 2009 pension and postretirement medical costs to be materially the same as in fiscal 2008. Despite the recent decline in the fair value of the plans assets, we were not required to make a minimum funding contribution to our pension plans during fiscal 2008. However, based upon market conditions subsequent to September 30, 2008, the current funded position of the plans and the new funding requirements under the Pension Protection Act (PPA), we believe it is reasonably possible that we will be required to contribute to the plans in fiscal 2009. Further, we will consider whether an additional voluntary contribution is prudent to maintain certain PPA funding thresholds. However, we cannot anticipate with certainty whether such contributions will be made and the amount of such contributions. With respect to our postretirement medical plans, we anticipate contributing approximately $3.8 million during fiscal 2009. The projected pension liability, future funding requirements and the amount of pension expense or income recognized for the Plan are subject to change, depending upon the actuarial value of plan assets and the determination of future benefit obligations as of each subsequent actuarial calculation date. These amounts are impacted by actual investment returns, changes in interest rates and changes in the demographic composition of the participants in the plan. 63 Table of Contents RECENT ACCOUNTING DEVELOPMENTS Recent accounting developments and their impact on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows are described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements. 
