CIK: 77476
Company Name: PEPSICO INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2013-02-21


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. OUR BUSINESS Executive Overview 29 Our Operations 31 Our Customers 33 Our Distribution Network 33 Our Competition 34 Other Relationships 34 Our Business Risks 34 OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES Revenue Recognition 38 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets 39 Income Tax Expense and Accruals 40 Pension and Retiree Medical Plans 41 OUR FINANCIAL RESULTS Items Affecting Comparability 44 Results of Operations Consolidated Review 48 Results of Operations Division Review 52 Frito-Lay North America 54 Quaker Foods North America 55 Latin America Foods 56 PepsiCo Americas Beverages 57 Europe 58 Asia, Middle East and Africa 60 Our Liquidity and Capital Resources 61 27 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Income 65 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 66 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 67 Consolidated Balance Sheet 69 Consolidated Statement of Equity 70 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Our Divisions 71 Note 2 Our Significant Accounting Policies 76 Note 3 Restructuring, Impairment and Integration Charges 79 Note 4 Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets 81 Note 5 Income Taxes 84 Note 6 Stock-Based Compensation 86 Note 7 Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans 90 Note 8 Related Party Transactions 97 Note 9 Debt Obligations and Commitments 97 Note 10 Financial Instruments 99 Note 11 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share 102 Note 12 Preferred Stock 103 Note 13 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Attributable to PepsiCo 104 Note 14 Supplemental Financial Information 104 Note 15 Acquisitions and Divestitures 105 MANAGEMENT S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL REPORTING 107 REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM 109 SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA 111 FIVE-YEAR SUMMARY 112 GLOSSARY 114 28 Table of Contents Our discussion and analysis is an integral part of our consolidated financial statements and is provided as an addition to, and should be read in connection with, our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Definitions of key terms can be found in the glossary beginning on page 114. Tabular dollars are presented in millions, except per share amounts. All per share amounts reflect common per share amounts, assume dilution unless otherwise noted, and are based on unrounded amounts. Percentage changes are based on unrounded amounts. OUR BUSINESS Executive Overview We are a leading global food and beverage company with brands that are respected household names throughout the world. Through our operations, authorized bottlers, contract manufacturers and other partners, we make, market, sell and distribute a wide variety of convenient and enjoyable foods and beverages, serving customers and consumers in more than 200 countries and territories. Our management monitors a variety of key indicators to evaluate our business results and financial condition. These indicators include market share, volume, net revenue, operating profit, management operating cash flow, earnings per share and return on invested capital. During 2012 we undertook a number of significant initiatives that we believe will position us for future success. These initiatives included increasing investment in our iconic global brands; stepping up our innovation program and launching new products like Pepsi Next; and implementing a multi-year productivity program that resulted in over $1 billion in savings last year alone. We successfully completed these initiatives while returning $6.5 billion to shareholders through repurchases and dividends during 2012. As we look to 2013 and beyond, we are focused on positioning our Company for long-term advantage and growth while continuing to deliver strong and consistent financial results. Our business strategies are designed to address key challenges facing our industry, including increasing consumer and government focus on health and wellness, demographic shifts and retail trade consolidation, and macroeconomic uncertainty and commodity price volatility. We believe that many of these challenges create new opportunities for growth for our Company. For example, we expect that the acceleration of the convenience trend will drive continued growth in the demand for convenient foods and beverages worldwide. In addition, the favorable outlook in emerging and developing markets creates opportunities for growth in all of our products in those markets. We believe that there are also potential new categories of expansion for us in the global food and beverage marketplace, such as good for you and premium priced products, products for aging populations and value offerings. In order to address these challenges and capitalize on these opportunities, we plan to do the following: Reinforce our existing value drivers. We will continue to refocus our efforts on key global brands and categories in our most important developed markets to drive profitable growth. We believe that concentrating our insights, marketing and innovation resources behind our most significant brands in key markets will enable us to reinforce our existing competitive advantages resulting from our go-to-market systems and strong brands, particularly with respect to snacks, and continue to grow demand and market share. 29 Table of Contents Migrate our portfolio towards attractive high growth categories and markets. We plan to build on our existing efforts in the good for you space to continue to grow our nutrition business by growing our most admired existing nutrition brands, including Quaker, Tropicana and Gatorade. Our efforts to capitalize on the growing consumer demand for convenient nutrition are global. We are also working to unlock opportunities in new product categories through our dairy business in Russia and our M ller Quaker Dairy joint venture in the United States, our Sabra dips joint venture and our Stacy baked grain snack business. We believe emerging and developing markets represent another very attractive high growth space for PepsiCo. Economic growth in these markets is lifting consumer income levels and driving urban lifestyles, which is in turn increasing demand for convenient foods and beverages. We expect to continue to invest aggressively for advantaged growth in emerging and developing markets, such as through tuck-in acquisitions like Mabel cookies in Brazil and through strategic partnerships to improve scale and performance such as our partnership with Tingyi in China. Accelerate the benefits of Power of One . We are focused on continuing to drive cost savings and other productivity enhancements derived from our complementary food and beverage portfolio, which benefit both our top and bottom line. For example, we realize significant benefits from our cost scale across our portfolio. We also capture productivity benefits by applying a common set of best-in-class processes, technologies and best practices across our businesses around the globe. In addition, the complementary nature of our categories allows us to drive commercial activities across food and beverage to accelerate our growth within particular markets. Harmonize internal processes and aggressively build out new capabilities. To be successful in an increasingly competitive environment, we must effectively implement our global operating model and aggressively build out new capabilities. We are leveraging the expertise of our marketing and innovation teams across the Company. We plan to increase the use of global marketing campaigns for our iconic global brands, such as the Live for Now campaign for Pepsi to create a more consistent brand experience for consumers around the world. We also expect to continue to increase our investment behind sweeteners and other research and development initiatives. In addition, we are investing in packaging and other innovations, including through the creation of a new design group. Other global processes, such as master data and information technology systems, are also being harmonized to increase efficiency across the Company and speed decision-making. Build and retain top talent. Our continued growth and our ability to effectively respond to a rapidly changing environment requires us to develop and retain talented associates. To address this need, we have implemented award-winning talent and leadership initiatives and plan to continue to recruit from outside our industry to infuse fresh thinking and bring complementary capabilities to our team. Deliver on the promise of Performance with Purpose. Performance with Purpose is our vision to succeed in the long term by creating sustained value. PepsiCo was again recognized for its leadership in this area in 2012 by earning a place on the prestigious Dow Jones Sustainability World Index for the sixth consecutive year and on the North America Index for the seventh consecutive year. We plan to continue delivering on this vision by offering a wide range of product choices, finding innovative ways to cut costs and minimize our impact on the environment, providing a safe and inclusive workplace and respecting and investing in the communities in which we operate. 30 Table of Contents Our Operations We are organized into four business units, as follows: 1) PepsiCo Americas Foods, which includes Frito-Lay North America (FLNA), Quaker Foods North America (QFNA) and all of our Latin American food and snack businesses (LAF); 2) PepsiCo Americas Beverages (PAB), which includes all of our North American and Latin American beverage businesses; 3) PepsiCo Europe, which includes all beverage, food and snack businesses in Europe and South Africa; and 4) PepsiCo Asia, Middle East and Africa (AMEA), which includes all beverage, food and snack businesses in AMEA, excluding South Africa. Our four business units are comprised of six reportable segments (also referred to as divisions), as follows: FLNA, QFNA, LAF, PAB, Europe, and AMEA. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for financial information about our divisions and geographic areas. Frito-Lay North America Either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, FLNA makes, markets, sells and distributes branded snack foods. These foods include Lay potato chips, Doritos tortilla chips, Cheetos cheese flavored snacks, Tostitos tortilla chips, branded dips, Ruffles potato chips, Fritos corn chips and Santitas tortilla chips. FLNA branded products are sold to independent distributors and retailers. In addition, FLNA joint venture with Strauss Group makes, markets, sells and distributes Sabra refrigerated dips and spreads. Quaker Foods North America Either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, QFNA makes, markets, sells and distributes cereals, rice, pasta, dairy and other branded products. QFNA products include Quaker oatmeal, Aunt Jemima mixes and syrups, Quaker Chewy granola bars, Quaker grits, Cap n Crunch cereal, Life cereal, Quaker rice cakes, Rice-A-Roni side dishes, Near East side dishes and Pasta Roni side dishes. These branded products are sold to independent distributors and retailers. Latin America Foods Either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, LAF makes, markets, sells and distributes a number of snack food brands including Marias Gamesa, Cheetos, Doritos, Ruffles, Emperador, Saladitas, Elma Chips, Rosquinhas Mabel, Sabritas and Tostitos, as well as many Quaker-branded cereals and snacks. These branded products are sold to independent distributors and retailers. PepsiCo Americas Beverages Either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, PAB makes, markets, sells and distributes beverage concentrates, fountain syrups and finished goods under various beverage brands including Pepsi, Mountain Dew, Gatorade, Diet Pepsi, Aquafina, 7UP (outside the U.S.), Diet Mountain Dew, Tropicana Pure Premium, Sierra Mist and Mirinda. PAB also, either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, 31 Table of Contents makes, markets and sells ready-to-drink tea and coffee products through joint ventures with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name) and Starbucks. Further, PAB manufactures and distributes certain brands licensed from DPSG, including Dr Pepper and Crush, and certain juice brands licensed from Dole Food Company, Inc. PAB operates its own bottling plants and distribution facilities and sells branded finished goods directly to independent distributors and retailers. PAB also sells concentrate and finished goods for our brands to authorized and independent bottlers, who in turn also sell our brands as finished goods to independent distributors and retailers in certain markets. PAB volume reflects sales to its independent distributors and retailers, as well as the sales of beverages bearing our trademarks that bottlers have reported as sold to independent distributors and retailers. Bottler case sales (BCS) and concentrate shipments and equivalents (CSE) are not necessarily equal during any given period due to seasonality, timing of product launches, product mix, bottler inventory practices and other factors. While our revenues are not entirely based on BCS volume, as there are independent bottlers in the supply chain, we believe that BCS is a valuable measure as it quantifies the sell-through of our products at the consumer level. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our acquisitions of PBG and PAS in 2010. Europe Either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, Europe makes, markets, sells and distributes a number of leading snack foods including Lay s, Walkers, Doritos, Cheetos and Ruffles, as well as many Quaker-branded cereals and snacks, through consolidated businesses as well as through noncontrolled affiliates. Europe also, either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, makes, markets, sells and distributes beverage concentrates, fountain syrups and finished goods under various beverage brands including Pepsi, Pepsi Max, 7UP, Diet Pepsi and Tropicana. These branded products are sold to authorized bottlers, independent distributors and retailers. In certain markets, however, Europe operates its own bottling plants and distribution facilities. Europe also, either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, makes, markets and sells ready-to-drink tea products through an international joint venture with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name). In addition, Europe makes, markets, sells and distributes a number of leading dairy products including Domik v Derevne, Chudo and Agusha. Europe reports two measures of volume. Snacks volume is reported on a system-wide basis, which includes our own sales and the sales by our noncontrolled affiliates of snacks bearing Company-owned or licensed trademarks. Beverage volume reflects Company-owned or authorized bottler sales of beverages bearing Company-owned or licensed trademarks to independent distributors and retailers (see PepsiCo Americas Beverages above). In 2011, we acquired WBD, Russia leading branded food and beverage company. WBD portfolio of products is included within Europe snacks or beverage reporting, depending on product type. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our acquisitions of WBD in 2011 and PBG and PAS in 2010. Asia, Middle East and Africa Either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, AMEA makes, markets, sells and distributes a number of leading snack food brands including Lay s, Chipsy, Kurkure, Doritos, Cheetos and Smith through consolidated businesses as well as through noncontrolled affiliates. Further, either independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, AMEA makes, markets and sells many Quaker-branded cereals and snacks. AMEA also makes, markets, sells and distributes beverage concentrates, fountain syrups and finished goods under various beverage brands including Pepsi, Mirinda, 7UP, Mountain Dew, Aquafina and Tropicana. These branded products are sold to authorized bottlers, independent distributors and retailers. However, in certain markets, AMEA operates its own bottling plants and distribution facilities. AMEA also, either 32 Table of Contents independently or in conjunction with third-party partners, makes, markets and sells ready-to-drink tea products through an international joint venture with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name). Further, AMEA licenses co-branded juice products to third-party partners through a strategic alliance with Tingyi under the House of Tropicana brand name. AMEA reports two measures of volume (see Europe above). See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about our transaction with Tingyi in 2012. Our Customers Our primary customers include wholesale distributors, foodservice distributors, grocery stores, convenience stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores and authorized independent bottlers. We normally grant our independent bottlers exclusive contracts to sell and manufacture certain beverage products bearing our trademarks within a specific geographic area. These arrangements provide us with the right to charge our independent bottlers for concentrate, finished goods and Aquafina royalties and specify the manufacturing process required for product quality. Since we do not sell directly to the consumer, we rely on and provide financial incentives to our customers to assist in the distribution and promotion of our products. For our independent distributors and retailers, these incentives include volume-based rebates, product placement fees, promotions and displays. For our independent bottlers, these incentives are referred to as bottler funding and are negotiated annually with each bottler to support a variety of trade and consumer programs, such as consumer incentives, advertising support, new product support, and vending and cooler equipment placement. Consumer incentives include coupons, pricing discounts and promotions, and other promotional offers. Advertising support is directed at advertising programs and supporting independent bottler media. New product support includes targeted consumer and retailer incentives and direct marketplace support, such as point-of-purchase materials, product placement fees, media and advertising. Vending and cooler equipment placement programs support the acquisition and placement of vending machines and cooler equipment. The nature and type of programs vary annually. Retail consolidation and the current economic environment continue to increase the importance of major customers. In 2012 , sales to Wal-Mart (including Sam s) represented approximately 11% of our total net revenue. Our top five retail customers represented approximately 30% of our 2012 North American net revenue, with Wal-Mart (including Sam s) representing approximately 17%. These percentages include concentrate sales to our independent bottlers which were used in finished goods sold by them to these retailers. Our Distribution Network Our products are brought to market through DSD, customer warehouse and distributor networks. The distribution system used depends on customer needs, product characteristics and local trade practices. Direct-Store-Delivery We, our independent bottlers and our distributors operate DSD systems that deliver snacks and beverages directly to retail stores where the products are merchandised by our employees or our bottlers. DSD enables us to merchandise with maximum visibility and appeal. DSD is especially well-suited to products that are restocked often and respond to in-store promotion and merchandising. Customer Warehouse Some of our products are delivered from our manufacturing plants and warehouses to customer warehouses and retail stores. These less costly systems generally work best for products that are less fragile and perishable, have lower turnover, and are less likely to be impulse purchases. 33 Table of Contents Distributor Networks We distribute many of our products through third party distributors. Third party distributors are particularly effective when greater distribution reach can be achieved by including a wide range of products on the delivery vehicles. For example, our foodservice and vending business distributes snacks, foods and beverages to restaurants, businesses, schools and stadiums through third-party foodservice and vending distributors and operators. Our Competition Our businesses operate in highly competitive markets. Our beverage, snack and food brands compete against global, regional, local and private label manufacturers and other value competitors. In many countries in which we do business, The Coca-Cola Company is our primary beverage competitor. Other food and beverage competitors include, but are not limited to, Nestl S.A., Danone, DPSG, Kellogg Company, General Mills, Inc. and Mondel z International, Inc. In many markets, we compete against numerous regional and local companies. Many of our snack and food brands hold significant leadership positions in the snack and food industry worldwide. However, The Coca-Cola Company has significant CSD share advantage in many markets outside the United States. Our beverage, snack and food brands compete on the basis of price, quality, product variety and distribution. Success in this competitive environment is dependent on effective promotion of existing products, the introduction of new products and the effectiveness of our advertising campaigns, marketing programs, product packaging, pricing, increased efficiency in production techniques and brand and trademark development and protection. We believe that the strength of our brands, innovation and marketing, coupled with the quality of our products and flexibility of our distribution network, allows us to compete effectively. Other Relationships Certain members of our Board of Directors also serve on the boards of certain vendors and customers. Those Board members do not participate in our vendor selection and negotiations nor in our customer negotiations. Our transactions with these vendors and customers are in the normal course of business and are consistent with terms negotiated with other vendors and customers. In addition, certain of our employees serve on the boards of Pepsi Bottling Ventures LLC and other affiliated companies of PepsiCo and do not receive incremental compensation for their Board services. Our Business Risks We are subject to risks in the normal course of business. During 2012, amid a continued unstable economic environment in Europe, certain countries continued to experience debt and credit issues as well as currency fluctuations. We continue to monitor the economic environment in Europe closely and have identified actions to potentially mitigate the unfavorable impact, if any, on our 2013 financial results. See also Risk Factors in Item 1A., Executive Overview above and Market Risks below for more information about these risks. Risk Management Framework The achievement of our strategic and operating objectives necessarily involves taking risks. Our risk management process is intended to ensure that risks are taken knowingly and purposefully. As such, we leverage an integrated risk management framework to identify, assess, prioritize, address, manage, monitor and communicate risks across the Company. This framework includes: PepsiCo Board of Directors, which is responsible for overseeing the assessment and mitigation of the Company top risks, receives updates on key risks throughout the year. The Audit Committee 34 Table of Contents of the Board of Directors helps define PepsiCo risk management processes and assists the Board in its oversight of strategic, financial, operating, business, compliance, safety, reputational and other risks facing PepsiCo. The Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors assists the Board in overseeing potential risks that may be associated with the Company compensation programs; The PepsiCo Risk Committee (PRC), comprised of a cross-functional, geographically diverse, senior management group which meets regularly to identify, assess, prioritize and address our key risks; Division Risk Committees (DRC), comprised of cross-functional senior management teams which meet regularly to identify, assess, prioritize and address division-specific business risks; PepsiCo Risk Management Office, which manages the overall risk management process, provides ongoing guidance, tools and analytical support to the PRC and the DRCs, identifies and assesses potential risks and facilitates ongoing communication between the parties, as well as with PepsiCo Audit Committee and Board of Directors; PepsiCo Corporate Audit, which evaluates the ongoing effectiveness of our key internal controls through periodic audit and review procedures; and PepsiCo Compliance & Ethics Department, which leads and coordinates our compliance policies and practices. Market Risks We are exposed to market risks arising from adverse changes in: commodity prices, affecting the cost of our raw materials and energy; foreign exchange rates and currency restrictions; and interest rates. In the normal course of business, we manage these risks through a variety of strategies, including productivity initiatives, global purchasing programs and hedging strategies. Ongoing productivity initiatives involve the identification and effective implementation of meaningful cost-saving opportunities or efficiencies. Our global purchasing programs include fixed-price purchase orders and pricing agreements. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for further information on our non-cancelable purchasing commitments. Our hedging strategies include the use of derivatives. Certain derivatives are designated as either cash flow or fair value hedges and qualify for hedge accounting treatment, while others do not qualify and are marked to market through earnings. Cash flows from derivatives used to manage commodity, foreign exchange or interest risks are classified as operating activities. We do not use derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We perform assessments of our counterparty credit risk regularly, including a review of credit ratings, credit default swap rates and potential nonperformance of the counterparty. Based on our most recent assessment of our counterparty credit risk, we consider this risk to be low. In addition, we enter into derivative contracts with a variety of financial institutions that we believe are creditworthy in order to reduce our concentration of credit risk. See Unfavorable economic conditions may have an adverse impact on our business results or financial condition. in Risk Factors in Item 1A. The fair value of our derivatives fluctuates based on market rates and prices. The sensitivity of our derivatives to these market fluctuations is discussed below. See Note 10 to consolidated financial statements for further discussion of these derivatives and our hedging policies. See Our Critical Accounting Policies for a discussion of the exposure of our pension and retiree medical plan assets and liabilities to risks related to market fluctuations. Inflationary, deflationary and recessionary conditions impacting these market risks also impact the demand for and pricing of our products. See Risk Factors in Item 1A. for further discussion. 35 Table of Contents Commodity Prices We expect to be able to reduce the impact of volatility in our raw material and energy costs through our hedging strategies and ongoing sourcing initiatives. We use derivatives, with terms of no more than three years, to economically hedge price fluctuations related to a portion of our anticipated commodity purchases, primarily for agricultural products, metals and energy. Our open commodity derivative contracts that qualify for hedge accounting had a face value of $507 million as of December 29, 2012 and $598 million as of December 31, 2011. At the end of 2012, the potential change in fair value of commodity derivative instruments, assuming a 10% decrease in the underlying commodity price, would have increased our net unrealized losses in 2012 by $49 million . Our open commodity derivative contracts that do not qualify for hedge accounting had a face value of $853 million as of December 29, 2012 and $630 million as of December 31, 2011. At the end of 2012, the potential change in fair value of commodity derivative instruments, assuming a 10% decrease in the underlying commodity price, would have increased our net losses in 2012 by $85 million . Foreign Exchange Financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars using period-end exchange rates for assets and liabilities and weighted-average exchange rates for revenues and expenses. Adjustments resulting from translating net assets are reported as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive loss within PepsiCo common shareholders equity under the caption currency translation adjustment. Our operations outside of the U.S. generate 49% of our net revenue, with Russia, Mexico, Canada, the United Kingdom and Brazil comprising approximately 25% of our net revenue. As a result, we are exposed to foreign currency risks. During 2012, unfavorable foreign exchange reduced net revenue growth by 2.5 percentage points, primarily due to depreciation of the Russian ruble, euro, Brazilian real and the Mexican peso. Currency declines against the U.S. dollar which are not offset could adversely impact our future results. The results of our Venezuelan businesses have been reported under hyperinflationary accounting since the beginning of our 2010 fiscal year, at which time the functional currency of our Venezuelan entities was changed from the bolivar fuerte (bolivar) to the U.S. dollar. As a result of the change to hyperinflationary accounting and the devaluation of the bolivar, we recorded an after-tax net charge of $120 million in 2010. In 2012 and 2011, the majority of our transactions and net monetary assets qualified to be remeasured at the official exchange rate of obtaining U.S. dollars for dividends through the government-operated Foreign Exchange Administration Board (CADIVI) (4.3 bolivars per dollar for 2012 and 2011). In 2012 and 2011, our operations in Venezuela comprised 7% and 8% of our cash and cash equivalents balance, respectively, and generated 1% of our net revenue in 2012 and less than 1% of our net revenue in 2011. Effective February 2013, the Venezuelan government devalued the bolivar by resetting the official exchange rate to 6.3 bolivars per dollar. We expect that the impact of the devaluation on PepsiCo 2013 net revenue and operating profit will not be material. The above impact excludes an after-tax net charge of approximately $100 million associated with the remeasurement of bolivar denominated net monetary assets. This after-tax net charge will be reflected in items affecting comparability in our 2013 first quarter Form 10-Q. We continue to use available options to obtain U.S. dollars to meet our operational needs. We are also exposed to foreign currency risk from foreign currency purchases and foreign currency assets and liabilities created in the normal course of business. We manage this risk through sourcing purchases from local suppliers, negotiating contracts in local currencies with foreign suppliers and through the use of derivatives, primarily forward contracts with terms of no more than two years. Exchange rate gains or losses related to foreign currency transactions are recognized as transaction gains or losses in our income statement as incurred. 36 Table of Contents Our foreign currency derivatives had a total face value of $2.8 billion as of December 29, 2012 and $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2011. At the end of 2012, we estimate that an unfavorable 10% change in the exchange rates would have increased our net unrealized losses by $134 million . For foreign currency derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment, all losses and gains were offset by changes in the underlying hedged items, resulting in no net material impact on earnings. Interest Rates We centrally manage our debt and investment portfolios considering investment opportunities and risks, tax consequences and overall financing strategies. We use various interest rate derivative instruments including, but not limited to, interest rate swaps, cross-currency interest rate swaps, Treasury locks and swap locks to manage our overall interest expense and foreign exchange risk. These instruments effectively change the interest rate and currency of specific debt issuances. Certain of our fixed rate indebtedness has been swapped to floating rates. The notional amount, interest payment and maturity date of the interest rate and cross-currency swaps match the principal, interest payment and maturity date of the related debt. Our Treasury locks and swap locks are entered into to protect against unfavorable interest rate changes relating to forecasted debt transactions. The notional amounts of the interest rate derivative instruments outstanding as of December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011 were $8.1 billion and $8.3 billion, respectively. Assuming year-end 2012 variable rate debt and investment levels, a 1-percentage-point increase in interest rates would have increased net interest expense by $9 million in 2012. OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES An appreciation of our critical accounting policies is necessary to understand our financial results. These policies may require management to make difficult and subjective judgments regarding uncertainties, and as a result, such estimates may significantly impact our financial results. The precision of these estimates and the likelihood of future changes depend on a number of underlying variables and a range of possible outcomes. Other than our accounting for pension and retiree medical plans, our critical accounting policies do not involve a choice between alternative methods of accounting. We applied our critical accounting policies and estimation methods consistently in all material respects, and for all periods presented, and have discussed these policies with our Audit Committee. Our critical accounting policies arise in conjunction with the following: revenue recognition; goodwill and other intangible assets; income tax expense and accruals; and pension and retiree medical plans. 37 Table of Contents Revenue Recognition Our products are sold for cash or on credit terms. Our credit terms, which are established in accordance with local and industry practices, typically require payment within 30 days of delivery in the U.S., and generally within 30 to 90 days internationally, and may allow discounts for early payment. We recognize revenue upon shipment or delivery to our customers based on written sales terms that do not allow for a right of return. However, our policy for DSD and certain chilled products is to remove and replace damaged and out-of-date products from store shelves to ensure that consumers receive the product quality and freshness they expect. Similarly, our policy for certain warehouse-distributed products is to replace damaged and out-of-date products. Based on our experience with this practice, we have reserved for anticipated damaged and out-of-date products. Our policy is to provide customers with product when needed. In fact, our commitment to freshness and product dating serves to regulate the quantity of product shipped or delivered. In addition, DSD products are placed on the shelf by our employees with customer shelf space and storerooms limiting the quantity of product. For product delivered through our other distribution networks, we monitor customer inventory levels. As discussed in Our Customers, we offer sales incentives and discounts through various programs to customers and consumers. Total marketplace spending includes sales incentives, discounts, advertising and other marketing activities. Sales incentives and discounts are primarily accounted for as a reduction of revenue and totaled $34.7 billion in 2012, $34.6 billion in 2011 and $29.1 billion in 2010. Sales incentives and discounts include payments to customers for performing merchandising activities on our behalf, such as payments for in-store displays, payments to gain distribution of new products, payments for shelf space and discounts to promote lower retail prices. Sales incentives and discounts also include support provided to our independent bottlers through funding of advertising and other marketing activities. A number of our sales incentives, such as bottler funding to independent bottlers and customer volume rebates, are based on annual targets, and accruals are established during the year for the expected payout. These accruals are based on contract terms and our historical experience with similar programs and require management judgment with respect to estimating customer participation and performance levels. Differences between estimated expense and actual incentive costs are normally insignificant and are recognized in earnings in the period such differences are determined. The terms of most of our incentive arrangements do not exceed a year, and therefore do not require highly uncertain long-term estimates. Certain arrangements, such as fountain pouring rights, may extend beyond one year. Payments made to obtain these rights are recognized over the shorter of the economic or contractual life, as a reduction of revenue, and the remaining balances of $ 335 million as of December 29, 2012 and $ 313 million as of December 31, 2011 are included in current assets and other assets on our balance sheet. For interim reporting, our policy is to allocate our forecasted full-year sales incentives for most of our programs to each of our interim reporting periods in the same year that benefits from the programs. The allocation methodology is based on our forecasted sales incentives for the full year and the proportion of each interim period actual gross revenue and volume, as applicable, to our forecasted annual gross revenue and volume, as applicable. Based on our review of the forecasts at each interim period, any changes in estimates and the related allocation of sales incentives are recognized in the interim period as they are identified. In addition, we apply a similar allocation methodology for interim reporting purposes for advertising and other marketing activities. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on our total marketplace spending. Our annual financial statements are not impacted by this interim allocation methodology. 38 Table of Contents We estimate and reserve for our bad debt exposure based on our experience with past due accounts and collectibility, the aging of accounts receivable and our analysis of customer data. Bad debt expense is classified within selling, general and administrative expenses in our income statement. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets We sell products under a number of brand names, many of which were developed by us. The brand development costs are expensed as incurred. We also purchase brands in acquisitions. In a business combination, the consideration is first assigned to identifiable assets and liabilities, including brands, based on estimated fair values, with any excess recorded as goodwill. Determining fair value requires significant estimates and assumptions based on an evaluation of a number of factors, such as marketplace participants, product life cycles, market share, consumer awareness, brand history and future expansion expectations, amount and timing of future cash flows and the discount rate applied to the cash flows. We believe that a brand has an indefinite life if it has a history of strong revenue and cash flow performance, and we have the intent and ability to support the brand with marketplace spending for the foreseeable future. If these perpetual brand criteria are not met, brands are amortized over their expected useful lives, which generally range from five to 40 years. Determining the expected life of a brand requires management judgment and is based on an evaluation of a number of factors, including market share, consumer awareness, brand history, future expansion expectations and regulatory restrictions, as well as the macroeconomic environment of the countries in which the brand is sold. Perpetual brands and goodwill are not amortized and are assessed for impairment at least annually. If the carrying amount of a perpetual brand exceeds its fair value, as determined by its discounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Goodwill is evaluated using a two-step impairment test at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit can be a division or business within a division. The first step compares the book value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, with its fair value, as determined by its discounted cash flows. Discounted cash flows are primarily based on growth rates for sales and operating profit which are inputs from our annual long-range planning process. Additionally, they are also impacted by estimates of discount rates, perpetuity growth assumptions and other factors. If the book value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we complete the second step to determine the amount of goodwill impairment loss that we should record, if any. In the second step, we determine an implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill by allocating the fair value of the reporting unit to all of the assets and liabilities other than goodwill (including any unrecognized intangible assets). The amount of impairment loss is equal to the excess of the book value of the goodwill over the implied fair value of that goodwill. Amortizable brands are only evaluated for impairment upon a significant change in the operating or macroeconomic environment. If an evaluation of the undiscounted future cash flows indicates impairment, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value, which is based on its discounted future cash flows. In connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we reacquired certain franchise rights which provided PBG and PAS with the exclusive and perpetual rights to manufacture and/or distribute beverages for sale in specified territories. In determining the useful life of these reacquired franchise rights, we considered many factors, including the pre-existing perpetual bottling arrangements, the indefinite period expected for the reacquired rights to contribute to our future cash flows, as well as the lack of any factors that would limit the useful life of the reacquired rights to us, including legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors. Therefore, certain reacquired franchise rights, as well as perpetual brands and goodwill, are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment at least annually. Certain reacquired and acquired franchise rights are amortized over the remaining contractual period of the contract in which the right was granted. 39 Table of Contents Significant management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating and macroeconomic changes and to estimate future cash flows. Assumptions used in our impairment evaluations, such as forecasted growth rates and our cost of capital, are based on the best available market information and are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. These assumptions could be adversely impacted by certain of the risks discussed in Risk Factors in Item 1A. and Our Business Risks. We did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill in the years presented. In addition, as of December 29, 2012, we did not have any reporting units that were at risk of failing the first step of the goodwill impairment test. We recognized impairment charges in Europe for other nonamortizable intangible assets of $23 million and $14 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. We did not recognize any impairment charges for other nonamortizable intangible assets in 2010. As of December 29, 2012, we had $31.7 billion of goodwill and other nonamortizable intangible assets, primarily related to the acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD. Income Tax Expense and Accruals Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining our annual tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions. We establish reserves when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable, we believe that certain positions are subject to challenge and that we may not succeed. We adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest, in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of a tax audit. An estimated annual effective tax rate is applied to our quarterly operating results. In the event there is a significant or unusual item recognized in our quarterly operating results, the tax attributable to that item is separately calculated and recorded at the same time as that item. We consider the tax adjustments from the resolution of prior year tax matters to be among such items. Tax law requires items to be included in our tax returns at different times than the items are reflected in our financial statements. As a result, our annual tax rate reflected in our financial statements is different than that reported in our tax returns (our cash tax rate). Some of these differences are permanent, such as expenses that are not deductible in our tax return, and some differences reverse over time, such as depreciation expense. These temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in our tax returns in future years for which we have already recorded the tax benefit in our income statement. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent tax expense recognized in our financial statements for which payment has been deferred, or expense for which we have already taken a deduction in our tax return but have not yet recognized as expense in our financial statements. In 2012, our annual tax rate was 25.2% compared to 26.8% in 2011, as discussed in Other Consolidated Results. The tax rate in 2012 decreased 1.6 percentage points primarily reflecting the tax impact of a favorable tax court decision combined with the pre-payment of Medicare subsidy liabilities, partially offset by the tax impact of the transaction with Tingyi and the lapping of prior year tax benefits related to a portion of our international bottling operations. 40 Table of Contents Pension and Retiree Medical Plans Our pension plans cover certain full-time employees in the U.S. and certain international employees. Benefits are determined based on either years of service or a combination of years of service and earnings. Certain U.S. and Canada retirees are also eligible for medical and life insurance benefits (retiree medical) if they meet age and service requirements. Generally, our share of retiree medical costs is capped at specified dollar amounts, which vary based upon years of service, with retirees contributing the remainder of the cost. As of February 2012, certain U.S. employees earning a benefit under one of our defined benefit pension plans were no longer eligible for Company matching contributions on their 401(k) contributions. In the fourth quarter of 2012, the Company offered certain former employees who have vested benefits in our defined benefit pension plans the option of receiving a one-time lump sum payment equal to the present value of the participant pension benefit (payable in cash or rolled over into a qualified retirement plan or Individual Retirement Account (IRA)). See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. For information about certain changes to our U.S. pension and retiree medical plans and changes in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, see Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. Our Assumptions The determination of pension and retiree medical plan obligations and related expenses requires the use of assumptions to estimate the amount of benefits that employees earn while working, as well as the present value of those benefits. Annual pension and retiree medical expense amounts are principally based on four components: (1) the value of benefits earned by employees for working during the year (service cost), (2) the increase in the liability due to the passage of time (interest cost), and (3) other gains and losses as discussed below, reduced by (4) the expected return on assets for our funded plans. Significant assumptions used to measure our annual pension and retiree medical expense include: the interest rate used to determine the present value of liabilities (discount rate); certain employee-related factors, such as turnover, retirement age and mortality; the expected return on assets in our funded plans; for pension expense, the rate of salary increases for plans where benefits are based on earnings; and for retiree medical expense, health care cost trend rates. Our assumptions reflect our historical experience and management best judgment regarding future expectations. Due to the significant management judgment involved, our assumptions could have a material impact on the measurement of our pension and retiree medical benefit expenses and obligations. At each measurement date, the discount rates are based on interest rates for high-quality, long-term corporate debt securities with maturities comparable to those of our liabilities. In 2011 and 2010, our U.S. discount rate was determined using the Mercer Pension Discount Yield Curve (Mercer Curve). The Mercer Curve in 2011 and 2010 used a portfolio of high-quality bonds rated Aa or higher by Moody s. In 2012, due to the downgrade of several global financial institutions by Moody s, Mercer developed a new curve, the Above Mean Curve, which we used to determine the discount rate for our U.S. pension and retiree medical plans. These curves included bonds that closely match the timing and amount of our expected benefit payments and reflects the portfolio of investments we would consider to settle our liabilities. The expected return on pension plan assets is based on our pension plan investment strategy and our expectations for long-term rates of return by asset class, taking into account volatility and correlation among asset classes and our historical experience. We also review current levels of interest rates and inflation to 41 Table of Contents assess the reasonableness of the long-term rates. We evaluate our expected return assumptions annually to ensure that they are reasonable. Our pension plan investment strategy includes the use of actively managed securities and is reviewed periodically in conjunction with plan liabilities, an evaluation of market conditions, tolerance for risk and cash requirements for benefit payments. Our investment objective is to ensure that funds are available to meet the plans benefit obligations when they become due. Our overall investment strategy is to prudently invest plan assets in a well-diversified portfolio of equity and high-quality debt securities to achieve our long-term return expectations. Our investment policy also permits the use of derivative instruments which are primarily used to reduce risk. Our expected long-term rate of return on U.S. plan assets is 7.8%. Our target investment allocations are as follows: 2013 2012 Fixed income 40 % 40 % U.S. equity 33 % 33 % International equity 22 % 22 % Real estate 5 % 5 % Actual investment allocations may vary from our target investment allocations due to prevailing market conditions. We regularly review our actual investment allocations and periodically rebalance our investments to our target allocations. To calculate the expected return on pension plan assets, our market-related value of assets for fixed income is the actual fair value. For all other asset categories, we use a method that recognizes investment gains or losses (the difference between the expected and actual return based on the market-related value of assets) over a five-year period. This has the effect of reducing year-to-year volatility. The difference between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets is added to, or subtracted from, other gains and losses resulting from actual experience differing from our assumptions and from changes in our assumptions determined at each measurement date. If this net accumulated gain or loss exceeds 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or plan liabilities, a portion of the net gain or loss is included in expense for the following year based upon the average remaining service period of active plan participants, which is approximately 11 years for pension expense and approximately 8 years for retiree medical expense. The cost or benefit of plan changes that increase or decrease benefits for prior employee service (prior service cost/(credit)) is included in earnings on a straight-line basis over the average remaining service period of active plan participants. The health care trend rate used to determine our retiree medical plan liability and expense is reviewed annually. Our review is based on our claim experience, information provided by our health plans and actuaries, and our knowledge of the health care industry. Our review of the trend rate considers factors such as demographics, plan design, new medical technologies and changes in medical carriers. 42 Table of Contents Weighted-average assumptions for pension and retiree medical expense are as follows: 2013 2012 2011 Pension Expense discount rate 4.2 % 4.6 % 5.6 % Expected rate of return on plan assets 7.5 % 7.6 % 7.6 % Expected rate of salary increases 3.7 % 3.8 % 4.1 % Retiree medical Expense discount rate 3.7 % 4.4 % 5.2 % Expected rate of return on plan assets 7.8 % 7.8 % 7.8 % Current health care cost trend rate 6.6 % 6.8 % 7.0 % Based on our assumptions, we expect our pension and retiree medical expenses to increase in 2013 primarily driven by lower discount rates, partially offset by the impact of the 2012 lump sum payments offered to certain former employees. Sensitivity of Assumptions A decrease in the discount rate or in the expected rate of return assumptions would increase pension expense. A 25-basis-point decrease in the discount rate and expected rate of return assumptions would increase the 2013 pension expense as follows: Assumption Amount Discount rate $69 million Expected rate of return $33 million See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for information about the sensitivity of our retiree medical cost assumptions. Funding We make contributions to pension trusts maintained to provide plan benefits for certain pension plans. These contributions are made in accordance with applicable tax regulations that provide for current tax deductions for our contributions and taxation to the employee only upon receipt of plan benefits. Generally, we do not fund our pension plans when our contributions would not be currently tax deductible. As our retiree medical plans are not subject to regulatory funding requirements, we generally fund these plans on a pay-as-you-go basis, although we periodically review available options to make additional contributions toward these benefits. Our pension contributions for 2012 were $1,614 million , of which $1,375 million was discretionary. Discretionary 2012 contributions included $ 405 million pertaining to pension lump sum payments. Our retiree medical contributions for 2012 were $ 251 million , of which $140 million was discretionary. In 2013 , we expect to make pension and retiree medical contributions of approximately $ 240 million , with up to approximately $ 17 million expected to be discretionary. Our contributions for retiree medical benefits are estimated to be approximately $ 70 million in 2013 . Our pension and retiree medical contributions are subject to change as a result of many factors, such as changes in interest rates, deviations between actual and expected asset returns and changes in tax or other benefit laws. For estimated future benefit payments, including our pay-as-you-go payments, as well as those from trusts, see Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. 43 Table of Contents OUR FINANCIAL RESULTS Items Affecting Comparability The year-over-year comparisons of our financial results are affected by the following items: 2012 2011 2010 Net revenue 53 rd week $ 623 Operating profit Mark-to-market net impact gains/(losses) $ 65 $ (102 ) $ 91 Merger and integration charges $ (11 ) $ (313 ) $ (769 ) Restructuring and impairment charges $ (279 ) $ (383 ) Restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi $ (150 ) Pension lump sum settlement charge $ (195 ) 53 rd week $ 109 Inventory fair value adjustments $ (46 ) $ (398 ) Venezuela currency devaluation $ (120 ) Asset write-off $ (145 ) Foundation contribution $ (100 ) Bottling equity income Merger and integration charges $ (9 ) Gain on previously held equity interests $ 735 Interest expense Merger and integration charges $ (5 ) $ (16 ) $ (30 ) 53 rd week $ (16 ) Debt repurchase $ (178 ) Net income attributable to PepsiCo Mark-to-market net impact gains/(losses) $ 41 $ (71 ) $ 58 Merger and integration charges $ (12 ) $ (271 ) $ (648 ) Restructuring and impairment charges $ (215 ) $ (286 ) Restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi $ (176 ) Pension lump sum settlement charge $ (131 ) Tax benefit related to tax court decision $ 217 53 rd week $ 64 Inventory fair value adjustments $ (28 ) $ (333 ) Gain on previously held equity interests $ 958 Venezuela currency devaluation $ (120 ) Asset write-off $ (92 ) Foundation contribution $ (64 ) Debt repurchase $ (114 ) Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted Mark-to-market net impact gains/(losses) $ 0.03 $ (0.04 ) $ 0.04 Merger and integration charges $ (0.01 ) $ (0.17 ) $ (0.40 ) Restructuring and impairment charges $ (0.14 ) $ (0.18 ) Restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi $ (0.11 ) Pension lump sum settlement charge $ (0.08 ) Tax benefit related to tax court decision $ 0.14 53 rd week $ 0.04 Inventory fair value adjustments $ (0.02 ) $ (0.21 ) Gain on previously held equity interests $ 0.60 Venezuela currency devaluation $ (0.07 ) Asset write-off $ (0.06 ) Foundation contribution $ (0.04 ) Debt repurchase $ (0.07 ) 44 Table of Contents Mark-to-Market Net Impact We centrally manage commodity derivatives on behalf of our divisions. These commodity derivatives include agricultural products, metals and energy. Certain of these commodity derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment and are marked to market with the resulting gains and losses recognized in corporate unallocated expenses. These gains and losses are subsequently reflected in division results when the divisions take delivery of the underlying commodity. Therefore, the divisions realize the economic effects of the derivative without experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2012 , we recognized $ 65 million ($ 41 million after-tax or $ 0.03 per share) of mark-to-market net gains on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2011 , we recognized $ 102 million ($ 71 million after-tax or $ 0.04 per share) of mark-to-market net losses on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2010 , we recognized $ 91 million ($ 58 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) of mark-to-market net gains on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. Merger and Integration Charges In 2012, we incurred merger and integration charges of $ 16 million ($ 12 million after-tax or $ 0.01 per share) related to our acquisition of WBD, including $ 11 million recorded in the Europe segment and $ 5 million recorded in interest expense. In 2011, we incurred merger and integration charges of $ 329 million ($ 271 million after-tax or $ 0.17 per share) related to our acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD, including $ 112 million recorded in the PAB segment, $ 123 million recorded in the Europe segment, $ 78 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses and $ 16 million recorded in interest expense. These charges also include closing costs and advisory fees related to our acquisition of WBD. In 2010, we incurred merger and integration charges of $ 799 million related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as advisory fees in connection with our acquisition of WBD. $ 467 million of these charges were recorded in the PAB segment, $ 111 million recorded in the Europe segment, $ 191 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses and $ 30 million recorded in interest expense. The merger and integration charges related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS were incurred to help create a more fully integrated supply chain and go-to-market business model, to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the distribution of our brands and to enhance our revenue growth. These charges also include closing costs, one-time financing costs and advisory fees related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. In addition, we recorded $ 9 million of merger-related charges, representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS, in bottling equity income. In total, the above charges had an after-tax impact of $ 648 million or $ 0.40 per share. Restructuring and Impairment Charges In 2012, we incurred restructuring charges of $ 279 million ($ 215 million after-tax or $ 0.14 per share) in conjunction with our multi-year productivity plan (Productivity Plan), including $ 38 million recorded in the FLNA segment, $ 9 million recorded in the QFNA segment, $ 50 million recorded in the LAF segment, $ 102 million recorded in the PAB segment, $ 42 million recorded in the Europe segment, $ 28 million recorded in the AMEA segment and $ 10 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2011, we incurred restructuring charges of $ 383 million ($ 286 million after-tax or $ 0.18 per share) in conjunction with our Productivity Plan, including $ 76 million recorded in the FLNA segment, $ 18 million recorded in the QFNA segment, $ 48 million recorded in the LAF segment, $ 81 million recorded in the PAB 45 Table of Contents segment, $ 77 million recorded in the Europe segment, $ 9 million recorded in the AMEA segment and $ 74 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses. The Productivity Plan includes actions in every aspect of our business that we believe will strengthen our complementary food, snack and beverage businesses by leveraging new technologies and processes across PepsiCo operations, go-to-market and information systems; heightening the focus on best practice sharing across the globe; consolidating manufacturing, warehouse and sales facilities; and implementing simplified organization structures, with wider spans of control and fewer layers of management. The Productivity Plan is expected to enhance PepsiCo cost-competitiveness, provide a source of funding for future brand-building and innovation initiatives, and serve as a financial cushion for potential macroeconomic uncertainty. As a result, we expect to incur pre-tax charges of approximately $ 910 million , $279 million of which was reflected in our 2012 results, $ 383 million of which was reflected in our 2011 results, and the balance of which will be reflected in our 2013 through 2015 results. These charges will consist of approximately $ 540 million of severance and other employee-related costs; approximately $ 270 million for other costs, including consulting-related costs and the termination of leases and other contracts; and approximately $ 100 million for asset impairments (all non-cash) resulting from plant closures and related actions. These charges resulted in cash expenditures of $343 million in 2012 and $ 30 million in 2011, with the balance of approximately $ 362 million expected in 2013 through 2015. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. Restructuring and Other Charges Related to the Transaction with Tingyi In 2012, we recorded restructuring and other charges of $ 150 million ($ 176 million after-tax or $ 0.11 per share) in the AMEA segment related to the transaction with Tingyi. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements. Pension Lump Sum Settlement Charge In 2012, we recorded a pension lump sum settlement charge in corporate unallocated expenses of $195 million ( $131 million after-tax or $ 0.08 per share). See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. Tax Benefit Related to Tax Court Decision In 2012, we recognized a non-cash tax benefit of $217 million ( $0.14 per share) associated with a favorable tax court decision related to the classification of financial instruments. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements. 53 rd Week In 2011, we had an additional week of results (53 rd week). Our fiscal year ends on the last Saturday of each December, resulting in an additional week of results every five or six years. The 53 rd week increased 2011 net revenue by $ 623 million and operating profit by $ 109 million ( $64 million after-tax or $0.04 per share). Inventory Fair Value Adjustments In 2011, we recorded $ 46 million ($ 28 million after-tax or $ 0.02 per share) of incremental costs in cost of sales related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory included in WBD balance sheet at the acquisition date and hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. In 2010, we recorded $ 398 million ($ 333 million after-tax or $ 0.21 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory and other related hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. Substantially all of these costs were recorded in cost of sales. 46 Table of Contents Gain on Previously Held Equity Interests In 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded a gain on our previously held equity interests of $ 958 million ($ 0.60 per share), comprising $ 735 million which was non-taxable and recorded in bottling equity income and $ 223 million related to the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with these previously held equity interests. Venezuela Currency Devaluation As of the beginning of our 2010 fiscal year, we recorded a $ 120 million net charge related to our change to hyperinflationary accounting for our Venezuelan businesses and the related devaluation of the bolivar. $ 129 million of this net charge was recorded in corporate unallocated expenses, with the balance (income of $ 9 million ) recorded in our PAB segment. In total, this net charge had an after-tax impact of $ 120 million or $ 0.07 per share. Asset Write-Off In 2010, we recorded a $ 145 million charge ($ 92 million after-tax or $ 0.06 per share) related to a change in scope of one release in our ongoing migration to SAP software. This change was driven, in part, by a review of our North America systems strategy following our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Foundation Contribution In 2010, we made a $ 100 million ($ 64 million after-tax or $ 0.04 per share) contribution to the PepsiCo Foundation, Inc., in order to fund charitable and social programs over the next several years. This contribution was recorded in corporate unallocated expenses. Debt Repurchase In 2010, we paid $ 672 million in a cash tender offer to repurchase $ 500 million (aggregate principal amount) of our 7.90% senior unsecured notes maturing in 2018 . As a result of this debt repurchase, we recorded a $ 178 million charge to interest expense ($ 114 million after-tax or $ 0.07 per share), primarily representing the premium paid in the tender offer. Non-GAAP Measures Certain measures contained in this Form 10-K are financial measures that are adjusted for items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability for a detailed list and description of each of these items), as well as, in certain instances, adjusted for foreign exchange. These measures are not in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Items adjusted for currency assume foreign currency exchange rates used for translation based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-year period. In order to compute our constant currency results, we multiply or divide, as appropriate, our current year U.S. dollar results by the current year average foreign exchange rates and then multiply or divide, as appropriate, those amounts by the prior year average foreign exchange rates. We believe investors should consider these non-GAAP measures in evaluating our results as they are more indicative of our ongoing performance and with how management evaluates our operational results and trends. These measures are not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP reporting measures. See also Organic Revenue Growth and Management Operating Cash Flow. 47 Table of Contents Results of Operations Consolidated Review In the discussions of net revenue and operating profit below, effective net pricing reflects the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries and net pricing reflects the year-over-year combined impact of list price changes, weight changes per package, discounts and allowances. Additionally, acquisitions and divestitures, except as otherwise noted, reflect all mergers and acquisitions activity, including the impact of acquisitions, divestitures and changes in ownership or control in consolidated subsidiaries and nonconsolidated equity investees. Servings Since our divisions each use different measures of physical unit volume (i.e., kilos, gallons, pounds and case sales), a common servings metric is necessary to reflect our consolidated physical unit volume. Our divisions physical volume measures are converted into servings based on U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines for single-serving sizes of our products. In 2012, total servings increased 3% compared to 2011. Excluding the impact of the 53 rd week, total servings also increased 3% compared to 2011. In 2011, total servings increased 6% compared to 2010. Excluding the impact of the 53 rd week, total servings increased 5% compared to 2010. 2012 and 2011 servings growth reflects an adjustment to the base year for divestitures that occurred in 2012 and 2011, as applicable. Total Net Revenue and Operating Profit Change 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Total net revenue $ 65,492 $ 66,504 $ 57,838 (1.5 )% 15 % Operating profit FLNA $ 3,646 $ 3,621 $ 3,376 1 % 7 % QFNA 695 797 741 (13 )% 8 % LAF 1,059 1,078 1,004 (2 )% 7 % PAB 2,937 3,273 2,776 (10 )% 18 % Europe 1,330 1,210 1,054 10 % 15 % AMEA 747 887 708 (16 )% 25 % Corporate Unallocated Mark-to-market net impact gains/(losses) 65 (102 ) 91 n/m n/m Merger and integration charges (78 ) (191 ) n/m (59 )% Restructuring and impairment charges (10 ) (74 ) (86 )% n/m Pension lump sum settlement charge (195 ) n/m 53 rd week (18 ) n/m n/m Venezuela currency devaluation (129 ) n/m Asset write-off (145 ) n/m Foundation contribution (100 ) n/m Other (1,162 ) (961 ) (853 ) 21 % 13 % Total operating profit $ 9,112 $ 9,633 $ 8,332 (5 )% 16 % Total operating profit margin 13.9 % 14.5 % 14.4 % (0.6 ) 0.1 n/m represents year-over-year changes that are not meaningful. 48 Table of Contents 2012 On a reported basis, total operating profit decreased 5% and operating margin decreased 0.6 percentage points. Operating profit performance was primarily driven by cost increases reflecting strategic investments, higher commodity costs, higher advertising and marketing expense and unfavorable foreign exchange, partially offset by effective net pricing. Other corporate unallocated expenses increased 21% , primarily driven by increased pension expense. Commodity inflation was approximately $1.2 billion compared to the prior period, primarily attributable to PAB, FLNA and Europe. Operating profit also benefited from actions associated with our productivity initiatives, which contributed more than $1 billion in cost reductions across a number of expense categories among all of our divisions. Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) positively contributed 1.2 percentage points to the total operating profit performance and 0.4 percentage points to total operating margin. 2011 On a reported basis, total operating profit increased 16% and operating margin increased 0.1 percentage points. Operating profit growth was primarily driven by the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs. Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) contributed 10 percentage points to the total operating profit growth and 1.2 percentage points to the total operating margin increase. 49 Table of Contents Other Consolidated Results Change 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Bottling equity income $ 735 $ (735 ) Interest expense, net $ (808 ) $ (799 ) $ (835 ) $ (9 ) $ 36 Annual tax rate 25.2 % 26.8 % 23.0 % Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,178 $ 6,443 $ 6,320 (4 )% 2 % Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 3.92 $ 4.03 $ 3.91 (3 )% 3 % Mark-to-market net impact (gains)/losses (0.03 ) 0.04 (0.04 ) Merger and integration charges 0.01 0.17 0.40 Restructuring and impairment charges 0.14 0.18 Restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi 0.11 Pension lump sum settlement charge 0.08 Tax benefit related to tax court decision (0.14 ) 53 rd week (0.04 ) Inventory fair value adjustments 0.02 0.21 Gain on previously held equity interests (0.60 ) Venezuela currency devaluation 0.07 Asset write-off 0.06 Foundation contribution 0.04 Debt repurchase 0.07 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share - diluted, excluding above items* $ 4.10 ** $ 4.40 $ 4.13 ** (7 )% 7 % Impact of foreign exchange translation 2 (1 ) Growth in net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted, excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* (5 )% 5 % ** * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2012 Net interest expense increased $ 9 million , primarily reflecting higher average debt balances and higher rates on our debt balances, partially offset by gains in the market value of investments used to economically hedge a portion of our deferred compensation costs and the impact of the 53 rd week in the prior year. The tax rate decreased 1.6 percentage points compared to 2011, primarily reflecting the tax impact of a favorable tax court decision combined with the pre-payment of Medicare subsidy liabilities, partially offset by the tax impact of the transaction with Tingyi and the lapping of prior year tax benefits related to a portion of our international bottling operations. Net income attributable to PepsiCo decreased 4% and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share decreased 3% . Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) positively contributed 4 percentage points to both net income attributable to PepsiCo and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share. 50 Table of Contents 2011 Bottling equity income decreased $ 735 million , reflecting the gain in the prior year on our previously held equity interests in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Prior to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS on February 26, 2010, we had noncontrolling interests in each of these bottlers and consequently included our share of their net income in bottling equity income. Upon consummation of the acquisitions in the first quarter of 2010, we began to consolidate the results of these bottlers and recorded this gain in bottling equity income associated with revaluing our previously held equity interests in PBG and PAS to fair value. Net interest expense decreased $ 36 million , primarily reflecting interest expense in the prior year in connection with our cash tender offer to repurchase debt in 2010, partially offset by higher average debt balances in 2011. The tax rate increased 3.8 percentage points compared to 2010, primarily reflecting the prior year non-taxable gain and reversal of deferred taxes attributable to our previously held equity interests in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Net income attributable to PepsiCo increased 2% and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share increased 3% . Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) decreased net income attributable to PepsiCo by 3 percentage points and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share by 3.5 percentage points. 51 Table of Contents Results of Operations Division Review The results and discussions below are based on how our Chief Executive Officer monitors the performance of our divisions. Accordingly, 2012 and 2011 volume growth measures reflect an adjustment to the base year for divestitures that occurred in 2012 and 2011. See Items Affecting Comparability for a discussion of items to consider when evaluating our results and related information regarding non-GAAP measures. FLNA QFNA LAF PAB Europe AMEA Total Net Revenue, 2012 $ 13,574 $ 2,636 $ 7,780 $ 21,408 $ 13,441 $ 6,653 $ 65,492 Net Revenue, 2011 $ 13,322 $ 2,656 $ 7,156 $ 22,418 $ 13,560 $ 7,392 $ 66,504 % Impact of: Volume (a) (1 )% (1 )% 4 % (3 )% % 8 % % Effective net pricing (b) 3 1 10 3 4 2 4 Foreign exchange translation (7 ) (7 ) (3 ) (2.5 ) Acquisitions and divestitures 2 (4.5 ) 2 (17 ) (3 ) Reported growth (c) 2 % (1 )% 9 % (4.5 )% (1 )% (10 )% (1.5 )% FLNA QFNA LAF PAB Europe AMEA Total Net Revenue, 2011 $ 13,322 $ 2,656 $ 7,156 $ 22,418 $ 13,560 $ 7,392 $ 66,504 Net Revenue, 2010 $ 12,573 $ 2,656 $ 6,315 $ 20,401 $ 9,602 $ 6,291 $ 57,838 % Impact of: Volume (a) 2 % (5 )% 3.5 % * * 10 % * Effective net pricing (b) 3 4 8 * * 6 * Foreign exchange translation 1 2 1 % 3 % 2 1 % Acquisitions and divestitures * * * Reported growth (c) 6 % % 13 % 10 % 41 % 17 % 15 % (a) Excludes the impact of acquisitions and divestitures. In certain instances, volume growth varies from the amounts disclosed in the following divisional discussions due to nonconsolidated joint venture volume, and, for our beverage businesses, temporary timing differences between BCS and CSE. Our net revenue excludes nonconsolidated joint venture volume, and, for our beverage businesses, is based on CSE. (b) Includes the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries. (c) Amounts may not sum due to rounding. * It is impractical to separately determine and quantify the impact of our acquisitions of PBG and PAS from changes in our pre-existing beverage business since we now manage these businesses as an integrated system. 52 Table of Contents Organic Revenue Growth Organic revenue growth is a significant measure we use to monitor net revenue performance. However, it is not a measure provided by accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Therefore, this measure is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP net revenue growth. In order to compute our organic revenue growth results, we exclude the impact of acquisitions and divestitures, foreign exchange translation and the 53 rd week from reported net revenue growth. See also Non-GAAP Measures. 2012 FLNA QFNA LAF PAB Europe AMEA Total Reported Growth 2 % (1 )% 9 % (4.5 )% (1 )% (10 )% (1.5 )% % Impact of: Foreign exchange translation 7 7 3 2.5 Acquisitions and divestitures (2 ) 4.5 (2 ) 17 3 53 rd week 2 2 1 1 Organic Growth (a) 4 % 1 % 14 % 1.5 % 4 % 10 % 5 % 2011 FLNA QFNA LAF PAB Europe AMEA Total Reported Growth 6 % % 13 % 10 % 41 % 17 % 15 % % Impact of: Foreign exchange translation (1 ) (2 ) (1 ) (3 ) (2 ) (1 ) Acquisitions and divestitures * * * 53 rd week (2 ) (2 ) (1 ) (1 ) Organic Growth (a) 3.5 % (2 )% 11 % * * 16 % * (a) Amounts may not sum due to rounding. * It is impractical to separately determine and quantify the impact of our acquisitions of PBG and PAS from changes in our pre-existing beverage business since we now manage these businesses as an integrated system. 53 Table of Contents Frito-Lay North America % Change 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Net revenue $ 13,574 $ 13,322 $ 12,573 2 6 53 rd week (260 ) Net revenue excluding above item* $ 13,574 $ 13,062 $ 12,573 4 4 Impact of foreign exchange translation Net revenue growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 4 3.5 ** Operating profit $ 3,646 $ 3,621 $ 3,376 1 7 Restructuring and impairment charges 38 76 53 rd week (72 ) Operating profit excluding above items* $ 3,684 $ 3,625 $ 3,376 2 7 Impact of foreign exchange translation Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* 2 7 * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2012 Net revenue increased 2% and pound volume declined 1%. Net revenue growth was driven by effective net pricing, partially offset by the volume decline. The volume performance reflects double-digit declines in trademark SunChips and Rold Gold, a low-single-digit decline in trademark Lay and a mid-single-digit decline in trademark Tostitos, partially offset by a high-single-digit increase in variety packs and a double-digit increase in our Sabra joint venture. The impact of the 53 rd week in the prior year reduced both volume and net revenue performance by 2 percentage points. Operating profit grew 1%, driven by the net revenue growth and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, partially offset by higher commodity costs, primarily cooking oil, which reduced operating profit growth by 6 percentage points, and higher advertising and marketing expenses. The impact of the 53 rd week in the prior year reduced operating profit growth by 2 percentage points. Lower restructuring and impairment charges contributed 1 percentage point to operating profit growth. 2011 Net revenue increased 6% and pound volume grew 3%. The volume growth primarily reflected double-digit growth in our Sabra joint venture and in variety packs, as well as mid-single-digit growth in trademark Doritos, Cheetos and Ruffles. These gains were partially offset by a double-digit decline in trademark SunChips. Net revenue growth also benefited from effective net pricing. The 53 rd week contributed 2 percentage points to both net revenue and volume growth. Operating profit grew 7%, primarily reflecting the net revenue growth. Restructuring charges reduced operating profit growth by 2 percentage points and were offset by the 53 rd week, which contributed 2 percentage points to operating profit growth. 54 Table of Contents Quaker Foods North America % Change 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Net revenue $ 2,636 $ 2,656 $ 2,656 (1 ) 53 rd week (42 ) Net revenue excluding above item* $ 2,636 $ 2,614 $ 2,656 1 (2 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation (1 ) Net revenue growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 1 (2 ) ** Operating profit $ 695 $ 797 $ 741 (13 ) 8 Restructuring and impairment charges 9 18 53 rd week (12 ) Operating profit excluding above items* $ 704 $ 803 $ 741 (12 ) 8 Impact of foreign exchange translation (0.5 ) Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* (12 ) 8 ** * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2012 Net revenue and volume declined 1%. The net revenue decline reflects the lower volume, partially offset by effective net pricing. The volume decline primarily reflects a double-digit decline in Chewy granola bars and a low-single-digit decline in oatmeal, partially offset by the introduction of Soft Baked Cookies in the second quarter. The volume and net revenue declines reflect the impact of the 53 rd week in 2011, which contributed nearly 2 percentage points to both the net revenue and volume declines. Operating profit declined 13%, primarily reflecting higher commodity costs, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by 9 percentage points, partially offset by lower general and administrative expenses and effective net pricing. The net impact of acquisitions and divestitures, including a partnership investment in 2012 and the gain on the divestiture of a business in the prior year, reduced operating profit performance by 5 percentage points. Additionally, the benefit from a change in accounting methodology for inventory and the sale of a distribution center, both of which were recorded in the prior year, each contributed 2 percentage points to the operating profit decline. The net impact of items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ) negatively impacted operating profit performance by 1 percentage point. 2011 Net revenue was flat and volume declined 5%. The impact of positive net pricing, driven primarily by price increases taken in the fourth quarter of 2010, was partially offset by negative mix. The volume decline primarily reflects double-digit volume declines in ready-to-eat cereals and Chewy granola bars, as well as a mid-single-digit decline in Aunt Jemima syrup and mix. Favorable foreign exchange contributed nearly 1 percentage point to the net revenue performance. The 53 rd week positively contributed almost 2 percentage points to both the net revenue and volume performance. Operating profit grew 8%, primarily reflecting the favorable effective net pricing, partially offset by the volume declines. Gains on the divestiture of a business and the sale of a distribution center increased operating profit growth by 4 percentage points, and a change in accounting methodology for inventory contributed 2 percentage points to operating profit growth (see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements). 55 Table of Contents Restructuring charges reduced operating profit growth by over 2 percentage points and were mostly offset by the 53 rd week, which contributed 2 percentage points to operating profit growth. Latin America Foods % Change 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Net revenue $ 7,780 $ 7,156 $ 6,315 9 13 Impact of foreign exchange translation 7 (2 ) Net revenue growth, on a constant currency basis* 16 11 Operating profit $ 1,059 $ 1,078 $ 1,004 (2 ) 7 Restructuring and impairment charges 50 48 Operating profit excluding above item* $ 1,109 $ 1,126 $ 1,004 (1.5 ) 12 Impact of foreign exchange translation 5.5 (1 ) Operating profit growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 4 11 * See Non-GAAP Measures 2012 Net revenue increased 9%, primarily reflecting effective net pricing and volume growth. Acquisitions and divestitures in Argentina and Brazil in the prior year contributed 2 percentage points to net revenue growth. Unfavorable foreign exchange reduced net revenue growth by 7 percentage points. Volume increased 13%, primarily reflecting a mid-single-digit increase in Mexico and a slight increase in Brazil (excluding the impact of an acquisition). Acquisitions contributed 9 percentage points to the volume growth. Operating profit decreased 2%, driven by higher commodity costs, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by 17 percentage points, as well as other cost increases reflecting strategic investments. These impacts were partially offset by the net revenue growth and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories. The net impact of acquisitions and divestitures reduced operating profit growth by 3.5 percentage points, primarily as a result of a gain in the prior year associated with the sale of a fish business in Brazil. Unfavorable foreign exchange reduced operating profit growth by 5.5 percentage points. 2011 Net revenue increased 13%, primarily reflecting effective net pricing and volume growth. Favorable foreign exchange contributed 2 percentage points to net revenue growth. Acquisitions and divestitures had a nominal impact on the net revenue growth rate. Volume increased 5%, primarily reflecting mid-single-digit increases in Brazil (excluding the impact of an acquisition in the fourth quarter) and at Gamesa in Mexico. Additionally, Sabritas in Mexico was up slightly. Acquisitions contributed 1 percentage point to the volume growth. Operating profit grew 7%, driven by the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs. Acquisitions and divestitures, which included a gain from the sale of a fish business in Brazil, contributed nearly 4 percentage points to operating profit growth. Restructuring charges reduced operating profit growth by 5 percentage points. 56 Table of Contents PepsiCo Americas Beverages % Change 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Net revenue $ 21,408 $ 22,418 $ 20,401 (4.5 ) 10 53 rd week (288 ) Net revenue excluding above item* $ 21,408 $ 22,130 $ 20,401 (3 ) 8 Impact of foreign exchange translation (1 ) Net revenue growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* (3 ) 8 ** Operating profit $ 2,937 $ 3,273 $ 2,776 (10 ) 18 Merger and integration charges 112 467 Restructuring and impairment charges 102 81 53 rd week (35 ) Inventory fair value adjustments 21 358 Venezuela currency devaluation (9 ) Operating profit excluding above items* $ 3,039 $ 3,452 $ 3,592 (12 ) (4 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation 1 (0.5 ) Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* (11 ) (4 ) ** * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2012 Net revenue decreased 4.5%, primarily reflecting the divestiture of our Mexico beverage business in the fourth quarter of 2011, which contributed 5 percentage points to the net revenue decline. Additionally, volume declines were offset by favorable effective net pricing. The impact of the 53 rd week in the prior year contributed over 1 percentage point to the net revenue decline. Volume decreased 2%, driven by a 4% decline in North America volume, partially offset by a 2% increase in Latin America volume. North America volume declines were driven by a 4% decline in CSDs and a 3% decline in non-carbonated beverage volumes. The non-carbonated beverage volume decline primarily reflected a double-digit decline in Tropicana brands and a low-single-digit decline in Gatorade sports drinks. Latin America volume growth primarily reflected mid-single-digit increases in Mexico and Brazil, partially offset by a high-single-digit decline in Venezuela. The impact of the 53 rd week in the prior year contributed 1 percentage point to the volume decline. Reported operating profit decreased 10%, primarily reflecting higher commodity costs, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by 12 percentage points, the volume decline and higher advertising and marketing expenses, partially offset by effective net pricing and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories. Excluding the items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ) operating profit declined 12%. The divestiture of our Mexico beverage business in 2011 contributed nearly 3 percentage points to the reported operating profit decline and included a one-time gain associated with the contribution of this business to form a joint venture with both Organizacion Cultiba SAB de CV (Cultiba), formerly Geupec, and Empresas Polar. Unfavorable foreign exchange contributed 1 percentage point to the operating profit decline. 57 Table of Contents 2011 Net revenue increased 10%, primarily reflecting the incremental finished goods revenue related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Favorable foreign exchange contributed nearly 1 percentage point to net revenue growth and the 53 rd week contributed over 1 percentage point to net revenue growth. Volume increased 2%, primarily reflecting a 3% increase in Latin America volume, as well as volume from incremental brands related to our DPSG manufacturing and distribution agreement, which contributed 1 percentage point to volume growth. North America volume, excluding the impact of the incremental DPSG volume, increased slightly, as a 4% increase in non-carbonated beverage volume was partially offset by a 2% decline in CSD volume. The non-carbonated beverage volume growth primarily reflected a double-digit increase in Gatorade sports drinks. The 53 rd week contributed 1 percentage point to volume growth. Reported operating profit increased 18%, primarily reflecting the items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Excluding these items, operating profit decreased 4%, mainly driven by higher commodity costs and higher selling and distribution costs, partially offset by the net revenue growth. Operating profit performance also benefited from the impact of certain insurance adjustments and more-favorable settlements of promotional spending accruals in the current year, which collectively contributed 2 percentage points to the reported operating profit growth. The net impact of the divestiture of our Mexico beverage business in the fourth quarter contributed 1 percentage point to reported operating profit growth and included a one-time gain associated with the contribution of this business to form a joint venture with both Cultiba and Empresas Polar. Europe % Change 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Net revenue $ 13,441 $ 13,560 $ 9,602 (1 ) 41 53 rd week (33 ) Net revenue excluding above item* $ 13,441 $ 13,527 $ 9,602 (1 ) 41 Impact of foreign exchange translation 7 (3 ) Net revenue growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 6 38 Operating profit $ 1,330 $ 1,210 $ 1,054 10 15 Merger and integration charges 11 123 111 Restructuring and impairment charges 42 77 53 rd week (8 ) Inventory fair value adjustments 25 40 Operating profit excluding above items* $ 1,383 $ 1,427 $ 1,205 (3 ) 18 Impact of foreign exchange translation 6 (4 ) Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* 3 14 * See Non-GAAP Measures 2012 Net revenue decreased 1%, primarily reflecting unfavorable foreign exchange, which reduced net revenue growth by 7 percentage points, partially offset by effective net pricing. Our acquisition of WBD positively contributed 2 percentage points to the net revenue performance. 58 Table of Contents Snacks volume grew 3%, mainly due to our acquisition of WBD, which contributed 2 percentage points to volume growth and declined slightly for the comparable post-acquisition period. Double-digit growth in Russia (ex-WBD) and mid-single-digit growth in South Africa were partially offset by a mid-single-digit decline in Poland. Additionally, the United Kingdom was flat. Beverage volume increased 1%, primarily reflecting our acquisition of WBD, which contributed over 1 percentage point to volume growth and increased at a low-single-digit rate for the comparable post-acquisition period. Volume growth also reflected mid-single-digit growth in Turkey and low-single-digit growth in Russia (ex-WBD) and the United Kingdom. These increases were partially offset by a high-single-digit decline in Poland and a low-single-digit decline in Germany. Operating profit increased 10%, primarily reflecting the items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Excluding these items affecting comparability, operating profit declined 3%, driven by higher commodity costs and unfavorable foreign exchange, which reduced reported operating profit performance by 17 percentage points and 6 percentage points, respectively, as well as other cost increases reflecting certain strategic investments. These impacts were partially offset by the effective net pricing and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories. Additionally, certain impairment charges primarily associated with our operations in Greece reduced reported operating profit growth by 2 percentage points. 2011 Net revenue grew 41%, primarily reflecting our acquisition of WBD, which contributed 29 percentage points to net revenue growth, and the incremental finished goods revenue related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Favorable foreign exchange contributed 3 percentage points to net revenue growth. Snacks volume grew 35%, primarily reflecting our acquisition of WBD, which contributed 31 percentage points to volume growth. Double-digit growth in Turkey and South Africa and high-single-digit growth in Russia (ex-WBD) were partially offset by a mid-single-digit decline in Spain. Additionally, Walkers in the United Kingdom experienced low-single-digit growth. Beverage volume increased 21%, primarily reflecting our acquisition of WBD, which contributed 20 percentage points to volume growth, and incremental brands related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, which contributed nearly 1 percentage point to volume growth. A double-digit increase in Turkey and mid-single-digit increases in the United Kingdom and France were offset by a high-single-digit decline in Russia (ex-WBD). Reported operating profit increased 15%, primarily reflecting the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs. Our acquisition of WBD contributed 19 percentage points to the reported operating profit growth and reflected net charges of $56 million included in items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Excluding the items affecting comparability, operating profit increased 18%. Favorable foreign exchange contributed 4 percentage points to operating profit growth. 59 Table of Contents Asia, Middle East and Africa % Change 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 Net revenue $ 6,653 $ 7,392 $ 6,291 (10 ) 17 Impact of foreign exchange translation 3 (2 ) Net revenue growth, on a constant currency basis* (7 ) 16 ** Operating profit $ 747 $ 887 $ 708 (16 ) 25 Restructuring and impairment charges 28 9 Restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi 150 Operating profit excluding above items* $ 925 $ 896 $ 708 3 27 Impact of foreign exchange translation 1 (2.5 ) Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* 4 24 ** * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2012 Net revenue declined 10%, reflecting the impact of the transaction with Tingyi and the deconsolidation of International Dairy and Juice Limited (IDJ), which reduced net revenue performance by 15 percentage points and 2 percentage points, respectively, partially offset by volume growth and effective net pricing. Unfavorable foreign exchange negatively impacted net revenue performance by nearly 3 percentage points. Snacks volume grew 14%, reflecting broad-based increases, which included double-digit growth in the Middle East, India and China. Additionally, Australia experienced low-single-digit growth. Beverage volume grew 10%, driven by double-digit growth in India and Pakistan and high-single-digit growth in the Middle East as well as in China, which included the benefit of new co-branded juice products distributed through our joint venture with Tingyi. The Tingyi co-branded volume had a 4-percentage-point impact on AMEA reported beverage volume. Excluding the benefit of the Tingyi co-branded volume, beverage volume in China declined high-single digits due to Tingyi transitional impact on AMEA legacy juice business, the introduction of a 500ml PET value package in the third quarter of 2011, which largely replaced our 600ml offering in the market, and the timing of the New Year holiday. Operating profit declined 16%, driven by the items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Excluding these items affecting comparability, operating profit increased 3%, reflecting the volume growth and effective net pricing, partially offset by higher commodity costs, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by 10 percentage points. Excluding the restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi listed in the above items affecting comparability, the net impact of acquisitions and divestitures reduced reported operating profit by 2 percentage points, primarily as a result of a one-time gain in the prior year associated with the sale of our investment in our franchise bottler in Thailand, which negatively impacted reported operating profit performance by 13 percentage points. This decline was partially offset by the impact of structural changes related to the transaction with Tingyi, which positively contributed 11 percentage points to reported operating profit performance. Unfavorable foreign exchange reduced reported operating profit performance by 1 percentage point. 60 Table of Contents 2011 Net revenue grew 17%, reflecting volume growth and favorable effective net pricing. Foreign exchange contributed 2 percentage points to net revenue growth. Acquisitions had a nominal impact on net revenue growth. Snacks volume grew 15%, reflecting broad-based increases driven by double-digit growth in India, China and the Middle East. Beverage volume grew 5%, driven by double-digit growth in India and mid-single-digit growth in China and the Middle East. Acquisitions had a nominal impact on the beverage volume growth rate. Operating profit grew 25%, driven primarily by the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs. Acquisitions and divestitures increased operating profit growth by 16 percentage points, primarily as a result of a one-time gain associated with the sale of our investment in our franchise bottler in Thailand. Favorable foreign exchange contributed 2.5 percentage points to the operating profit growth. Our Liquidity and Capital Resources We believe that our cash generating capability and financial condition, together with our revolving credit facilities and other available methods of debt financing (including long-term debt financing which, depending upon market conditions, we may use to replace a portion of our commercial paper borrowings), will be adequate to meet our operating, investing and financing needs. Sources of cash available to us to fund cash outflows, such as our anticipated share repurchases and dividend payments, include cash from operations and proceeds obtained in the U.S. debt markets. However, there can be no assurance that volatility in the global capital and credit markets will not impair our ability to access these markets on terms commercially acceptable to us, or at all. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for a description of our credit facilities. See also Unfavorable economic conditions may have an adverse impact on our business results or financial condition. in Risk Factors in Item 1A. As of December 29, 2012 , we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $ 5.3 billion outside the U.S. To the extent foreign earnings are repatriated, such amounts would be subject to income tax liabilities, both in the U.S. and in various applicable foreign jurisdictions. In addition, currency restrictions enacted by the government in Venezuela have impacted our ability to pay dividends outside of the country from our snack and beverage operations in Venezuela. As of December 29, 2012 , our operations in Venezuela comprised 7% of our cash and cash equivalents balance. Effective February 2013, the Venezuelan government devalued the bolivar by resetting the official exchange rate to 6.3 bolivars per dollar. For additional information on the impact of the devaluation, see Market Risks - Foreign Exchange in Our Business Risks. Furthermore, our cash provided from operating activities is somewhat impacted by seasonality. Working capital needs are impacted by weekly sales, which are generally highest in the third quarter due to seasonal and holiday-related sales patterns, and generally lowest in the first quarter. On a continuing basis, we consider various transactions to increase shareholder value and enhance our business results, including acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures, share repurchases and other structural changes. These transactions may result in future cash proceeds or payments. The table below summarizes our cash activity: 2012 2011 2010 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 8,479 $ 8,944 $ 8,448 Net cash used for investing activities $ (3,005 ) $ (5,618 ) $ (7,668 ) Net cash (used for)/provided by financing activities $ (3,306 ) $ (5,135 ) $ 1,386 61 Table of Contents Operating Activities During 2012, net cash provided by operating activities was $ 8.5 billion , compared to net cash provided of $ 8.9 billion in the prior year. The operating cash flow performance primarily reflects discretionary pension and retiree medical contributions of $1.5 billion ($1.1 billion after-tax) in 2012, partially offset by favorable working capital comparisons to 2011. During 2011, net cash provided by operating activities was $ 8.9 billion , compared to net cash provided of $ 8.4 billion in the prior year. The increase over 2010 primarily reflects the overlap of discretionary pension contributions of $1.3 billion ($1.0 billion after-tax) in 2010, partially offset by unfavorable working capital comparisons to the prior year. Also see Management Operating Cash Flow below for certain other items impacting net cash provided by operating activities. Investing Activities During 2012, net cash used for investing activities was $ 3.0 billion , primarily reflecting $2.6 billion for net capital spending and $0.3 billion of cash payments related to the transaction with Tingyi. During 2011, net cash used for investing activities was $ 5.6 billion , primarily reflecting $3.3 billion for net capital spending and $2.4 billion of cash paid, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired, in connection with our acquisition of WBD. We expect 2013 net capital spending to be approximately $3.0 billion, within our long-term capital spending target of less than or equal to 5% of net revenue. Financing Activities During 2012, net cash used for financing activities was $ 3.3 billion , primarily reflecting the return of operating cash flow to our shareholders through dividend payments and share repurchases of $6.5 billion as well as net repayments of short-term borrowings of $1.5 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from long-term debt of $3.6 billion and stock option proceeds of $1.1 billion. During 2011, net cash used for financing activities was $ 5.1 billion , primarily reflecting the return of operating cash flow to our shareholders through share repurchases and dividend payments of $5.6 billion, our purchase of an additional $1.4 billion of WBD ordinary shares (including shares underlying American Depositary Shares (ADS)) and our repurchase of certain WBD debt obligations of $0.8 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from long-term debt of $1.4 billion and stock option proceeds of $0.9 billion. We annually review our capital structure with our Board of Directors, including our dividend policy and share repurchase activity. In the first quarter of 2013, we approved a new share repurchase program providing for the repurchase of up to $10 billion of PepsiCo common stock from July 1, 2013 through June 30, 2016, which will succeed the current repurchase program that expires on June 30, 2013. In addition, we announced a 5.6% increase in our annualized dividend to $2.27 per share from $2.15 per share, effective with the dividend payable in June 2013. Under these programs, we expect to return a total of $6.4 billion to shareholders in 2013 through dividends of approximately $3.4 billion and share repurchases of approximately $3.0 billion. Management Operating Cash Flow We focus on management operating cash flow as a key element in achieving maximum shareholder value. Since net capital spending is essential to our product innovation initiatives and maintaining our operational capabilities, we believe that it is a recurring and necessary use of cash. As such, we believe investors should also consider net capital spending when evaluating our cash from operating activities. Additionally, we 62 Table of Contents consider certain items (included in the table below) in evaluating management operating cash flow. We believe investors should consider these items in evaluating our management operating cash flow results. Management operating cash flow excluding certain items is the primary measure we use to monitor cash flow performance. However, it is not a measure provided by U.S. GAAP. Therefore, this measure is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP cash flow measures. The table below reconciles net cash provided by operating activities, as reflected in our cash flow statement, to our management operating cash flow excluding the impact of the items below. 2012 2011 2010 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 8,479 $ 8,944 $ 8,448 Capital spending (2,714 ) (3,339 ) (3,253 ) Sales of property, plant and equipment 95 84 81 Management operating cash flow 5,860 5,689 5,276 Discretionary pension and retiree medical contributions (after-tax) 1,051 44 983 Merger and integration payments (after-tax) 63 283 299 Payments related to restructuring charges (after-tax) 260 21 20 Capital investments related to the PBG/PAS integration 10 108 138 Capital investments related to the Productivity Plan 26 Payments for restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi (after-tax) 117 Foundation contribution (after-tax) 64 Debt repurchase (after-tax) 112 Management operating cash flow excluding above items $ 7,387 $ 6,145 $ 6,892 In all years presented, management operating cash flow was used primarily to repurchase shares and pay dividends. We expect to continue to return management operating cash flow to our shareholders through dividends and share repurchases while maintaining credit ratings that provide us with ready access to global and capital credit markets. However, see Our borrowing costs and access to capital and credit markets may be adversely affected by a downgrade or potential downgrade of our credit ratings. in Risk Factors in Item 1A. and Our Business Risks for certain factors that may impact our operating cash flows. Any downgrade of our credit ratings by a credit rating agency, especially any downgrade to below investment grade, could increase our future borrowing costs or impair our ability to access capital and credit markets on terms commercially acceptable to us, or at all. In addition, any downgrade of our current short-term credit ratings could impair our ability to access the commercial paper market with the same flexibility that we have experienced historically, and therefore require us to rely more heavily on more expensive types of debt financing. See Our Business Risks , Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements and Our borrowing costs and access to capital and credit markets may be adversely affected by a downgrade or potential downgrade of our credit ratings. in Risk Factors in Item 1A. Credit Facilities and Long-Term Contractual Commitments See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for a description of our credit facilities and long-term contractual commitments. 63 Table of Contents Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements It is not our business practice to enter into off-balance-sheet arrangements, other than in the normal course of business. Additionally, we do not enter into off-balance-sheet transactions specifically structured to provide income or tax benefits or to avoid recognizing or disclosing assets or liabilities. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements. 64 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Income PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 29, 2012, December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 (in millions except per share amounts) 2012 2011 2010 Net Revenue $ 65,492 $ 66,504 $ 57,838 Cost of sales 31,291 31,593 26,575 Selling, general and administrative expenses 24,970 25,145 22,814 Amortization of intangible assets 119 133 117 Operating Profit 9,112 9,633 8,332 Bottling equity income 735 Interest expense (899 ) (856 ) (903 ) Interest income and other 91 57 68 Income before income taxes 8,304 8,834 8,232 Provision for income taxes 2,090 2,372 1,894 Net income 6,214 6,462 6,338 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 36 19 18 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,178 $ 6,443 $ 6,320 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share Basic $ 3.96 $ 4.08 $ 3.97 Diluted $ 3.92 $ 4.03 $ 3.91 Weighted-average common shares outstanding Basic 1,557 1,576 1,590 Diluted 1,575 1,597 1,614 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 2.1275 $ 2.025 $ 1.89 See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 65 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 29, 2012, December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 (in millions) 2012 Pre-tax amounts Tax benefit/(expense) After-tax amounts Net income $ 6,214 Other Comprehensive Income Currency translation adjustment $ 737 $ 737 Cash flow hedges: Net derivative losses (50 ) 10 (40 ) Reclassification of net losses to net income 90 (32 ) 58 Pension and retiree medical: Net prior service cost (32 ) 12 (20 ) Net losses (41 ) (11 ) (52 ) Unrealized gains on securities 18 18 Other 36 36 Total Other Comprehensive Income $ 722 $ 15 737 Comprehensive income 6,951 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests (31 ) Comprehensive Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,920 2011 Pre-tax amounts Tax benefit/(expense) After-tax amounts Net income $ 6,462 Other Comprehensive Loss Currency translation adjustment $ (1,464 ) $ (1,464 ) Cash flow hedges: Net derivative losses (126 ) 43 (83 ) Reclassification of net losses to net income 5 4 9 Pension and retiree medical: Net prior service cost (18 ) 8 (10 ) Net losses (1,468 ) 501 (967 ) Unrealized losses on securities (27 ) 19 (8 ) Other (16 ) 5 (11 ) Total Other Comprehensive Loss $ (3,114 ) $ 580 (2,534 ) Comprehensive income 3,928 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests (84 ) Comprehensive Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 3,844 2010 Pre-tax amounts Tax benefit/(expense) After-tax amounts Net income $ 6,338 Other Comprehensive Income Currency translation adjustment $ 299 $ 299 Cash flow hedges: Net derivative losses (69 ) 23 (46 ) Reclassification of net losses to net income 75 (25 ) 50 Pension and retiree medical: Net prior service credit 35 (13 ) 22 Net losses (260 ) 124 (136 ) Unrealized gains on securities 24 (1 ) 23 Other (25 ) (36 ) (61 ) Total Other Comprehensive Income $ 79 $ 72 151 Comprehensive income 6,489 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests (5 ) Comprehensive Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,484 See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements . 66 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 29, 2012, December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 (in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Operating Activities Net income $ 6,214 $ 6,462 $ 6,338 Depreciation and amortization 2,689 2,737 2,327 Stock-based compensation expense 278 326 299 Merger and integration costs 16 329 808 Cash payments for merger and integration costs (83 ) (377 ) (385 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 279 383 Cash payments for restructuring charges (343 ) (31 ) (31 ) Restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi 176 Cash payments for restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi (109 ) Gain on previously held equity interests in PBG and PAS (958 ) Asset write-off 145 Non-cash foreign exchange loss related to Venezuela devaluation 120 Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements (124 ) (70 ) (107 ) Pension and retiree medical plan contributions (1,865 ) (349 ) (1,734 ) Pension and retiree medical plan expenses 796 571 453 Bottling equity income, net of dividends 42 Deferred income taxes and other tax charges and credits 321 495 500 Change in accounts and notes receivable (250 ) (666 ) (268 ) Change in inventories 144 (331 ) 276 Change in prepaid expenses and other current assets 89 (27 ) 144 Change in accounts payable and other current liabilities 548 520 488 Change in income taxes payable (97 ) (340 ) 123 Other, net (200 ) (688 ) (132 ) Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities 8,479 8,944 8,448 Investing Activities Capital spending (2,714 ) (3,339 ) (3,253 ) Sales of property, plant and equipment 95 84 81 Acquisitions of PBG and PAS, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired (2,833 ) Acquisition of manufacturing and distribution rights from DPSG (900 ) Acquisition of WBD, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired (2,428 ) Investment in WBD (164 ) (463 ) Cash payments related to the transaction with Tingyi (306 ) Other acquisitions and investments in noncontrolled affiliates (121 ) (601 ) (83 ) Divestitures (32 ) 780 12 Short-term investments, by original maturity More than three months purchases (12 ) More than three months maturities 21 29 Three months or less, net 61 45 (229 ) Other investing, net 12 (16 ) (17 ) Net Cash Used for Investing Activities (3,005 ) (5,618 ) (7,668 ) (Continued on following page) 67 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows (continued) PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 29, 2012, December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 (in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Financing Activities Proceeds from issuances of long-term debt $ 5,999 $ 3,000 $ 6,451 Payments of long-term debt (2,449 ) (1,596 ) (59 ) Debt repurchase (771 ) (500 ) Short-term borrowings, by original maturity More than three months proceeds 549 523 227 More than three months payments (248 ) (559 ) (96 ) Three months or less, net (1,762 ) 339 2,351 Cash dividends paid (3,305 ) (3,157 ) (2,978 ) Share repurchases common (3,219 ) (2,489 ) (4,978 ) Share repurchases preferred (7 ) (7 ) (5 ) Proceeds from exercises of stock options 1,122 945 1,038 Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements 124 70 107 Acquisition of noncontrolling interests (68 ) (1,406 ) (159 ) Other financing (42 ) (27 ) (13 ) Net Cash (Used for)/Provided by Financing Activities (3,306 ) (5,135 ) 1,386 Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 62 (67 ) (166 ) Net Increase/(Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents 2,230 (1,876 ) 2,000 Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning of Year 4,067 5,943 3,943 Cash and Cash Equivalents, End of Year $ 6,297 $ 4,067 $ 5,943 Non-cash activity: Issuance of common stock and equity awards in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as reflected in investing and financing activities $ 4,451 See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 68 Table of Contents Consolidated Balance Sheet PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011 (in millions except per share amounts) 2012 2011 ASSETS Current Assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 6,297 $ 4,067 Short-term investments 322 358 Accounts and notes receivable, net 7,041 6,912 Inventories 3,581 3,827 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 1,479 2,277 Total Current Assets 18,720 17,441 Property, Plant and Equipment, net 19,136 19,698 Amortizable Intangible Assets, net 1,781 1,888 Goodwill 16,971 16,800 Other nonamortizable intangible assets 14,744 14,557 Nonamortizable Intangible Assets 31,715 31,357 Investments in Noncontrolled Affiliates 1,633 1,477 Other Assets 1,653 1,021 Total Assets $ 74,638 $ 72,882 LIABILITIES AND EQUITY Current Liabilities Short-term obligations $ 4,815 $ 6,205 Accounts payable and other current liabilities 11,903 11,757 Income taxes payable 371 192 Total Current Liabilities 17,089 18,154 Long-Term Debt Obligations 23,544 20,568 Other Liabilities 6,543 8,266 Deferred Income Taxes 5,063 4,995 Total Liabilities 52,239 51,983 Commitments and Contingencies Preferred Stock, no par value 41 41 Repurchased Preferred Stock (164 ) (157 ) PepsiCo Common Shareholders Equity Common stock, par value 1 2 / 3 per share (authorized 3,600 shares, issued, net of repurchased common stock at par value: 1,544 and 1,565 shares, respectively) 26 26 Capital in excess of par value 4,178 4,461 Retained earnings 43,158 40,316 Accumulated other comprehensive loss (5,487 ) (6,229 ) Repurchased common stock, in excess of par value (322 and 301 shares, respectively) (19,458 ) (17,870 ) Total PepsiCo Common Shareholders Equity 22,417 20,704 Noncontrolling interests 105 311 Total Equity 22,399 20,899 Total Liabilities and Equity $ 74,638 $ 72,882 See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 69 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Equity PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 29, 2012, December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 (in millions) 2012 2011 2010 Shares Amount Shares Amount Shares Amount Preferred Stock 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 Repurchased Preferred Stock Balance, beginning of year (0.6 ) (157 ) (0.6 ) (150 ) (0.6 ) (145 ) Redemptions (7 ) (7 ) (5 ) Balance, end of year (0.6 ) (164 ) (0.6 ) (157 ) (0.6 ) (150 ) Common Stock Balance, beginning of year 1,565 26 1,582 26 1,566 26 Repurchased common stock (21 ) (17 ) (67 ) (1 ) Shares issued in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS 83 1 Balance, end of year 1,544 26 1,565 26 1,582 26 Capital in Excess of Par Value Balance, beginning of year 4,461 4,527 250 Stock-based compensation expense 278 326 299 Stock option exercises/RSUs converted (a) (431 ) (361 ) (500 ) Withholding tax on RSUs converted (70 ) (56 ) (68 ) Equity issued in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS 4,451 Other (60 ) 25 95 Balance, end of year 4,178 4,461 4,527 Retained Earnings Balance, beginning of year 40,316 37,090 33,805 Net income attributable to PepsiCo 6,178 6,443 6,320 Cash dividends declared common (3,312 ) (3,192 ) (3,028 ) Cash dividends declared preferred (1 ) (1 ) (1 ) Cash dividends declared RSUs (23 ) (24 ) (12 ) Other 6 Balance, end of year 43,158 40,316 37,090 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Balance, beginning of year (6,229 ) (3,630 ) (3,794 ) Currency translation adjustment 742 (1,529 ) 312 Cash flow hedges, net of tax: Net derivative losses (40 ) (83 ) (46 ) Reclassification of net losses to net income 58 9 50 Pension and retiree medical, net of tax: Net pension and retiree medical losses (493 ) (1,110 ) (280 ) Reclassification of net losses to net income 421 133 166 Unrealized gains/(losses) on securities, net of tax 18 (8 ) 23 Other 36 (11 ) (61 ) Balance, end of year (5,487 ) (6,229 ) (3,630 ) Repurchased Common Stock Balance, beginning of year (301 ) (17,870 ) (284 ) (16,740 ) (217 ) (13,379 ) Share repurchases (47 ) (3,219 ) (39 ) (2,489 ) (76 ) (4,977 ) Stock option exercises 24 1,488 20 1,251 24 1,487 Other 2 143 2 108 (15 ) 129 Balance, end of year (322 ) (19,458 ) (301 ) (17,870 ) (284 ) (16,740 ) Total PepsiCo Common Shareholders Equity 22,417 20,704 21,273 Noncontrolling Interests Balance, beginning of year 311 312 638 Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 36 19 18 Distributions to noncontrolling interests, net (37 ) (24 ) (6 ) Currency translation adjustment (5 ) 65 (13 ) Acquisitions and divestitures (200 ) (57 ) (326 ) Other, net (4 ) 1 Balance, end of year 105 311 312 Total Equity $ 22,399 $ 20,899 $ 21,476 (a) Includes total tax benefits of $84 million in 2012, $43 million in 2011 and $75 million in 2010. See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 70 Table of Contents Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Our Divisions Basis of Presentation Our financial statements include the consolidated accounts of PepsiCo, Inc. and the affiliates that we control. In addition, we include our share of the results of certain other affiliates using the equity method based on our economic ownership interest, our ability to exercise significant influence over the operating or financial decisions of these affiliates or our ability to direct their economic resources. We do not control these other affiliates, as our ownership in these other affiliates is generally less than 50% . Intercompany balances and transactions are eliminated. Our fiscal year ends on the last Saturday of each December, resulting in an additional week of results every five or six years. In 2011, we had an additional week of results (53 rd week). On February 26, 2010, we completed our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. The results of the acquired companies in the U.S. and Canada were reflected in our consolidated results as of the acquisition date, and the international results of the acquired companies have been reported as of the beginning of the second quarter of 2010, consistent with our monthly international reporting calendar. The results of the acquired companies in the U.S., Canada and Mexico are reported within our PAB segment, and the results of the acquired companies in Europe, including Russia, are reported within our Europe segment. Prior to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded our share of equity income or loss from the acquired companies in bottling equity income in our income statement. Our share of income or loss from other noncontrolled affiliates is reflected as a component of selling, general and administrative expenses. Additionally, in the first quarter of 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded a gain on our previously held equity interests of $958 million , comprising $735 million which was non-taxable and recorded in bottling equity income and $223 million related to the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with these previously held equity interests. See Notes 8 and 15 to our consolidated financial statements, and for additional unaudited information on items affecting the comparability of our consolidated results see Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. As of the beginning of our 2010 fiscal year, the results of our Venezuelan businesses are reported under hyperinflationary accounting. See Our Business Risks and Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. In the first quarter of 2011, QFNA changed its method of accounting for certain U.S. inventories from the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method to the average cost method as we believe that the average cost method of accounting improves our financial reporting by better matching revenues and expenses and better reflecting the current value of inventory. The impact of this change on consolidated net income in the first quarter of 2011 was approximately $9 million (or less than a penny per share). Prior periods were not restated as the impact of the change on previously issued financial statements was not considered material. Raw materials, direct labor and plant overhead, as well as purchasing and receiving costs, costs directly related to production planning, inspection costs and raw material handling facilities, are included in cost of sales. The costs of moving, storing and delivering finished product are included in selling, general and administrative expenses. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are used in determining, among other items, sales incentives accruals, tax reserves, stock-based compensation, pension and retiree medical accruals, amounts and useful lives for intangible assets, and future cash flows associated with impairment testing for perpetual brands, goodwill and other long-lived assets. We evaluate our estimates on 71 Table of Contents an ongoing basis using our historical experience, as well as other factors we believe appropriate under the circumstances, such as current economic conditions, and adjust or revise our estimates as circumstances change. As future events and their effect cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. While our North America results are reported on a weekly calendar basis, most of our international operations report on a monthly calendar basis. In 2011, we had an additional week of results (53 rd week). The following chart details our quarterly reporting schedule for all other reporting periods presented: Quarter U.S. and Canada International First Quarter 12 weeks January, February Second Quarter 12 weeks March, April and May Third Quarter 12 weeks June, July and August Fourth Quarter 16 weeks September, October, November and December See Our Divisions below, and for additional unaudited information on items affecting the comparability of our consolidated results, see Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Tabular dollars are in millions, except per share amounts. All per share amounts reflect common per share amounts, assume dilution unless noted, and are based on unrounded amounts. Certain reclassifications were made to prior years amounts to conform to the 2012 presentation. Our Divisions We manufacture or use contract manufacturers, market and sell a variety of salty, convenient, sweet and grain-based snacks, carbonated and non-carbonated beverages, dairy products and other foods in over 200 countries and territories with our largest operations in North America (United States and Canada), Russia, Mexico, the United Kingdom and Brazil. Division results are based on how our Chief Executive Officer assesses the performance of and allocates resources to our divisions. For additional unaudited information on our divisions, see Our Operations in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The accounting policies for the divisions are the same as those described in Note 2, except for the following allocation methodologies: stock-based compensation expense; pension and retiree medical expense; and derivatives. Stock-Based Compensation Expense Our divisions are held accountable for stock-based compensation expense and, therefore, this expense is allocated to our divisions as an incremental employee compensation cost. The allocation of stock-based compensation expense in 2012 was approximately 16% to FLNA, 2% to QFNA, 5% to LAF, 25% to PAB, 14% to Europe, 12% to AMEA and 26% to corporate unallocated expenses. We had similar allocations of stock-based compensation expense to our divisions in 2011 and 2010. The expense allocated to our divisions excludes any impact of changes in our assumptions during the year which reflect market conditions over which division management has no control. Therefore, any variances between allocated expense and our actual expense are recognized in corporate unallocated expenses. 72 Table of Contents Pension and Retiree Medical Expense Pension and retiree medical service costs measured at a fixed discount rate, as well as amortization of costs related to certain pension plan amendments and gains and losses due to demographics, including salary experience, are reflected in division results for North American employees. Division results also include interest costs, measured at a fixed discount rate, for retiree medical plans. Interest costs for the pension plans, pension asset returns and the impact of pension funding, and gains and losses other than those due to demographics, are all reflected in corporate unallocated expenses. In addition, corporate unallocated expenses include the difference between the service costs measured at a fixed discount rate (included in division results as noted above) and the total service costs determined using the plans discount rates as disclosed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. Derivatives We centrally manage commodity derivatives on behalf of our divisions. These commodity derivatives include agricultural products, metals and energy. Certain of these commodity derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment and are marked to market with the resulting gains and losses recognized in corporate unallocated expenses. These gains and losses are subsequently reflected in division results when the divisions take delivery of the underlying commodity. Therefore, the divisions realize the economic effects of the derivative without experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in corporate unallocated expenses. These derivatives hedge underlying commodity price risk and were not entered into for speculative purposes. 73 Table of Contents Net Revenue Operating Profit (a) 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 FLNA $ 13,574 $ 13,322 $ 12,573 $ 3,646 $ 3,621 $ 3,376 QFNA 2,636 2,656 2,656 695 797 741 LAF 7,780 7,156 6,315 1,059 1,078 1,004 PAB 21,408 22,418 20,401 2,937 3,273 2,776 Europe (b) 13,441 13,560 9,602 1,330 1,210 1,054 AMEA 6,653 7,392 6,291 747 887 708 Total division 65,492 66,504 57,838 10,414 10,866 9,659 Corporate Unallocated Mark-to-market net impact gains/(losses) 65 (102 ) 91 Merger and integration charges (78 ) (191 ) Restructuring and impairment charges (10 ) (74 ) Pension lump sum settlement charge (195 ) 53 rd week (18 ) Venezuela currency devaluation (129 ) Asset write-off (145 ) Foundation contribution (100 ) Other (1,162 ) (961 ) (853 ) $ 65,492 $ 66,504 $ 57,838 $ 9,112 $ 9,633 $ 8,332 (a) For information on the impact of restructuring, impairment and integration charges on our divisions, see Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. (b) Change in net revenue in 2011 relates primarily to our acquisition of WBD. Corporate Corporate includes costs of our corporate headquarters, centrally managed initiatives such as our ongoing global business transformation initiative and research and development projects, unallocated insurance and benefit programs, foreign exchange transaction gains and losses, certain commodity derivative gains and losses and certain other items. 74 Table of Contents Other Division Information Total Assets Capital Spending 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 FLNA $ 5,332 $ 5,384 $ 5,276 $ 365 $ 439 $ 515 QFNA 966 1,024 1,062 37 43 48 LAF 4,993 4,721 4,041 436 413 370 PAB 30,899 31,142 31,571 702 1,006 973 Europe (a) 19,218 18,461 13,018 575 588 517 AMEA 5,738 6,038 5,557 510 693 610 Total division 67,146 66,770 60,525 2,625 3,182 3,033 Corporate (b) 7,492 6,112 7,389 89 157 220 Investments in bottling affiliates 239 $ 74,638 $ 72,882 $ 68,153 $ 2,714 $ 3,339 $ 3,253 (a) Changes in total assets in 2011 relate primarily to our acquisition of WBD. (b) Corporate assets consist principally of cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, derivative instruments and property, plant and equipment. Amortization of Intangible Assets Depreciation and Other Amortization 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 FLNA $ 7 $ 7 $ 7 $ 445 $ 458 $ 448 QFNA 53 54 52 LAF 10 10 6 248 238 213 PAB 59 65 56 855 865 749 Europe 36 39 35 522 522 355 AMEA 7 12 13 305 350 294 Total division 119 133 117 2,428 2,487 2,111 Corporate 142 117 99 $ 119 $ 133 $ 117 $ 2,570 $ 2,604 $ 2,210 75 Table of Contents Net Revenue Long-Lived Assets (a) 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 U.S. $ 33,348 $ 33,053 $ 30,618 $ 28,344 $ 28,999 $ 28,631 Russia (b) 4,861 4,749 1,890 8,603 8,121 2,744 Mexico 3,955 4,782 4,531 1,237 1,027 1,671 Canada 3,290 3,364 3,081 3,294 3,097 3,133 United Kingdom 2,102 2,075 1,888 1,053 1,011 1,019 Brazil 1,866 1,838 1,582 1,134 1,124 677 All other countries 16,070 16,643 14,248 10,600 11,041 11,020 $ 65,492 $ 66,504 $ 57,838 $ 54,265 $ 54,420 $ 48,895 (a) Long-lived assets represent property, plant and equipment, nonamortizable intangible assets, amortizable intangible assets and investments in noncontrolled affiliates. These assets are reported in the country where they are primarily used. (b) Change in 2011 relates primarily to our acquisition of WBD. Note 2 Our Significant Accounting Policies Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue upon shipment or delivery to our customers based on written sales terms that do not allow for a right of return. However, our policy for DSD and certain chilled products is to remove and replace damaged and out-of-date products from store shelves to ensure that consumers receive the product quality and freshness they expect. Similarly, our policy for certain warehouse-distributed products is to replace damaged and out-of-date products. Based on our experience with this practice, we have reserved for anticipated damaged and out-of-date products. For additional unaudited information on our revenue recognition and related policies, including our policy on bad debts, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. We are exposed to concentration of credit risk by our customers, including Wal-Mart. In 2012, Wal-Mart (including Sam s) represented approximately 11% of our total net revenue, including concentrate sales to our independent bottlers which are used in finished goods sold by them to Wal-Mart. We have not experienced credit issues with these customers. Total Marketplace Spending We offer sales incentives and discounts through various programs to customers and consumers. Total marketplace spending includes sales incentives, discounts, advertising and other marketing activities. Sales incentives and discounts are primarily accounted for as a reduction of revenue and totaled $34.7 billion in 2012, $34.6 billion in 2011 and $29.1 billion in 2010. Sales incentives and discounts include payments to customers for performing merchandising activities on our behalf, such as payments for in-store displays, payments to gain distribution of new products, payments for shelf space and discounts to promote lower 76 Table of Contents retail prices. It also includes support provided to our independent bottlers through funding of advertising and other marketing activities. While most of these incentive arrangements have terms of no more than one year, certain arrangements, such as fountain pouring rights, may extend beyond one year. Costs incurred to obtain these arrangements are recognized over the shorter of the economic or contractual life, as a reduction of revenue, and the remaining balances of $335 million as of December 29, 2012 and $313 million as of December 31, 2011, are included in current assets and other assets on our balance sheet. For additional unaudited information on our sales incentives, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Advertising and other marketing activities, reported as selling, general and administrative expenses, totaled $3.7 billion in 2012, $3.5 billion in 2011 and $3.4 billion in 2010, including advertising expenses of $2.2 billion in 2012 and $1.9 billion in both 2011 and 2010. Deferred advertising costs are not expensed until the year first used and consist of: media and personal service prepayments; promotional materials in inventory; and production costs of future media advertising. Deferred advertising costs of $88 million and $163 million at year-end 2012 and 2011, respectively, are classified as prepaid expenses on our balance sheet. Distribution Costs Distribution costs, including the costs of shipping and handling activities, are reported as selling, general and administrative expenses. Shipping and handling expenses were $9.1 billion in 2012, $9.2 billion in 2011 and $7.7 billion in 2010. Cash Equivalents Cash equivalents are highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. Software Costs We capitalize certain computer software and software development costs incurred in connection with developing or obtaining computer software for internal use when both the preliminary project stage is completed and it is probable that the software will be used as intended. Capitalized software costs include only (i) external direct costs of materials and services utilized in developing or obtaining computer software, (ii) compensation and related benefits for employees who are directly associated with the software project and (iii) interest costs incurred while developing internal-use computer software. Capitalized software costs are included in property, plant and equipment on our balance sheet and amortized on a straight-line basis when placed into service over the estimated useful lives of the software, which approximate 5 to 10 years. Software amortization totaled $196 million in 2012, $156 million in 2011 and $137 million in 2010. Net capitalized software and development costs were $1.1 billion as of December 29, 2012 and $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2011. Commitments and Contingencies We are subject to various claims and contingencies related to lawsuits, certain taxes and environmental matters, as well as commitments under contractual and other commercial obligations. We recognize liabilities for contingencies and commitments when a loss is probable and estimable. For additional information on our commitments, see Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements. Research and Development We engage in a variety of research and development activities and continue to invest to accelerate growth in these activities and to drive innovation globally. These activities principally involve the development of 77 Table of Contents new products, improvement in the quality of existing products, improvement and modernization of production processes, and the development and implementation of new technologies to enhance the quality and value of both current and proposed product lines. Consumer research is excluded from research and development costs and included in other marketing costs. Research and development costs were $552 million in 2012, $525 million in 2011 and $488 million in 2010 and are reported within selling, general and administrative expenses. Other Significant Accounting Policies Our other significant accounting policies are disclosed as follows: Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets Note 4, and for additional unaudited information on goodwill and other intangible assets see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Income Taxes Note 5, and for additional unaudited information see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Stock-Based Compensation Note 6. Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans Note 7, and for additional unaudited information see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Financial Instruments Note 10, and for additional unaudited information, see Our Business Risks in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Inventories Note 14. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined using the average; first-in, first-out (FIFO) or last-in, first-out (LIFO) methods. Translation of Financial Statements of Foreign Subsidiaries Financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars using period-end exchange rates for assets and liabilities and weighted-average exchange rates for revenues and expenses. Adjustments resulting from translating net assets are reported as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive loss within common shareholders equity as currency translation adjustment. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In July 2012, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued new accounting guidance that permits an entity to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired as a basis for determining whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. An entity would continue to calculate the fair value of an indefinite-lived intangible asset if the asset fails the qualitative assessment, while no further analysis would be required if it passes. The provisions of the new guidance are effective as of the beginning of our 2013 fiscal year. We do not expect the new guidance to have an impact on the 2013 impairment test results. In September 2011, the FASB issued new accounting guidance that permits an entity to first assess qualitative factors of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit fair value is less than its carrying amount before applying the two-step goodwill impairment test. An entity would continue to perform the historical first step of the impairment test if it fails the qualitative assessment, while no further analysis would be required if it passes. The provisions of the new guidance were effective for, and had no impact on, our 2012 annual goodwill impairment test results. In December 2011, the FASB issued new disclosure requirements that are intended to enhance current disclosures on offsetting financial assets and liabilities. The new disclosures require an entity to disclose both gross and net information about derivative instruments accounted for in accordance with the guidance on derivatives and hedging that are eligible for offset on the balance sheet and instruments and transactions 78 Table of Contents subject to an agreement similar to a master netting arrangement. The provisions of the new disclosure requirements are effective as of the beginning of our 2014 fiscal year. We are currently evaluating the impact of the new guidance on our financial statements. In September 2011, the FASB amended its guidance regarding the disclosure requirements for employers participating in multiemployer pension and other postretirement benefit plans (multiemployer plans) to improve transparency and increase awareness of the commitments and risks involved with participation in multiemployer plans. The new accounting guidance requires employers participating in multiemployer plans to provide additional quantitative and qualitative disclosures to provide users with more detailed information regarding an employer involvement in multiemployer plans. The provisions of this new guidance were effective as of the beginning of our 2011 fiscal year and did not have a material impact on our financial statements. In June 2011, the FASB amended its accounting guidance on the presentation of comprehensive income in financial statements to improve the comparability, consistency and transparency of financial reporting and to increase the prominence of items that are recorded in other comprehensive income. The new accounting guidance requires entities to report components of comprehensive income in either (1) a continuous statement of comprehensive income or (2) two separate but consecutive statements. The provisions of the guidance were effective as of the beginning of our 2012 fiscal year. Accordingly, we have presented the components of net income and other comprehensive income for the fiscal years ended December 29, 2012, December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 as separate but consecutive statements. In February 2013, the FASB issued guidance that would require an entity to provide enhanced footnote disclosures to explain the effect of reclassification adjustments on other comprehensive income by component and provide tabular disclosure in the footnotes showing the effect of items reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income on the line items of net income. The provisions of this new guidance are effective as of the beginning of our 2013 fiscal year. We do not expect the adoption of this new guidance to have a material impact on our financial statements. In the second quarter of 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) was signed into law. The PPACA changes the tax treatment related to an existing retiree drug subsidy (RDS) available to sponsors of retiree health benefit plans that provide a benefit that is at least actuarially equivalent to the benefits under Medicare Part D. As a result of the PPACA, RDS payments will effectively become taxable in tax years beginning in 2013, by requiring the amount of the subsidy received to be offset against our deduction for health care expenses. The provisions of the PPACA required us to record the effect of this tax law change beginning in our second quarter of 2010, and consequently we recorded a one-time related tax charge of $41 million in the second quarter of 2010. In the first quarter of 2012, we began pre-paying funds within our 401(h) voluntary employee beneficiary associations (VEBA) trust to fully cover prescription drug benefit liabilities for Medicare eligible retirees. As a result, the receipt of future Medicare subsidy payments for prescription drugs will not be taxable and consequently we recorded a $55 million tax benefit reflecting this change in the first quarter of 2012. Note 3 Restructuring, Impairment and Integration Charges In 2012, we incurred restructuring charges of $279 million ( $215 million after-tax or $ 0.14 per share) in conjunction with our Productivity Plan. In 2011, we incurred restructuring charges of $ 383 million ( $286 million after-tax or $0.18 per share) in conjunction with our Productivity Plan. All of these charges were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses and primarily relate to severance and other employee related costs, asset impairments, and consulting and contract termination costs. The Productivity Plan includes actions in every aspect of our business that we believe will strengthen our complementary food, snack and beverage businesses by leveraging new technologies and processes across PepsiCo operations; go-to-market and information systems; heightening the focus on best practice sharing across the globe; consolidating 79 Table of Contents manufacturing, warehouse and sales facilities; and implementing simplified organization structures, with wider spans of control and fewer layers of management. The Productivity Plan is expected to enhance PepsiCo cost-competitiveness, provide a source of funding for future brand-building and innovation initiatives, and serve as a financial cushion for potential macroeconomic uncertainty. A summary of our Productivity Plan charges in 2012 was as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total FLNA $ 14 $ 8 $ 16 $ 38 QFNA 9 9 LAF 15 8 27 50 PAB 34 43 25 102 Europe 14 16 12 42 AMEA 18 10 28 Corporate (6 ) 16 10 $ 89 $ 75 $ 115 $ 279 A summary of our Productivity Plan charges in 2011 was as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Other Costs Total FLNA $ 74 $ 2 $ 76 QFNA 18 18 LAF 46 2 48 PAB 75 6 81 Europe 65 12 77 AMEA 9 9 Corporate 40 34 74 $ 327 $ 56 $ 383 A summary of our Productivity Plan activity in 2011 and 2012 was as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total 2011 restructuring charges $ 327 $ $ 56 $ 383 Cash payments (1 ) (29 ) (30 ) Non-cash charges (77 ) (77 ) Liability as of December 31, 2011 249 27 276 2012 restructuring charges 89 75 115 279 Cash payments (239 ) (104 ) (343 ) Non-cash charges (8 ) (75 ) (2 ) (85 ) Liability as of December 29, 2012 $ 91 $ $ 36 $ 127 In 2012, we incurred merger and integration charges of $16 million ( $12 million after-tax or $ 0.01 per share) related to our acquisition of WBD, including $11 million recorded in the Europe segment and $ 5 million recorded in interest expense. All of these net charges, other than the interest expense portion, were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. The majority of cash payments related to these charges were paid by the end of 2012. In 2011, we incurred merger and integration charges of $329 million ( $271 million after-tax or $0.17 per share) related to our acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD, including $112 million recorded in the PAB segment, $123 million recorded in the Europe segment, $78 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses and $16 million recorded in interest expense. All of these net charges, other than the interest expense portion, were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. These charges also include closing 80 Table of Contents costs and advisory fees related to our acquisition of WBD. Substantially all cash payments related to the above charges were made by the end of 2011. In 2010, we incurred merger and integration charges of $799 million related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as advisory fees in connection with our acquisition of WBD. $467 million of these charges were recorded in the PAB segment, $111 million recorded in the Europe segment, $191 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses and $30 million recorded in interest expense. All of these charges, other than the interest expense portion, were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. The merger and integration charges related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS were incurred to help create a more fully integrated supply chain and go-to-market business model, to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the distribution of our brands and to enhance our revenue growth. These charges also include closing costs, one-time financing costs and advisory fees related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. In addition, we recorded $9 million of merger-related charges, representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS, in bottling equity income. Substantially all cash payments related to the above charges were made by the end of 2011. In total, these charges had an after-tax impact of $648 million or $0.40 per share. A summary of our merger and integration activity was as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total 2010 merger and integration charges $ 396 $ 132 $ 280 $ 808 Cash payments (114 ) (271 ) (385 ) Non-cash charges (103 ) (132 ) 16 (219 ) Liability as of December 25, 2010 179 25 204 2011 merger and integration charges 146 34 149 329 Cash payments (191 ) (186 ) (377 ) Non-cash charges (36 ) (34 ) 19 (51 ) Liability as of December 31, 2011 98 7 105 2012 merger and integration charges (3 ) 1 18 16 Cash payments (65 ) (18 ) (83 ) Non-cash charges (12 ) (1 ) (1 ) (14 ) Liability as of December 29, 2012 $ 18 $ $ 6 $ 24 Note 4 Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets Average Useful Life (Years) 2012 2011 2010 Property, plant and equipment, net Land and improvements 10 34 $ 1,890 $ 1,951 Buildings and improvements 15 44 7,792 7,565 Machinery and equipment, including fleet and software 5 15 24,743 23,798 Construction in progress 1,737 1,826 36,162 35,140 Accumulated depreciation (17,026 ) (15,442 ) $ 19,136 $ 19,698 Depreciation expense $ 2,489 $ 2,476 $ 2,124 Property, plant and equipment is recorded at historical cost. Depreciation and amortization are recognized on a straight-line basis over an asset estimated useful life. Land is not depreciated and construction in progress is not depreciated until ready for service. 81 Table of Contents 2012 2011 2010 Amortizable intangible assets, net Average Useful Life (Years) Gross Accumulated Amortization Net Gross Accumulated Amortization Net Acquired franchise rights 56 60 $ 931 $ (67 ) $ 864 $ 916 $ (42 ) $ 874 Reacquired franchise rights 1 14 110 (68 ) 42 110 (47 ) 63 Brands 5 40 1,422 (980 ) 442 1,417 (945 ) 472 Other identifiable intangibles 10 24 736 (303 ) 433 777 (298 ) 479 $ 3,199 $ (1,418 ) $ 1,781 $ 3,220 $ (1,332 ) $ 1,888 Amortization expense $ 119 $ 133 $ 117 Amortization of intangible assets for each of the next five years, based on existing intangible assets as of December 29, 2012 and using average 2012 foreign exchange rates, is expected to be as follows: 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Five-year projected amortization $ 110 $ 95 $ 86 $ 78 $ 72 Depreciable and amortizable assets are only evaluated for impairment upon a significant change in the operating or macroeconomic environment. In these circumstances, if an evaluation of the undiscounted cash flows indicates impairment, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value, which is based on discounted future cash flows. Useful lives are periodically evaluated to determine whether events or circumstances have occurred which indicate the need for revision. For additional unaudited information on our policies for amortizable brands, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 82 Table of Contents Nonamortizable Intangible Assets Perpetual brands and goodwill are assessed for impairment at least annually. If the carrying amount of a perpetual brand exceeds its fair value, as determined by its discounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill in the years presented. We recorded impairment charges on certain brands in Europe of $23 million and $14 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. The change in the book value of nonamortizable intangible assets is as follows: Balance, Beginning 2011 Acquisitions/(Divestitures) Translation and Other Balance, End of 2011 Acquisitions/ (Divestitures) Translation and Other Balance, End of 2012 FLNA Goodwill $ 313 $ $ (2 ) $ 311 $ $ 5 $ 316 Brands 31 (1 ) 30 1 31 344 (3 ) 341 6 347 QFNA Goodwill 175 175 175 LAF Goodwill 497 331 (35 ) 793 (61 ) (16 ) 716 Brands 143 20 (6 ) 157 75 (9 ) 223 640 351 (41 ) 950 14 (25 ) 939 PAB Goodwill 9,946 (27 ) 13 9,932 23 33 9,988 Reacquired franchise rights 7,283 77 (18 ) 7,342 (33 ) 28 7,337 Acquired franchise rights 1,565 (1 ) (2 ) 1,562 9 2 1,573 Brands 182 (20 ) 6 168 (15 ) 153 Other 10 (9 ) (1 ) 18,986 20 (2 ) 19,004 (1 ) 48 19,051 Europe (a) Goodwill 3,040 2,131 (271 ) 4,900 78 236 5,214 Reacquired franchise rights 793 (61 ) 732 40 772 Acquired franchise rights 227 (9 ) 218 5 223 Brands 1,380 3,114 (316 ) 4,178 (96 ) 202 4,284 5,440 5,245 (657 ) 10,028 (18 ) 483 10,493 AMEA Goodwill 690 (1 ) 689 (142 ) 15 562 Brands 169 1 170 (24 ) 2 148 859 859 (166 ) 17 710 Total goodwill 14,661 2,435 (296 ) 16,800 (102 ) 273 16,971 Total reacquired franchise rights 8,076 77 (79 ) 8,074 (33 ) 68 8,109 Total acquired franchise rights 1,792 (1 ) (11 ) 1,780 9 7 1,796 Total brands 1,905 3,114 (316 ) 4,703 (45 ) 181 4,839 Total other 10 (9 ) (1 ) $ 26,444 $ 5,616 $ (703 ) $ 31,357 $ (171 ) $ 529 $ 31,715 (a) Net increase in 2011 relates primarily to our acquisition of WBD. 83 Table of Contents Note 5 Income Taxes 2012 2011 2010 Income before income taxes U.S. $ 3,234 $ 3,964 $ 4,008 Foreign 5,070 4,870 4,224 $ 8,304 $ 8,834 $ 8,232 Provision for income taxes Current: U.S. Federal $ 911 $ 611 $ 932 Foreign 940 882 728 State 153 124 137 2,004 1,617 1,797 Deferred: U.S. Federal 154 789 78 Foreign (95 ) (88 ) 18 State 27 54 1 86 755 97 $ 2,090 $ 2,372 $ 1,894 Tax rate reconciliation U.S. Federal statutory tax rate 35.0 % 35.0 % 35.0 % State income tax, net of U.S. Federal tax benefit 1.4 1.3 1.1 Lower taxes on foreign results (6.9 ) (8.7 ) (9.4 ) Tax benefit related to tax court decision (2.6 ) Acquisitions of PBG and PAS (3.1 ) Other, net (1.7 ) (0.8 ) (0.6 ) Annual tax rate 25.2 % 26.8 % 23.0 % Deferred tax liabilities Investments in noncontrolled affiliates $ 48 $ 41 Debt guarantee of wholly owned subsidiary 828 828 Property, plant and equipment 2,424 2,466 Intangible assets other than nondeductible goodwill 4,388 4,297 Other 260 184 Gross deferred tax liabilities 7,948 7,816 Deferred tax assets Net carryforwards 1,378 1,373 Stock-based compensation 378 429 Retiree medical benefits 411 504 Other employee-related benefits 672 695 Pension benefits 647 545 Deductible state tax and interest benefits 345 339 Long-term debt obligations acquired 164 223 Other 863 822 Gross deferred tax assets 4,858 4,930 Valuation allowances (1,233 ) (1,264 ) Deferred tax assets, net 3,625 3,666 Net deferred tax liabilities $ 4,323 $ 4,150 84 Table of Contents 2012 2011 2010 Deferred taxes included within: Assets: Prepaid expenses and other current assets $ 740 $ 845 Liabilities: Deferred income taxes $ 5,063 $ 4,995 Analysis of valuation allowances Balance, beginning of year $ 1,264 $ 875 $ 586 Provision 68 464 75 Other (deductions)/additions (99 ) (75 ) 214 Balance, end of year $ 1,233 $ 1,264 $ 875 For additional unaudited information on our income tax policies, including our reserves for income taxes, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Reserves A number of years may elapse before a particular matter, for which we have established a reserve, is audited and finally resolved. The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. Our major taxing jurisdictions and the related open tax audits are as follows: U.S. during 2012, we received a favorable tax court decision related to the classification of financial instruments. We continue to dispute three matters related to the 2003-2007 audit cycle with the IRS Appeals Division. We are currently under audit for tax years 2008-2009; Mexico audits have been completed for all taxable years through 2005. We are currently under audit for 2006-2008; United Kingdom audits have been completed for all taxable years through 2009; Canada domestic audits have been substantially completed for all taxable years through 2008. International audits have been completed for all taxable years through 2005; and Russia audits have been substantially completed for all taxable years through 2008. We are currently under audit for 2009-2011. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular tax matter, we believe that our reserves reflect the probable outcome of known tax contingencies. We adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest, in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular issue would usually require the use of cash. Favorable resolution would be recognized as a reduction to our annual tax rate in the year of resolution. For further unaudited information on the impact of the resolution of open tax issues, see Other Consolidated Results in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. We believe that it is reasonably possible that our reserves for uncertain tax positions could decrease by approximately $ 1.5 billion within the next twelve months as a result of the completion of audits in various jurisdictions, including the potential settlement with the IRS for the taxable years 2003-2009. As of December 29, 2012, the total gross amount of reserves for income taxes, reported in income taxes payable and other liabilities, was $2,425 million . Any prospective adjustments to these reserves will be 85 Table of Contents recorded as an increase or decrease to our provision for income taxes and would impact our effective tax rate. In addition, we accrue interest related to reserves for income taxes in our provision for income taxes and any associated penalties are recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. The gross amount of interest accrued, reported in other liabilities, was $670 million as of December 29, 2012, of which $10 million was recognized in 2012. The gross amount of interest accrued, reported in other liabilities, was $660 million as of December 31, 2011, of which $90 million was recognized in 2011. A rollforward of our reserves for all federal, state and foreign tax jurisdictions, is as follows: 2012 2011 Balance, beginning of year $ 2,167 $ 2,022 Additions for tax positions related to the current year 275 233 Additions for tax positions from prior years 161 147 Reductions for tax positions from prior years (172 ) (46 ) Settlement payments (17 ) (156 ) Statute of limitations expiration (3 ) (15 ) Translation and other 14 (18 ) Balance, end of year $ 2,425 $ 2,167 Carryforwards and Allowances Operating loss carryforwards totaling $10.4 billion at year-end 2012 are being carried forward in a number of foreign and state jurisdictions where we are permitted to use tax operating losses from prior periods to reduce future taxable income. These operating losses will expire as follows: $0.2 billion in 2013, $8.2 billion between 2014 and 2032 and $2.0 billion may be carried forward indefinitely. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Undistributed International Earnings As of December 29, 2012, we had approximately $32.2 billion of undistributed international earnings. We intend to continue to reinvest earnings outside the U.S. for the foreseeable future and, therefore, have not recognized any U.S. tax expense on these earnings. Note 6 Stock-Based Compensation Our stock-based compensation program is designed to attract and retain employees while also aligning employees interests with the interests of our shareholders. Stock options and restricted stock units (RSU) are granted to employees under the shareholder-approved 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan (LTIP). In 2012, certain executive officers were granted PepsiCo equity performance units (PEPUnits). These PEPUnits are earned based on achievement of a cumulative net income performance target and provide an opportunity to earn shares of PepsiCo common stock with a value that adjusts based upon absolute changes in PepsiCo stock price as well as PepsiCo Total Shareholder Return relative to the S&P 500 over a three -year performance period. The Company may use either authorized and unissued shares or repurchased common stock to meet share requirements resulting from the exercise of stock options and the vesting of restricted stock awards. At year-end 2012, 124 million shares were available for future stock-based compensation grants. 86 Table of Contents The following table summarizes our total stock-based compensation expense: 2012 2011 2010 Stock-based compensation expense $ 278 $ 326 $ 299 Merger and integration charges 2 13 53 Restructuring and impairment (benefits) / charges (7 ) 4 Total (a) $ 273 $ 343 $ 352 Income tax benefits recognized in earnings related to stock-based compensation $ 73 $ 101 $ 89 (a) $86 million recorded in 2010 was related to the unvested PBG/PAS acquisition-related grants. In connection with our acquisition of PBG in 2010, we issued 13.4 million stock options and 2.7 million RSUs at weighted-average grant prices of $42.89 and $62.30 , respectively, to replace previously held PBG equity awards. In connection with our acquisition of PAS in 2010, we issued 0.4 million stock options at a weighted-average grant price of $31.72 to replace previously held PAS equity awards. Our equity issuances included 8.3 million stock options and 0.6 million RSUs which were vested at the acquisition date and were included in the purchase price. The remaining 5.5 million stock options and 2.1 million RSUs issued were unvested at the issuance date and are being amortized over their remaining vesting period, up to three years from the issuance date. As a result of our annual benefits review in 2010, the Company approved certain changes to our benefits programs to remain market competitive relative to other leading global companies. These changes included ending the Company broad-based SharePower stock option program. Consequently, beginning in 2011, no new awards were granted under the SharePower program. Outstanding SharePower awards from 2010 and earlier continue to vest and are exercisable according to the terms and conditions of the program. See Note 7 for additional information regarding other related changes. Method of Accounting and Our Assumptions We account for our employee stock options under the fair value method of accounting using a Black-Scholes valuation model to measure stock option expense at the date of grant. In addition, we use the Monte-Carlo simulation option-pricing model to determine the fair value of market-based awards. The Monte-Carlo simulation option-pricing model uses the same input assumptions as the Black-Scholes model, however, it also further incorporates into the fair-value determination the possibility that the market condition may not be satisfied. Compensation costs related to awards with a market-based condition are recognized regardless of whether the market condition is satisfied, provided that the requisite service has been provided. All stock option grants have an exercise price equal to the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant and generally have a 10 -year term. We do not backdate, reprice or grant stock-based compensation awards retroactively. Repricing of awards would require shareholder approval under the LTIP. 87 Table of Contents The fair value of stock option grants is amortized to expense over the vesting period, generally three years. Awards to employees eligible for retirement prior to the award becoming fully vested are amortized to expense over the period through the date that the employee first becomes eligible to retire and is no longer required to provide service to earn the award. Executives who are awarded long-term incentives based on their performance are generally offered the choice of stock options or RSUs. Executives who elect RSUs receive one RSU for every four stock options that would have otherwise been granted. Senior officers do not have a choice and, through 2012, are granted 50% stock options and 50% performance-based RSUs. Our weighted-average Black-Scholes fair value assumptions are as follows: 2012 2011 2010 Expected life 6 years 6 years 5 years Risk-free interest rate 1.3 % 2.5 % 2.3 % Expected volatility 17 % 16 % 17 % Expected dividend yield 3.0 % 2.9 % 2.8 % The expected life is the period over which our employee groups are expected to hold their options. It is based on our historical experience with similar grants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the expected U.S. Treasury rate over the expected life. Volatility reflects movements in our stock price over the most recent historical period equivalent to the expected life. Dividend yield is estimated over the expected life based on our stated dividend policy and forecasts of net income, share repurchases and stock price. A summary of our stock-based compensation activity for the year ended December 29, 2012 is presented below: Our Stock Option Activity Options (a) Average Price (b) Average Life (years) (c) Aggregate Intrinsic Value (d) Outstanding at December 31, 2011 91,075 $ 55.92 Granted 3,696 $ 67.13 Exercised (23,585 ) $ 47.33 Forfeited/expired (3,041 ) $ 63.81 Outstanding at December 29, 2012 68,145 $ 59.15 5.04 $ 614,322 Exercisable at December 29, 2012 48,366 $ 56.44 4.45 $ 567,761 Expected to vest as of December 29, 2012 19,432 $ 65.79 7.85 $ 45,374 (a) Options are in thousands and include options previously granted under PBG, PAS and Quaker legacy plans. No additional options or shares may be granted under the PBG, PAS and Quaker plans. (b) Weighted-average exercise price. (c) Weighted-average contractual life remaining. (d) In thousands. 88 Table of Contents Our RSU Activity RSUs (a) Average Intrinsic Value (b) Average Life (years) (c) Aggregate Intrinsic Value (d) Outstanding at December 31, 2011 12,340 $ 62.96 Granted 4,404 $ 66.64 Converted (3,436 ) $ 57.76 Forfeited (1,326 ) $ 64.80 Outstanding at December 29, 2012 11,982 $ 65.60 1.49 $ 815,051 Expected to vest as of December 29, 2012 11,616 $ 65.58 1.34 $ 790,128 (a) RSUs are in thousands and include RSUs previously granted under a PBG plan. No additional RSUs or shares may be granted under the PBG plan. (b) Weighted-average intrinsic value at grant date. (c) Weighted-average contractual life remaining. (d) In thousands. Our PEPUnit Activity PEPUnits (a) Average Intrinsic Value (b) Average Life (years) (c) Aggregate Intrinsic Value (d) Outstanding at December 31, 2011 $ Granted 410 $ 64.85 Converted $ Forfeited (42 ) $ 64.51 Outstanding at December 29, 2012 368 $ 64.89 2.26 $ 25,031 Expected to vest as of December 29, 2012 334 $ 64.85 2.26 $ 22,721 (a) PEPUnits are in thousands. (b) Weighted-average intrinsic value at grant date. (c) Weighted-average contractual life remaining. (d) In thousands. Other Stock-Based Compensation Data 2012 2011 2010 Stock Options Weighted-average fair value of options granted $ 6.86 $ 7.79 $ 13.93 Total intrinsic value of options exercised (a) $ 512,636 $ 385,678 $ 502,354 RSUs Total number of RSUs granted (a) 4,404 5,333 8,326 Weighted-average intrinsic value of RSUs granted $ 66.64 $ 63.87 $ 65.01 Total intrinsic value of RSUs converted (a) $ 236,575 $ 173,433 $ 202,717 PEPUnits Total number of PEPUnits granted (a) 410 Weighted-average intrinsic value of PEPUnits granted $ 64.85 $ Total intrinsic value of PEPUnits converted (a) (a) In thousands. 89 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2012, there was $389 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested share-based compensation grants. This unrecognized compensation is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of two years. Note 7 Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans Our pension plans cover certain full-time employees in the U.S. and certain international employees. Benefits are determined based on either years of service or a combination of years of service and earnings. Certain U.S. and Canada retirees are also eligible for medical and life insurance benefits (retiree medical) if they meet age and service requirements. Generally, our share of retiree medical costs is capped at specified dollar amounts, which vary based upon years of service, with retirees contributing the remainder of the costs. Gains and losses resulting from actual experience differing from our assumptions, including the difference between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets, and from changes in our assumptions are determined at each measurement date. If this net accumulated gain or loss exceeds 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or plan liabilities, a portion of the net gain or loss is included in expense for the following year based upon the average remaining service period of active plan participants, which is approximately 11 years for pension expense and approximately 8 years for retiree medical expense. The cost or benefit of plan changes that increase or decrease benefits for prior employee service (prior service cost/(credit)) is included in earnings on a straight-line basis over the average remaining service period of active plan participants. In connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we assumed sponsorship of pension and retiree medical plans that provide benefits to certain U.S. and international employees. Subsequently, during 2010, we merged the pension plan assets of the legacy PBG and PAS U.S. pension plans with those of PepsiCo into one master trust. During 2010, the Compensation Committee of PepsiCo Board of Directors approved certain changes to the U.S. pension and retiree medical plans, effective January 1, 2011. Pension plan design changes included implementing a new employer contribution to the 401(k) savings plan for all future salaried new hires of the Company, as salaried new hires are no longer eligible to participate in the defined benefit pension plan, as well as implementing a new defined benefit pension formula for certain hourly new hires of the Company. Pension plan design changes also included implementing a new employer contribution to the 401(k) savings plan for certain legacy PBG and PAS salaried employees (as such employees are also not eligible to participate in the defined benefit pension plan), as well as implementing a new defined benefit pension formula for certain legacy PBG and PAS hourly employees. The retiree medical plan design change included phasing out Company subsidies of retiree medical benefits. As a result of these changes, we remeasured our pension and retiree medical expenses and liabilities in 2010, which resulted in a one-time pre-tax curtailment gain of $62 million included in retiree medical expenses. In the fourth quarter of 2012, the Company offered certain former employees who have vested benefits in our defined benefit pension plans the option of receiving a one-time lump sum payment equal to the present value of the participant pension benefit (payable in cash or rolled over into a qualified retirement plan or IRA). In December 2012, we made a discretionary contribution of $405 million to fund substantially all of these payments. The Company recorded a pre-tax non-cash settlement charge of $195 million ( $131 million after-tax or $0.08 per share) as a result of this transaction. See Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The provisions of both the PPACA and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act are reflected in our retiree medical expenses and liabilities and were not material to our financial statements. 90 Table of Contents Selected financial information for our pension and retiree medical plans is as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 Change in projected benefit liability Liability at beginning of year $ 11,901 $ 9,851 $ 2,381 $ 2,142 $ 1,563 $ 1,770 Acquisitions/(divestitures) 11 (63 ) Service cost 407 350 100 95 50 51 Interest cost 534 547 115 117 65 88 Plan amendments 15 21 (16 ) 3 Participant contributions 3 3 Experience loss/(gain) 932 1,484 200 224 (63 ) (239 ) Benefit payments (278 ) (414 ) (76 ) (69 ) (111 ) (110 ) Settlement/curtailment (633 ) (20 ) (40 ) (15 ) Special termination benefits 8 71 1 1 5 1 Foreign currency adjustment 102 (41 ) 2 (1 ) Other 2 3 Liability at end of year $ 12,886 $ 11,901 $ 2,788 $ 2,381 $ 1,511 $ 1,563 Change in fair value of plan assets Fair value at beginning of year $ 9,072 $ 8,870 $ 2,031 $ 1,896 $ 190 $ 190 Acquisitions/(divestitures) 11 (1 ) Actual return on plan assets 1,282 542 206 79 35 Employer contributions/funding 1,368 63 246 176 251 110 Participant contributions 3 3 Benefit payments (278 ) (414 ) (76 ) (69 ) (111 ) (110 ) Settlement (627 ) (33 ) (30 ) Foreign currency adjustment 86 (23 ) Fair value at end of year $ 10,817 $ 9,072 $ 2,463 $ 2,031 $ 365 $ 190 Funded status $ (2,069 ) $ (2,829 ) $ (325 ) $ (350 ) $ (1,146 ) $ (1,373 ) 91 Table of Contents Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 Amounts recognized Other assets $ $ $ 51 $ 55 $ $ Other current liabilities (51 ) (91 ) (2 ) (1 ) (71 ) (124 ) Other liabilities (2,018 ) (2,738 ) (374 ) (404 ) (1,075 ) (1,249 ) Net amount recognized $ (2,069 ) $ (2,829 ) $ (325 ) $ (350 ) $ (1,146 ) $ (1,373 ) Amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive loss (pre-tax) Net loss/(gain) $ 4,212 $ 4,217 $ 1,096 $ 977 $ (44 ) $ 32 Prior service cost/(credit) 121 122 (3 ) (2 ) (92 ) (118 ) Total $ 4,333 $ 4,339 $ 1,093 $ 975 $ (136 ) $ (86 ) Components of the (decrease)/increase in net loss/(gain) included in accumulated other comprehensive loss Change in discount rate $ 776 $ 1,710 $ 188 $ 302 $ 84 $ 115 Employee-related assumption changes 135 (140 ) (2 ) (51 ) (67 ) (125 ) Liability-related experience different from assumptions 66 (85 ) 14 (27 ) (80 ) (210 ) Actual asset return different from expected return (486 ) 162 (60 ) 57 (13 ) 14 Amortization and settlement of losses (451 ) (147 ) (64 ) (55 ) (12 ) Other, including foreign currency adjustments (45 ) (9 ) 43 (16 ) (20 ) Total $ (5 ) $ 1,491 $ 119 $ 210 $ (76 ) $ (238 ) Liability at end of year for service to date $ 11,643 $ 11,205 $ 2,323 $ 1,921 The components of benefit expense are as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 Components of benefit expense Service cost $ 407 $ 350 $ 299 $ 100 $ 95 $ 81 $ 50 $ 51 $ 54 Interest cost 534 547 506 115 117 106 65 88 93 Expected return on plan assets (796 ) (704 ) (643 ) (146 ) (136 ) (123 ) (22 ) (14 ) (1 ) Amortization of prior service cost/(credit) 17 14 12 1 2 2 (26 ) (28 ) (22 ) Amortization of net loss 259 145 119 53 40 24 12 9 421 352 293 123 118 90 67 109 133 Settlement/curtailment loss/(gain) (a) 185 (8 ) (2 ) 4 30 1 (62 ) Special termination benefits 8 71 45 1 1 3 5 1 3 Total $ 614 $ 415 $ 336 $ 128 $ 149 $ 94 $ 72 $ 110 $ 74 (a) Includes pension lump sum settlement charge of $195 million in 2012. This charge is reflected in items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations). 92 Table of Contents The estimated amounts to be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into expense in 2013 for our pension and retiree medical plans are as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International Net loss $ 289 $ 68 $ 1 Prior service cost/(credit) 18 1 (22 ) Total $ 307 $ 69 $ (21 ) The following table provides the weighted-average assumptions used to determine projected benefit liability and benefit expense for our pension and retiree medical plans: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 Weighted-average assumptions Liability discount rate 4.2 % 4.6 % 5.7 % 4.4 % 4.8 % 5.5 % 3.7 % 4.4 % 5.2 % Expense discount rate 4.6 % 5.7 % 6.0 % 4.8 % 5.5 % 6.0 % 4.4 % 5.2 % 5.8 % Expected return on plan assets 7.8 % 7.8 % 7.8 % 6.7 % 6.7 % 7.1 % 7.8 % 7.8 % 7.8 % Liability rate of salary increases 3.7 % 3.7 % 4.1 % 3.9 % 4.1 % 4.1 % Expense rate of salary increases 3.7 % 4.1 % 4.4 % 4.1 % 4.1 % 4.1 % The following table provides selected information about plans with liability for service to date and total benefit liability in excess of plan assets: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 Selected information for plans with liability for service to date in excess of plan assets Liability for service to date $ (11,643 ) $ (11,205 ) $ (711 ) $ (471 ) Fair value of plan assets $ 10,817 $ 9,072 $ 552 $ 344 Selected information for plans with projected benefit liability in excess of plan assets Benefit liability $ (12,886 ) $ (11,901 ) $ (2,542 ) $ (2,191 ) $ (1,511 ) $ (1,563 ) Fair value of plan assets $ 10,817 $ 9,072 $ 2,166 $ 1,786 $ 365 $ 190 Of the total projected pension benefit liability at year-end 2012 , $ 761 million relates to plans that we do not fund because the funding of such plans does not receive favorable tax treatment. Future Benefit Payments and Funding Our estimated future benefit payments are as follows: 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018-22 Pension $ 560 $ 570 $ 600 $ 650 $ 705 $ 4,465 Retiree medical (a) $ 120 $ 125 $ 125 $ 130 $ 130 $ 655 (a) Expected future benefit payments for our retiree medical plans do not reflect any estimated subsidies expected to be received under the 2003 Medicare Act. Subsidies are expected to be approximately $13 million for each of the years from 2013 through 2017 and approximately $90 million in total for 2018 through 2022. These future benefits to beneficiaries include payments from both funded and unfunded plans. 93 Table of Contents In 2013 , we expect to make pension and retiree medical contributions of approximately $ 240 million , with up to approximately $ 17 million expected to be discretionary. Our contributions for retiree medical are estimated to be approximately $ 70 million in 2013 . Plan Assets Pension Our pension plan investment strategy includes the use of actively managed securities and is reviewed periodically in conjunction with plan liabilities, an evaluation of market conditions, tolerance for risk and cash requirements for benefit payments. Our investment objective is to ensure that funds are available to meet the plans benefit obligations when they become due. Our overall investment strategy is to prudently invest plan assets in a well-diversified portfolio of equity and high-quality debt securities to achieve our long-term return expectations. Our investment policy also permits the use of derivative instruments which are primarily used to reduce risk. Our expected long-term rate of return on U.S. plan assets is 7.8% . Our target investment allocations are as follows: 2013 2012 Fixed income 40 % 40 % U.S. equity 33 % 33 % International equity 22 % 22 % Real estate 5 % 5 % Actual investment allocations may vary from our target investment allocations due to prevailing market conditions. We regularly review our actual investment allocations and periodically rebalance our investments to our target allocations. The expected return on pension plan assets is based on our pension plan investment strategy and our expectations for long-term rates of return by asset class, taking into account volatility and correlation among asset classes and our historical experience. We also review current levels of interest rates and inflation to assess the reasonableness of the long-term rates. We evaluate our expected return assumptions annually to ensure that they are reasonable. To calculate the expected return on pension plan assets, our market-related value of assets for fixed income is the actual fair value. For all other asset categories, we use a method that recognizes investment gains or losses (the difference between the expected and actual return based on the market-related value of assets) over a five -year period. This has the effect of reducing year-to-year volatility. Our pension contributions for 2012 were $1,614 million , of which $1,375 million was discretionary. Discretionary contributions included $ 405 million pertaining to pension lump sum payments. Retiree Medical In 2012 and 2011 , we made non-discretionary contributions of $111 million and $110 million , respectively, to fund the payment of retiree medical claims. In 2012 , we made a discretionary contribution of $140 million to fund future U.S. retiree medical plan benefits. This contribution was invested consistently with the allocation of existing assets in the U.S. pension plan. Fair Value The guidance on fair value measurements defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. The fair value framework requires the categorization of assets and liabilities into three levels based upon the assumptions (inputs) used to price the assets. Level 1 provides the most reliable measure of fair value, whereas Level 3 generally requires significant management judgment. 94 Table of Contents Plan assets measured at fair value as of fiscal year-end 2012 and 2011 are categorized consistently by level in both years, and are as follows: 2012 2011 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total U.S. plan assets* Equity securities: U.S. common stock (a) $ 626 $ 626 $ $ $ 514 U.S. commingled funds (b) 3,106 3,106 3,003 International common stock (a) 1,597 1,597 1,089 International commingled fund (c) 948 948 776 Preferred stock (d) 20 20 19 Fixed income securities: Government securities (d) 1,287 1,287 1,032 Corporate bonds (d) (e) 2,962 2,962 2,653 Mortgage-backed securities (d) 110 110 24 Other: Contracts with insurance companies (f) 27 27 24 Real estate commingled funds (g) 331 331 Cash and cash equivalents 117 117 78 Sub-total U.S. plan assets 11,131 $ 2,340 $ 8,433 $ 358 9,212 Dividends and interest receivable 51 50 Total U.S. plan assets $ 11,182 $ 9,262 International plan assets Equity securities: U.S. commingled funds (b) $ 278 $ $ 278 $ $ 246 International commingled funds (c) 863 863 729 Fixed income securities: Government securities (d) 202 202 171 Corporate bonds (d) 230 230 196 Fixed income commingled funds (h) 600 600 530 Other: Contracts with insurance companies (f) 35 35 30 Currency commingled funds (i) 64 64 52 Real estate commingled fund (g) 60 60 56 Cash and cash equivalents 125 125 16 Sub-total international plan assets 2,457 $ 125 $ 2,237 $ 95 2,026 Dividends and interest receivable 6 5 Total international plan assets $ 2,463 $ 2,031 (a) Based on quoted market prices in active markets. (b) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds that track various U.S. large, mid-cap and small company indices. Includes one large-cap fund that represents 25% and 30% , respectively, of total U.S. plan assets for 2012 and 2011 . (c) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds that track various non-U.S. equity indices. (d) Based on quoted bid prices for comparable securities in the marketplace and broker/dealer quotes that are not observable. (e) Corporate bonds of U.S.-based companies represent 22% and 24% , respectively, of total U.S. plan assets for 2012 and 2011 . (f) Based on the fair value of the contracts as determined by the insurance companies using inputs that are not observable. (g) Based on the appraised value of the investments owned by these funds as determined by independent third parties using inputs that are not observable. (h) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds that track various government and corporate bond indices. (i) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds. Includes managed hedge funds that invest primarily in derivatives to reduce currency exposure. * 2012 and 2011 amounts include $365 million and $ 190 million , respectively, of retiree medical plan assets that are restricted for purposes of providing health benefits for U.S. retirees and their beneficiaries. 95 Table of Contents The change in Level 3 plan assets for 2012 is as follows: Balance, End of 2011 Return on Assets Held at Year End Return on Assets Sold Purchases and Sales, Net Balance, End of 2012 Real estate commingled funds $ 56 $ 15 $ 1 $ 319 $ 391 Contracts with insurance companies 54 9 (1 ) 62 Total $ 110 $ 24 $ 1 $ 318 $ 453 Retiree Medical Cost Trend Rates An average increase of 7% in the cost of covered retiree medical benefits is assumed for 2013 . This average increase is then projected to decline gradually to 5% in 2020 and thereafter. These assumed health care cost trend rates have an impact on the retiree medical plan expense and liability. However, the cap on our share of retiree medical costs limits the impact. In addition, as of January 1, 2011, the Company started phasing out Company subsidies of retiree medical benefits. A 1-percentage-point change in the assumed health care trend rate would have the following effects: 1% Increase 1% Decrease 2012 Service and interest cost components $ 4 $ (4 ) 2012 Benefit liability $ 40 $ (38 ) Savings Plan Certain U.S. employees are eligible to participate in 401(k) savings plans, which are voluntary defined contribution plans. The plans are designed to help employees accumulate additional savings for retirement, and we make Company matching contributions on a portion of eligible pay based on years of service. In 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we also made Company retirement contributions for certain employees on a portion of eligible pay based on years of service. As of January 1, 2011, a new employer contribution to the 401(k) savings plan became effective for certain eligible legacy PBG and PAS salaried employees as well as all eligible salaried new hires of PepsiCo who were not eligible to participate in the defined benefit pension plan as a result of plan design changes approved during 2010. In 2012 and 2011 , our total Company contributions were $109 million and $144 million , respectively. As of February 2012, certain U.S. employees earning a benefit under one of our defined benefit pension plans were no longer eligible for the Company matching contributions on their 401(k) contributions. For additional unaudited information on our pension and retiree medical plans and related accounting policies and assumptions, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 96 Table of Contents Note 8 Related Party Transactions On February 26, 2010, we completed our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, at which time we gained control over their operations and began to consolidate their results. See Notes 1 and 15 to our consolidated financial statements. Prior to these acquisitions, our significant related party transactions were with PBG and PAS as they represented our most significant noncontrolled bottling affiliates. In 2010, prior to the date of acquisition of PBG and PAS, we reflected the following related party transactions in our consolidated financial statements: net revenue of $993 million , cost of sales of $116 million and selling, general and administrative expenses of $6 million . As a result of these acquisitions, our related party transactions in 2011 and 2012 were not material. We also coordinate, on an aggregate basis, the contract negotiations of sweeteners and other raw material requirements, including aluminum cans and plastic bottles and closures for certain of our independent bottlers. Once we have negotiated the contracts, the bottlers order and take delivery directly from the supplier and pay the suppliers directly. Consequently, these transactions are not reflected in our consolidated financial statements. As the contracting party, we could be liable to these suppliers in the event of any nonpayment by our bottlers, but we consider this exposure to be remote. In addition, our joint ventures with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name) and Starbucks sell finished goods (ready-to-drink teas and coffees) to our noncontrolled bottling affiliates. Consistent with accounting for equity method investments, our joint venture revenue is not included in our consolidated net revenue. In 2010, we repurchased $357 million ( 5.5 million shares) of PepsiCo stock from the master trust which holds assets of PepsiCo U.S. qualified pension plans at market value. Note 9 Debt Obligations and Commitments 2012 2011 Short-term debt obligations Current maturities of long-term debt $ 2,901 $ 2,549 Commercial paper (0.1% and 0.1%) 1,101 2,973 Other borrowings (7.4% and 7.6%) 813 683 $ 4,815 $ 6,205 Long-term debt obligations Notes due 2012 (3.0%) $ $ 2,353 Notes due 2013 (2.3%) 2,891 2,841 Notes due 2014 (4.4% and 4.6%) 3,237 3,335 Notes due 2015 (1.5% and 2.3%) 3,300 1,632 Notes due 2016 (3.9%) 1,878 1,876 Notes due 2017 (2.0% and 5.0%) 1,250 258 Notes due 2018-2042 (4.4% and 4.8%) 13,781 10,548 Other, due 2013-2020 (9.3% and 9.9%) 108 274 26,445 23,117 Less: current maturities of long-term debt obligations (2,901 ) (2,549 ) Total $ 23,544 $ 20,568 The interest rates in the above table reflect weighted-average rates at year-end. 97 Table of Contents In 2012, we issued: $750 million of 0.750% senior notes maturing in March 2015 ; $900 million of 0.700% senior notes maturing in August 2015 ; $1 billion of 1.250% senior notes maturing in August 2017 ; $1.250 billion of 2.750% senior notes maturing in March 2022 ; 500 million of 2.500% senior notes maturing in November 2022 ; $750 million of 4.000% senior notes maturing in March 2042 ; and $600 million of 3.600% senior notes maturing in August 2042 . The net proceeds from the issuances of all the above notes were used for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of commercial paper. In the second quarter of 2012, we extended the termination date of our four -year unsecured revolving credit agreement (Four-Year Credit Agreement) from June 14, 2015 to June 14, 2016 and the termination date of our 364 -day unsecured revolving credit agreement (364-Day Credit Agreement) from June 12, 2012 to June 11, 2013 . Funds borrowed under the Four-Year Credit Agreement and the 364-Day Credit Agreement may be used for general corporate purposes of PepsiCo and its subsidiaries, including, but not limited to, working capital, capital investments and acquisitions. In addition, as of December 29, 2012, our international debt of $857 million related to borrowings from external parties including various lines of credit. These lines of credit are subject to normal banking terms and conditions and are fully committed at least to the extent of our borrowings. Long-Term Contractual Commitments (a) Payments Due by Period Total 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 and beyond Long-term debt obligations (b) $ 22,858 $ $ 6,450 $ 3,105 $ 13,303 Interest on debt obligations (c) 8,772 915 1,477 1,252 5,128 Operating leases 2,061 445 634 362 620 Purchasing commitments (d) 1,738 741 808 135 54 Marketing commitments (d) 2,332 298 605 490 939 $ 37,761 $ 2,399 $ 9,974 $ 5,344 $ 20,044 (a) Based on year-end foreign exchange rates. (b) Excludes $2,901 million related to current maturities of long-term debt, $349 million related to the fair value step-up of debt acquired in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS and $337 million related to the increase in carrying value of long-term debt representing the gains on our fair value interest rate swaps. (c) Interest payments on floating-rate debt are estimated using interest rates effective as of December 29, 2012. (d) Primarily reflects non-cancelable commitments as of December 29, 2012. Most long-term contractual commitments, except for our long-term debt obligations, are not recorded on our balance sheet. Operating leases primarily represent building leases. Non-cancelable purchasing commitments are primarily for packaging materials, oranges and orange juice, and sugar and other sweeteners. Non-cancelable marketing commitments are primarily for sports marketing. Bottler funding to independent bottlers is not reflected in our long-term contractual commitments as it is negotiated on an annual basis. Accrued liabilities for pension and retiree medical plans are not reflected in our long-term contractual commitments because they do not represent expected future cash outflows. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our pension and retiree medical obligations. 98 Table of Contents Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements It is not our business practice to enter into off-balance-sheet arrangements, other than in the normal course of business. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements regarding contracts related to certain of our bottlers. See Our Liquidity and Capital Resources in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further unaudited information on our borrowings. Note 10 Financial Instruments We are exposed to market risks arising from adverse changes in: commodity prices, affecting the cost of our raw materials and energy; foreign exchange risks and currency restrictions; and interest rates. In the normal course of business, we manage these risks through a variety of strategies, including the use of derivatives. Certain derivatives are designated as either cash flow or fair value hedges and qualify for hedge accounting treatment, while others do not qualify and are marked to market through earnings. Cash flows from derivatives used to manage commodity, foreign exchange or interest risks are classified as operating activities. We classify both the earnings and cash flow impact from these derivatives consistent with the underlying hedged item. See Our Business Risks in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further unaudited information on our business risks. For cash flow hedges, changes in fair value are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive loss within common shareholders equity until the underlying hedged item is recognized in net income. For fair value hedges, changes in fair value are recognized immediately in earnings, consistent with the underlying hedged item. Hedging transactions are limited to an underlying exposure. As a result, any change in the value of our derivative instruments would be substantially offset by an opposite change in the value of the underlying hedged items. Hedging ineffectiveness and a net earnings impact occur when the change in the value of the hedge does not offset the change in the value of the underlying hedged item. If the derivative instrument is terminated, we continue to defer the related gain or loss and then include it as a component of the cost of the underlying hedged item. Upon determination that the underlying hedged item will not be part of an actual transaction, we recognize the related gain or loss on the hedge in net income immediately. We also use derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment. We account for such derivatives at market value with the resulting gains and losses reflected in our income statement. We do not use derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We perform assessments of our counterparty credit risk regularly, including a review of credit ratings, credit default swap rates and potential nonperformance of the counterparty. Based on our most recent assessment of our counterparty credit risk, we consider this risk to be low. In addition, we enter into derivative contracts with a variety of financial institutions that we believe are creditworthy in order to reduce our concentration of credit risk. Commodity Prices We are subject to commodity price risk because our ability to recover increased costs through higher pricing may be limited in the competitive environment in which we operate. This risk is managed through the use of fixed-price purchase orders, pricing agreements and derivatives. In addition, risk to our supply of certain raw materials is mitigated through purchases from multiple geographies and suppliers. We use derivatives, with terms of no more than three years, to economically hedge price fluctuations related to a portion of our anticipated commodity purchases, primarily for agricultural products, metals and energy. For those derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting, any ineffectiveness is recorded immediately in corporate unallocated 99 Table of Contents expenses. Ineffectiveness was not material for all periods presented. During the next 12 months, we expect to reclassify net losses of $12 million related to these hedges from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net income. Derivatives used to hedge commodity price risk that do not qualify for hedge accounting are marked to market each period and reflected in our income statement. Our open commodity derivative contracts that qualify for hedge accounting had a face value of $507 million as of December 29, 2012 and $598 million as of December 31, 2011. Our open commodity derivative contracts that do not qualify for hedge accounting had a face value of $853 million as of December 29, 2012 and $630 million as of December 31, 2011. Foreign Exchange Our operations outside of the U.S. generate 49% of our net revenue, with Russia, Mexico, Canada, the United Kingdom and Brazil comprising approximately 25% of our net revenue. As a result, we are exposed to foreign currency risks. Additionally, we are also exposed to foreign currency risk from foreign currency purchases and foreign currency assets and liabilities created in the normal course of business. We manage this risk through sourcing purchases from local suppliers, negotiating contracts in local currencies with foreign suppliers and through the use of derivatives, primarily forward contracts with terms of no more than two years. Exchange rate gains or losses related to foreign currency transactions are recognized as transaction gains or losses in our income statement as incurred. Our foreign currency derivatives had a total face value of $2.8 billion as of December 29, 2012 and $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2011. During the next 12 months, we expect to reclassify net losses of $14 million related to foreign currency contracts that qualify for hedge accounting from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net income. Additionally, ineffectiveness for our foreign currency hedges was not material for all periods presented. For foreign currency derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment, all losses and gains were offset by changes in the underlying hedged items, resulting in no net material impact on earnings. Interest Rates We centrally manage our debt and investment portfolios considering investment opportunities and risks, tax consequences and overall financing strategies. We use various interest rate derivative instruments including, but not limited to, interest rate swaps, cross-currency interest rate swaps, Treasury locks and swap locks to manage our overall interest expense and foreign exchange risk. These instruments effectively change the interest rate and currency of specific debt issuances. Certain of our fixed rate indebtedness has been swapped to floating rates. The notional amount, interest payment and maturity date of the interest rate and cross-currency swaps match the principal, interest payment and maturity date of the related debt. Our Treasury locks and swap locks are entered into to protect against unfavorable interest rate changes relating to forecasted debt transactions. The notional amounts of the interest rate derivative instruments outstanding as of December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011 were $8.1 billion and $8.3 billion , respectively. For those interest rate derivative instruments that qualify for cash flow hedge accounting, any ineffectiveness is recorded immediately. Ineffectiveness was not material for all periods presented. During the next 12 months, we expect to reclassify net losses of $23 million related to these hedges from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net income. As of December 29, 2012, approximately 27% of total debt, after the impact of the related interest rate derivative instruments, was exposed to variable rates, compared to 38% as of December 31, 2011. 100 Table of Contents Fair Value Measurements The fair values of our financial assets and liabilities as of December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011 are categorized as follows: 2012 2011 Assets (a) Liabilities (a) Assets (a) Liabilities (a) Available-for-sale securities (b) $ 79 $ $ 59 $ Short-term investments index funds (c) $ 161 $ $ 157 $ Prepaid forward contracts (d) $ 33 $ $ 40 $ Deferred compensation (e) $ $ 492 $ $ 519 Derivatives designated as fair value hedging instruments: Interest rate derivatives (f) $ 276 $ $ 300 $ Derivatives designated as cash flow hedging instruments: Foreign exchange contracts (g) $ 5 $ 19 $ 25 $ 5 Interest rate derivatives (f) 6 69 Commodity contracts (h) 8 24 3 78 $ 19 $ 43 $ 28 $ 152 Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments: Foreign exchange contracts (g) $ 8 $ 6 $ 17 $ 20 Interest rate derivatives (f) 123 153 107 141 Commodity contracts (h) 40 45 10 62 $ 171 $ 204 $ 134 $ 223 Total derivatives at fair value $ 466 $ 247 $ 462 $ 375 Total $ 739 $ 739 $ 718 $ 894 (a) Financial assets are classified on our balance sheet within prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets, with the exception of available-for-sale securities and short-term investments, which are classified as short-term investments. Financial liabilities are classified on our balance sheet within accounts payable and other current liabilities and other liabilities. Unless specifically indicated, all financial assets and liabilities are categorized as Level 2 assets or liabilities. (b) Based on the price of common stock. Categorized as a Level 1 asset. (c) Based on price changes in index funds used to manage a portion of market risk arising from our deferred compensation liability. Categorized as a Level 1 asset. (d) Based primarily on the price of our common stock. (e) Based on the fair value of investments corresponding to employees investment elections. As of December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011, $10 million and $44 million , respectively, are categorized as Level 1 liabilities. The remaining balances are categorized as Level 2 liabilities. (f) Based on LIBOR forward rates and recently reported market transactions of spot and forward rates. (g) Based on recently reported market transactions of spot and forward rates. (h) Based on recently reported transactions in the marketplace, primarily swap arrangements. 101 Table of Contents The effective portion of the pre-tax (gains)/losses on our derivative instruments are categorized in the table below. Fair Value/Non- designated Hedges Cash Flow Hedges (Gains)/Losses Recognized in Income Statement (a) Losses/(Gains) Recognized in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Losses/(Gains) Reclassified from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss into Income Statement (b) 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 Foreign exchange contracts $ (23 ) $ 14 $ 41 $ (9 ) $ 8 $ 26 Interest rate derivatives 17 (113 ) (2 ) 84 19 15 Commodity contracts (23 ) 25 11 51 63 (36 ) Total $ (29 ) $ (74 ) $ 50 $ 126 $ 90 $ 5 (a) Interest rate derivative losses are primarily from fair value hedges and are included in interest expense. These losses are substantially offset by decreases in the value of the underlying debt, which is also included in interest expense. All other gains/losses are from non-designated hedges and are included in corporate unallocated expenses. (b) Interest rate derivative losses are included in interest expense. All other gains/losses are primarily included in cost of sales. The carrying amounts of our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments approximate fair value due to the short-term maturity. Short-term investments consist principally of short-term time deposits and index funds used to manage a portion of market risk arising from our deferred compensation liability. The fair value of our debt obligations as of December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011 was $30.5 billion and $29.8 billion , respectively, based upon prices of similar instruments in the marketplace. Note 11 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share Basic net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share is net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders divided by the weighted average of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share is calculated using the weighted average of common shares outstanding adjusted to include the effect that would occur if in-the-money employee stock options were exercised and RSUs and preferred shares were converted into common shares. Options to purchase 9.6 million shares in 2012, 25.9 million shares in 2011 and 24.4 million shares in 2010 were not included in the calculation of diluted earnings per common share because these options were out-of-the-money. Out-of-the-money options had average exercise prices of $67.64 in 2012, $66.99 in 2011 and $67.26 in 2010. 102 Table of Contents The computations of basic and diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share are as follows: 2012 2011 2010 Income Shares (a) Income Shares (a) Income Shares (a) Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,178 $ 6,443 $ 6,320 Preferred shares: Dividends (1 ) (1 ) (1 ) Redemption premium (6 ) (6 ) (5 ) Net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders $ 6,171 1,557 $ 6,436 1,576 $ 6,314 1,590 Basic net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share $ 3.96 $ 4.08 $ 3.97 Net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders $ 6,171 1,557 $ 6,436 1,576 $ 6,314 1,590 Dilutive securities: Stock options and RSUs 17 20 23 ESOP convertible preferred stock 7 1 7 1 6 1 Diluted $ 6,178 1,575 $ 6,443 1,597 $ 6,320 1,614 Diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share $ 3.92 $ 4.03 $ 3.91 (a) Weighted-average common shares outstanding (in millions). Note 12 Preferred Stock As of December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011, there were 3 million shares of convertible preferred stock authorized. The preferred stock was issued for an ESOP established by Quaker and these shares are redeemable for common stock by the ESOP participants. The preferred stock accrues dividends at an annual rate of $5.46 per share. At year-end 2012 and 2011, there were 803,953 preferred shares issued and 186,553 and 206,653 shares outstanding, respectively. The outstanding preferred shares had a fair value of $63 million as of December 29, 2012 and $68 million as of December 31, 2011. Each share is convertible at the option of the holder into 4.9625 shares of common stock. The preferred shares may be called by us upon written notice at $78 per share plus accrued and unpaid dividends. Quaker made the final award to its ESOP plan in June 2001. 2012 2011 2010 Shares (a) Amount Shares (a) Amount Shares (a) Amount Preferred stock 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 Repurchased preferred stock Balance, beginning of year 0.6 $ 157 0.6 $ 150 0.6 $ 145 Redemptions 7 7 5 Balance, end of year 0.6 $ 164 0.6 $ 157 0.6 $ 150 (a) In millions. 103 Table of Contents Note 13 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Attributable to PepsiCo Comprehensive income is a measure of income which includes both net income and other comprehensive income or loss. Other comprehensive income or loss results from items deferred from recognition into our income statement. Accumulated other comprehensive income or loss is separately presented on our balance sheet as part of common shareholders equity. Other comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to PepsiCo was $742 million in 2012, $(2,599) million in 2011 and $164 million in 2010. The accumulated balances for each component of other comprehensive loss attributable to PepsiCo were as follows: 2012 2011 2010 Currency translation adjustment $ (1,946 ) $ (2,688 ) $ (1,159 ) Cash flow hedges, net of tax (94 ) (112 ) (38 ) Unamortized pension and retiree medical, net of tax (a) (3,491 ) (3,419 ) (2,442 ) Unrealized gain on securities, net of tax 80 62 70 Other (36 ) (72 ) (61 ) Accumulated other comprehensive loss attributable to PepsiCo $ (5,487 ) $ (6,229 ) $ (3,630 ) (a) Net of taxes of $1,832 million in 2012, $1,831 million in 2011 and $1,322 million in 2010. Note 14 Supplemental Financial Information 2012 2011 2010 Accounts receivable Trade receivables $ 6,215 $ 6,036 Other receivables 983 1,033 7,198 7,069 Allowance, beginning of year 157 144 $ 90 Net amounts charged to expense 28 30 12 Deductions (a) (27 ) (41 ) (37 ) Other (b) (1 ) 24 79 Allowance, end of year 157 157 $ 144 Net receivables $ 7,041 $ 6,912 Inventories (c) Raw materials $ 1,875 $ 1,883 Work-in-process 173 207 Finished goods 1,533 1,737 $ 3,581 $ 3,827 (a) Includes accounts written off. (b) Includes adjustments related to acquisitions, currency translation and other adjustments. (c) Approximately 3% , in both 2012 and 2011 , of the inventory cost was computed using the LIFO method. The differences between LIFO and FIFO methods of valuing these inventories were not material. 104 Table of Contents 2012 2011 Other assets Noncurrent notes and accounts receivable $ 136 $ 159 Deferred marketplace spending 195 186 Pension plans 62 65 Other investments (a) 718 89 Other 542 522 $ 1,653 $ 1,021 Accounts payable and other current liabilities Accounts payable $ 4,451 $ 4,083 Accrued marketplace spending 2,187 2,105 Accrued compensation and benefits 1,705 1,771 Dividends payable 838 813 Other current liabilities 2,722 2,985 $ 11,903 $ 11,757 (a) Net increase in 2012 primarily relates to our 5% indirect equity interest in Tingyi-Asahi Beverages Holding Co. Ltd. (TAB). 2012 2011 2010 Other supplemental information Rent expense $ 581 $ 589 $ 526 Interest paid $ 1,074 $ 1,039 $ 1,043 Income taxes paid, net of refunds $ 1,840 $ 2,218 $ 1,495 Note 15 Acquisitions and Divestitures PBG and PAS On February 26, 2010, we acquired PBG and PAS to create a more fully integrated supply chain and go-to-market business model, improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the distribution of our brands and enhancing our revenue growth. The total purchase price was approximately $12.6 billion , which included $8.3 billion of cash and equity and the fair value of our previously held equity interests in PBG and PAS of $4.3 billion . The acquisitions were accounted for as business combinations, and, accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed were recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Our fair market valuations of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed were completed in the first quarter of 2011. WBD On February 3, 2011, we acquired the ordinary shares, including shares underlying ADSs and Global Depositary Shares (GDS), of WBD, a company incorporated in the Russian Federation, which represented in the aggregate approximately 66% of WBD outstanding ordinary shares, pursuant to the purchase agreement dated December 1, 2010 between PepsiCo and certain selling shareholders of WBD for approximately $3.8 billion in cash (or $2.4 billion , net of cash and cash equivalents acquired). The acquisition of those shares increased our total ownership to approximately 77% , giving us a controlling interest in WBD. Under the guidance on accounting for business combinations, once a controlling interest is obtained, we were required to recognize and measure 100% of the identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and noncontrolling interests at their full fair values. Our fair market valuations of the identifiable assets acquired 105 Table of Contents and liabilities assumed were completed in the first quarter of 2012 and the final valuations did not materially differ from those fair values reported as of December 31, 2011. On March 10, 2011, we commenced tender offers in Russia and the U.S. for all remaining outstanding ordinary shares and ADSs of WBD for 3,883.70 Russian rubles per ordinary share and 970.925 Russian rubles per ADS, respectively. The Russian offer was made to all holders of ordinary shares and the U.S. offer was made to all holders of ADSs. We completed the Russian offer on May 19, 2011 and the U.S. offer on May 16, 2011. After completion of the offers, we paid approximately $1.3 billion for WBD ordinary shares (including shares underlying ADSs) and increased our total ownership of WBD to approximately 98.6% . On June 30, 2011, we elected to exercise our squeeze-out rights under Russian law with respect to all remaining WBD ordinary shares not already owned by us. Therefore, under Russian law, all remaining WBD shareholders were required to sell their ordinary shares (including those underlying ADSs) to us at the same price that was offered to WBD shareholders in the Russian tender offer. Accordingly, all registered holders of ordinary shares on August 15, 2011 (including the ADSs depositary) received 3,883.70 Russian rubles per ordinary share. After completion of the squeeze-out in September 2011, we paid approximately $79 million for WBD ordinary shares (including shares underlying ADSs) and increased our total ownership to 100% of WBD. Tingyi-Asahi Beverages Holding Co. Ltd. On March 31, 2012, we completed a transaction with Tingyi. Under the terms of the agreement, we contributed our company-owned and joint venture bottling operations in China to Tingyi beverage subsidiary, TAB, and received as consideration a 5% indirect equity interest in TAB. As a result of this transaction, TAB is now our franchise bottler in China. We also have a call option to increase our indirect holding in TAB to 20% by 2015. We recorded restructuring and other charges of $150 million ( $176 million after-tax or $0.11 per share), primarily consisting of employee-related charges, in our 2012 results. This charge is reflected in items affecting comparability. See Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 106 Table of Contents Management Responsibility for Financial Reporting To Our Shareholders: At PepsiCo, our actions the actions of all our associates are governed by our Global Code of Conduct. This Code is clearly aligned with our stated values a commitment to sustained growth, through empowered people, operating with responsibility and building trust. Both the Code and our core values enable us to operate with integrity both within the letter and the spirit of the law. Our Code of Conduct is reinforced consistently at all levels and in all countries. We have maintained strong governance policies and practices for many years. The management of PepsiCo is responsible for the objectivity and integrity of our consolidated financial statements. The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors has engaged independent registered public accounting firm, KPMG LLP, to audit our consolidated financial statements, and they have expressed an unqualified opinion. We are committed to providing timely, accurate and understandable information to investors. Our commitment encompasses the following: Maintaining strong controls over financial reporting. Our system of internal control is based on the control criteria framework of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission published in their report titled Internal Control Integrated Framework . The system is designed to provide reasonable assurance that transactions are executed as authorized and accurately recorded; that assets are safeguarded; and that accounting records are sufficiently reliable to permit the preparation of financial statements that conform in all material respects with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. We maintain disclosure controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the specified time periods. We monitor these internal controls through self-assessments and an ongoing program of internal audits. Our internal controls are reinforced through our Global Code of Conduct, which sets forth our commitment to conduct business with integrity, and within both the letter and the spirit of the law. Exerting rigorous oversight of the business. We continuously review our business results and strategies. This encompasses financial discipline in our strategic and daily business decisions. Our Executive Committee is actively involved from understanding strategies and alternatives to reviewing key initiatives and financial performance. The intent is to ensure we remain objective in our assessments, constructively challenge our approach to potential business opportunities and issues, and monitor results and controls. Engaging strong and effective Corporate Governance from our Board of Directors. We have an active, capable and diligent Board that meets the required standards for independence, and we welcome the Board oversight as a representative of our shareholders. Our Audit Committee is comprised of independent directors with the financial literacy, knowledge and experience to provide appropriate oversight. We review our critical accounting policies, financial reporting and internal control matters with them and encourage their direct communication with KPMG LLP, with our General Auditor, and with our General Counsel. We also have a Compliance & Ethics Department, led by our Chief Compliance & Ethics Officer, to coordinate our compliance policies and practices. Providing investors with financial results that are complete, transparent and understandable. The consolidated financial statements and financial information included in this report are the responsibility of management. This includes preparing the financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., which require estimates based on management best judgment. 107 Table of Contents PepsiCo has a strong history of doing what right. We realize that great companies are built on trust, strong ethical standards and principles. Our financial results are delivered from that culture of accountability, and we take responsibility for the quality and accuracy of our financial reporting. February 21, 2013 /s/ MARIE T. GALLAGHER Marie T. Gallagher Senior Vice President and Controller /s/ HUGH F. JOHNSTON Hugh F. Johnston Chief Financial Officer /s/ INDRA K. NOOYI Indra K. Nooyi Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer 108 Table of Contents Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm The Board of Directors and Shareholders PepsiCo, Inc.: We have audited the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets of PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries ( PepsiCo, Inc. or the Company ) as of December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011, and the related Consolidated Statements of Income, Comprehensive Income, Cash Flows and Equity for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended December 29, 2012. We also have audited PepsiCo, Inc. internal control over financial reporting as of December 29, 2012, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). PepsiCo, Inc. management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements and an opinion on the Company internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions. A company internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 109 Table of Contents In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of PepsiCo, Inc. as of December 29, 2012 and December 31, 2011, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended December 29, 2012, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Also in our opinion, PepsiCo, Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 29, 2012, based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework issued by COSO. /s/ KPMG LLP New York, New York February 21, 2013 110 Table of Contents Selected Financial Data (in millions except per share amounts, unaudited) 2012 2011 First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter Net revenue $ 12,428 $ 16,458 $ 16,652 $ 19,954 $ 11,937 $ 16,827 $ 17,582 $ 20,158 Gross profit $ 6,539 $ 8,543 $ 8,819 $ 10,300 $ 6,490 $ 8,864 $ 9,130 $ 10,427 Mark-to-market net impact (a) $ (84 ) $ 79 $ (121 ) $ 61 $ (31 ) $ 9 $ 53 $ 71 Merger and integration charges (b) $ 2 $ 3 $ 2 $ 9 $ 55 $ 58 $ 61 $ 155 Restructuring and impairment charges (c) $ 33 $ 77 $ 83 $ 86 $ 383 Restructuring and other charges related to the transaction with Tingyi (d) $ 137 $ 13 Pension lump sum settlement charge (e) $ 195 Tax benefit related to tax court decision (f) $ (217 ) 53 rd week (g) $ (94 ) Inventory fair value adjustments (h) $ 34 $ 4 $ 3 $ 5 Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 1,127 $ 1,488 $ 1,902 $ 1,661 $ 1,143 $ 1,885 $ 2,000 $ 1,415 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share basic $ 0.72 $ 0.95 $ 1.22 $ 1.07 $ 0.72 $ 1.19 $ 1.27 $ 0.90 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 0.71 $ 0.94 $ 1.21 $ 1.06 $ 0.71 $ 1.17 $ 1.25 $ 0.89 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 0.515 $ 0.5375 $ 0.5375 $ 0.5375 $ 0.48 $ 0.515 $ 0.515 $ 0.515 Stock price per share (i) High $ 67.19 $ 69.74 $ 73.66 $ 72.09 $ 67.46 $ 71.89 $ 70.75 $ 66.78 Low $ 62.15 $ 64.64 $ 68.10 $ 67.72 $ 62.05 $ 63.50 $ 60.10 $ 58.50 Close $ 65.30 $ 69.48 $ 72.10 $ 68.02 $ 63.24 $ 68.69 $ 63.30 $ 66.35 (a) In 2012 , we recognized $ 65 million ($ 41 million after-tax or $0.03 per share) of mark-to-market net gains on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2011, we recognized $102 million ($71 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) of mark-to-market net losses on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. (b) In 2012 , we incurred merger and integration charges of $ 16 million ($ 12 million after-tax or $ 0.01 per share) related to our acquisition of WBD. In 2011, we incurred merger and integration charges of $329 million ($271 million after-tax or $0.17 per share) related to our acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. (c) In 2012 , restructuring and impairment charges were $ 279 million ($ 215 million after-tax or $ 0.14 per share). Restructuring and impairment charges in 2011 were $383 million ($286 million after-tax or $0.18 per share). See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. (d) In 2012 , we recorded restructuring and other charges of $ 150 million ($ 176 million after-tax or $ 0.11 per share) related to the transaction with Tingyi. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements. (e) In 2012, we recorded a pension lump sum settlement charge of $195 million ( $131 million after-tax or $ 0.08 per share). See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. (f) In 2012, we recognized a non-cash tax benefit of $217 million ( $0.14 per share) associated with a favorable tax court decision related to the classification of financial instruments. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements. (g) The 2011 fiscal year consisted of fifty-three weeks compared to fifty-two weeks in our normal fiscal year. The 53 rd week increased 2011 net revenue by $623 million, gross profit by $358 million, pre-tax income by $94 million and net income attributable to PepsiCo by $64 million or $0.04 per share. (h) In 2011, we recorded $46 million ($28 million after-tax or $0.02 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory included in WBD balance sheet at the acquisition date and hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. See Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements. (i) Represents the composite high and low sales price and quarterly closing prices for one share of PepsiCo common stock. 111 Table of Contents Five-Year Summary (unaudited) 2012 2011 2010 Net revenue $ 65,492 $ 66,504 $ 57,838 Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,178 $ 6,443 $ 6,320 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share basic $ 3.96 $ 4.08 $ 3.97 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 3.92 $ 4.03 $ 3.91 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 2.1275 $ 2.025 $ 1.89 Total assets $ 74,638 $ 72,882 $ 68,153 Long-term debt $ 23,544 $ 20,568 $ 19,999 Return on invested capital (a) 13.7 % 14.3 % 17.0 % 2009 2008 Net revenue $ 43,232 $ 43,251 Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 5,946 $ 5,142 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share basic $ 3.81 $ 3.26 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 3.77 $ 3.21 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 1.775 $ 1.65 Total assets $ 39,848 $ 35,994 Long-term debt $ 7,400 $ 7,858 Return on invested capital (a) 27.5 % 24.0 % (a) Return on invested capital is defined as adjusted net income attributable to PepsiCo divided by the sum of average common shareholders equity and average total debt. Adjusted net income attributable to PepsiCo is defined as net income attributable to PepsiCo plus interest expense after-tax. Interest expense after-tax was $576 million in 2012 , $548 million in 2011 , $578 million in 2010 , $254 million in 2009 and $210 million in 2008 . Includes mark-to-market net (gains)/losses of: 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Pre-tax $ (65 ) $ 102 $ (91 ) $ (274 ) $ 346 After-tax $ (41 ) $ 71 $ (58 ) $ (173 ) $ 223 Per share $ (0.03 ) $ 0.04 $ (0.04 ) $ (0.11 ) $ 0.14 In 2012 , we incurred merger and integration charges of $ 16 million ($ 12 million after-tax or $ 0.01 per share) related to our acquisition of WBD. Includes restructuring and impairment charges of: 2012 2011 2009 2008 Pre-tax $ 279 $ 383 $ 36 $ 543 After-tax $ 215 $ 286 $ 29 $ 408 Per share $ 0.14 $ 0.18 $ 0.02 $ 0.25 In 2012 , we recorded restructuring and other charges of $ 150 million ($ 176 million after-tax or $ 0.11 per share) related to the transaction with Tingyi. In 2012, we recorded a pension lump sum settlement charge of $195 million ( $131 million after-tax or $ 0.08 per share). In 2012, we recognized a non-cash tax benefit of $217 million ( $0.14 per share) associated with a favorable tax court decision related to the classification of financial instruments. 112 Table of Contents In 2011, we incurred merger and integration charges of $329 million ($271 million after-tax or $0.17 per share) related to our acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD. The 2011 fiscal year consisted of fifty-three weeks compared to fifty-two weeks in our normal fiscal year. The 53 rd week increased 2011 net revenue by $623 million and net income attributable to PepsiCo by $64 million or $0.04 per share. In 2011, we recorded $46 million ($28 million after-tax or $0.02 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory included in WBD balance sheet at the acquisition date and hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. In 2010, we incurred merger and integration charges of $799 million related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as advisory fees in connection with our acquisition of WBD. In addition, we recorded $9 million of merger-related charges, representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS. In total, these costs had an after-tax impact of $648 million or $0.40 per share. In 2010, we recorded $398 million ($333 million after-tax or $0.21 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory and other related hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. In 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded a gain on our previously held equity interests of $958 million ($0.60 per share), comprising $735 million which was non-taxable and recorded in bottling equity income and $223 million related to the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with these previously held equity interests. In 2010, we recorded a $120 million net charge ($120 million after-tax or $0.07 per share) related to our change to hyperinflationary accounting for our Venezuelan businesses and the related devaluation of the bolivar. In 2010, we recorded a $145 million charge ($92 million after-tax or $0.06 per share) related to a change in scope of one release in our ongoing migration to SAP software. In 2010, we made a $100 million ($64 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) contribution to the PepsiCo Foundation Inc., in order to fund charitable and social programs over the next several years. In 2010, we paid $672 million in a cash tender offer to repurchase $500 million (aggregate principal amount) of our 7.90% senior unsecured notes maturing in 2018. As a result of this debt repurchase, we recorded a $178 million charge to interest expense ($114 million after-tax or $0.07 per share), primarily representing the premium paid in the tender offer. In 2009, we recognized $50 million of merger-related charges related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as an additional $11 million of costs in bottling equity income representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS. In total, these costs had an after-tax impact of $44 million or $0.03 per share. In 2008, we recognized $138 million ($114 million after-tax or $0.07 per share) of our share of PBG restructuring and impairment charges. 113 Table of Contents GLOSSARY Acquisitions and divestitures : all mergers and acquisitions activity, including the impact of acquisitions, divestitures and changes in ownership or control in consolidated subsidiaries and nonconsolidated equity investees. Bottler Case Sales (BCS) : measure of physical beverage volume shipped to retailers and independent distributors from both PepsiCo and our independent bottlers. Bottler funding : financial incentives we give to our independent bottlers to assist in the distribution and promotion of our beverage products. Concentrate Shipments and Equivalents (CSE) : measure of our physical beverage volume shipments to independent bottlers, retailers and independent distributors. Constant currency : financial results assuming constant foreign currency exchange rates used for translation based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-year period. In order to compute our constant currency results, we multiply or divide, as appropriate, our current year U.S. dollar results by the current year average foreign exchange rates and then multiply or divide, as appropriate, those amounts by the prior year average foreign exchange rates. Consumers : people who eat and drink our products. CSD : carbonated soft drinks. Customers : authorized independent bottlers, distributors and retailers. Derivatives : financial instruments, such as futures, swaps, Treasury locks, cross currency swaps, options and forward contracts that we use to manage our risk arising from changes in commodity prices, interest rates, foreign exchange rates and stock prices. Direct-Store-Delivery (DSD) : delivery system used by us and our independent bottlers to deliver snacks and beverages directly to retail stores where our products are merchandised. Effective net pricing : reflects the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries. Hedge accounting : treatment for qualifying hedges that allows fluctuations in a hedging instrument fair value to offset corresponding fluctuations in the hedged item in the same reporting period. Hedge accounting is allowed only in cases where the hedging relationship between the hedging instruments and hedged items is highly effective, and only prospectively from the date a hedging relationship is formally documented. Independent bottlers : customers to whom we have granted exclusive contracts to sell and manufacture certain beverage products bearing our trademarks within a specific geographical area. Management operating cash flow : net cash provided by operating activities less capital spending plus sales of property, plant and equipment. Mark-to-market net gain or loss or impact : change in market value for commodity contracts that we purchase to mitigate the volatility in costs of energy and raw materials that we consume. The market value is determined based on recently reported transactions in the marketplace. 114 Table of Contents Organic : a measure that adjusts for impacts of acquisitions, divestitures and other structural changes and foreign exchange translation. This measure also excludes the impact of an extra reporting week in 2011. In excluding the impact of foreign exchange translation, we assume constant foreign exchange rates used for translation based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-year period. See the definition of Constant currency for additional information. Servings : common metric reflecting our consolidated physical unit volume. Our divisions physical unit measures are converted into servings based on U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines for single-serving sizes of our products. Total marketplace spending : includes sales incentives and discounts offered through various programs to our customers, consumers or independent bottlers, as well as advertising and other marketing activities. Transaction gains and losses : the impact on our consolidated financial statements of exchange rate changes arising from specific transactions. Translation adjustment : the impact of converting our foreign affiliates financial statements into U.S. dollars for the purpose of consolidating our financial statements. 115 Table of Contents 
