CIK: 77476
Company Name: PEPSICO INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2012-02-27


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. OUR BUSINESS Executive Overview 32 Our Operations 34 Our Customers 36 Our Distribution Network 37 Our Competition 37 Other Relationships 38 Our Business Risks 38 OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES Revenue Recognition 41 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets 42 Income Tax Expense and Accruals 43 Pension and Retiree Medical Plans 44 OUR FINANCIAL RESULTS Items Affecting Comparability 47 Results of Operations Consolidated Review 51 Results of Operations Division Review 55 Frito-Lay North America 56 Quaker Foods North America 57 Latin America Foods 58 PepsiCo Americas Beverages 59 Europe 61 Asia, Middle East & Africa 63 Our Liquidity and Capital Resources 64 30 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Income 68 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 69 Consolidated Balance Sheet 71 Consolidated Statement of Equity 72 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Our Divisions 74 Note 2 Our Significant Accounting Policies 80 Note 3 Restructuring, Impairment and Integration Charges 83 Note 4 Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets 87 Note 5 Income Taxes 89 Note 6 Stock-Based Compensation 91 Note 7 Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans 94 Note 8 Related Party Transactions 102 Note 9 Debt Obligations and Commitments 104 Note 10 Financial Instruments 106 Note 11 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share 110 Note 12 Preferred Stock 111 Note 13 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Attributable to PepsiCo 112 Note 14 Supplemental Financial Information 113 Note 15 Acquisitions 114 MANAGEMENT S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL REPORTING 118 REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM 120 SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA 121 FIVE-YEAR SUMMARY 122 GLOSSARY 124 31 Table of Contents Our discussion and analysis is an integral part of our consolidated financial statements and is provided as an addition to, and should be read in connection with, our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Definitions of key terms can be found in the glossary beginning on page 124. Tabular dollars are presented in millions, except per share amounts. All per share amounts reflect common per share amounts, assume dilution unless otherwise noted, and are based on unrounded amounts. Percentage changes are based on unrounded amounts. OUR BUSINESS Executive Overview We are a leading global food and beverage company with hundreds of brands that are respected household names throughout the world. Either independently or through contract manufacturers or authorized bottlers, we make, market, sell and distribute a variety of convenient and enjoyable foods and beverages in more than 200 countries and territories. We continue to be guided by Performance with Purpose our belief that what is good for business can and should be good for society. Our commitment to deliver sustainable growth by investing in a healthier future for people and our planet is as much of a financial decision as it is an ethical one. In 2011, PepsiCo earned a place on the prestigious Dow Jones Sustainability World Index for the fifth consecutive year, the North America Index for the sixth consecutive year and was ranked as the number one company in the index Food and Beverage Supersector. Our management monitors a variety of key indicators to evaluate our business results and financial condition. These indicators include market share, volume, net revenue, operating profit, management operating cash flow, earnings per share and return on invested capital. Strategies to Drive Our Growth into the Future We made important strides in 2011. In 2012, our journey continues. We are pursuing specific strategic investment and productivity initiatives to build a stronger, more successful company. This includes an increased investment in our iconic, global brands, bringing innovation to market and increasing our advertising and marketing spending by approximately $500 to $600 million in 2012, the majority in North America. In addition, we have begun to implement a multi-year productivity program that we believe will further strengthen our complementary food and beverage businesses. These initiatives support our five strategic imperatives on which we continue to be focused. Our first imperative is to build and extend our macrosnacks portfolio globally. PepsiCo is the undisputed leader in macrosnacks around the world. We will work to grow our core salty snack brands Lay s, Doritos, Cheetos and SunChips while continuing to expand into adjacent categories like whole grain-based snacks. We will continue to create new flavors in tune with local tastes and leverage our go-to-market expertise to ensure our products are easily accessible in consumers lives. 32 Table of Contents Our second imperative is to sustainably and profitably grow our beverage business worldwide. Our beverage business remains large and highly profitable, accounting for approximately 52 percent of our net revenues in 2011. Our goal is to grow our developed market beverage business while building on promising gains in emerging and developing markets. We intend to continue to invest in and strengthen our most powerful and iconic beverage brands Pepsi, Mountain Dew, Sierra Mist, 7UP (outside of the U.S.), Gatorade, Tropicana, Mirinda and Lipton (through our joint venture with Unilever). Our third imperative is to build and expand our nutrition business. Today, PepsiCo has three of the top brands in the category Quaker, Tropicana and Gatorade in a global market for health and wellness in consumer packaged goods that exceeds $500 billion, driven by strong demographic and consumer trends. Building from our core brands, we believe that we are well-positioned to grow our global nutrition portfolio. Our fourth imperative is to increase and capitalize on the already high coincidence of snack and beverage consumption. Snacks and beverages are complementary categories. When people reach for a salty snack, about 30 percent of the time, they reach for a carbonated beverage. Our ability to use that combined power goes beyond marketing to innovation, production, distribution and brand management. We intend to increasingly capitalize on our cross-category presence to grow our positions in both snacks and beverages. Our fifth imperative is to ensure prudent and responsible financial management. Prudent financial management has always been a hallmark of PepsiCo. In 2012, we are bringing renewed focus to value creation in everything we do. We intend to continue to deliver attractive cash returns for shareholders by scrutinizing every capital expenditure, expense and working capital investment. 33 Table of Contents Our Operations We are organized into four business units, as follows: 1) PepsiCo Americas Foods (PAF), which includes Frito-Lay North America (FLNA), Quaker Foods North America (QFNA) and all of our Latin American food and snack businesses (LAF); 2) PepsiCo Americas Beverages (PAB), which includes all of our North American and Latin American beverage businesses; 3) PepsiCo Europe, which includes all beverage, food and snack businesses in Europe; and 4) PepsiCo Asia, Middle East and Africa (AMEA), which includes all beverage, food and snack businesses in AMEA. Our four business units are comprised of six reportable segments (referred to as divisions), as follows: FLNA, QFNA, LAF, PAB, Europe, and AMEA. Frito-Lay North America Either independently or through contract manufacturers, FLNA makes, markets, sells and distributes branded snack foods. These foods include Lay potato chips, Doritos tortilla chips, Cheetos cheese flavored snacks, Tostitos tortilla chips, branded dips, Ruffles potato chips, Fritos corn chips, SunChips multigrain snacks and Santitas tortilla chips. FLNA branded products are sold to independent distributors and retailers. In addition, FLNA joint venture with Strauss Group makes, markets, sells and distributes Sabra refrigerated dips and spreads. Quaker Foods North America Either independently or through contract manufacturers, QFNA makes, markets, sells and distributes cereals, rice, pasta and other branded products. QFNA products include Quaker oatmeal, Aunt Jemima mixes and syrups, Quaker Chewy granola bars, Quaker grits, Cap n Crunch cereal, Life cereal, Rice-A-Roni side dishes, Quaker rice cakes, Pasta Roni and Near East side dishes. These branded products are sold to independent distributors and retailers. Latin America Foods Either independently or through contract manufacturers, LAF makes, markets, sells and distributes a number of snack food brands including Marias Gamesa, Doritos, Cheetos, Ruffles, Saladitas, Emperador, Tostitos and Sabritas, as well as many Quaker-brand cereals and snacks. These branded products are sold to independent distributors and retailers. 34 Table of Contents PepsiCo Americas Beverages Either independently or through contract manufacturers, PAB makes, markets, sells and distributes beverage concentrates, fountain syrups and finished goods, under various beverage brands including Pepsi, Gatorade, Mountain Dew, Diet Pepsi, Aquafina, 7UP (outside the U.S.), Diet Mountain Dew, Tropicana Pure Premium, Sierra Mist and Mirinda. PAB also, either independently or through contract manufacturers, makes, markets and sells ready-to-drink tea, coffee and water products through joint ventures with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name) and Starbucks. In addition, PAB licenses the Aquafina water brand to its independent bottlers. Furthermore, PAB manufactures and distributes certain brands licensed from Dr Pepper Snapple Group, Inc. (DPSG), including Dr Pepper and Crush. PAB operates its own bottling plants and distribution facilities. PAB also sells concentrate and finished goods for our brands to authorized bottlers, and some of these branded finished goods are sold directly by us to independent distributors and retailers. We and the independent bottlers sell our brands as finished goods to independent distributors and retailers. PAB volume reflects sales to its independent distributors and retailers, as well as the sales of beverages bearing our trademarks that bottlers have reported as sold to independent distributors and retailers. Bottler case sales (BCS) and concentrate shipments and equivalents (CSE) are not necessarily equal during any given period due to seasonality, timing of product launches, product mix, bottler inventory practices and other factors. However, the difference between BCS and CSE measures has been greatly reduced since our acquisitions of our anchor bottlers, PBG and PAS, on February 26, 2010, as we now consolidate these bottlers and thus eliminate the impact of differences between BCS and CSE for a substantial majority of PAB total volume. While our revenues are not entirely based on BCS volume, as there continue to be independent bottlers in the supply chain, we believe that BCS is a valuable measure as it quantifies the sell-through of our products at the consumer level. See Note 15 for additional information about our acquisitions of PBG and PAS in 2010. Europe Either independently or through contract manufacturers, Europe makes, markets, sells and distributes a number of leading snack foods including Lay s, Walkers, Doritos, Chudo, Cheetos and Ruffles, as well as many Quaker-brand cereals and snacks, through consolidated businesses as well as through noncontrolled affiliates. Europe also, either independently or through contract manufacturers, makes, markets, sells and distributes beverage concentrates, fountain syrups and finished goods under various beverage brands including Pepsi, Pepsi Max, 7UP, Diet Pepsi and Tropicana. These branded products are sold to authorized bottlers, independent distributors and retailers. In certain markets, however, Europe operates its own bottling plants and distribution facilities. In addition, Europe licenses the Aquafina water brand to certain of its authorized bottlers and markets this brand. Europe also, either independently or through contract manufacturers, makes, markets and sells ready-to-drink tea products through an international joint venture with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name). Europe reports two measures of volume. Snacks volume is reported on a system-wide basis, which includes our own sales and the sales by our noncontrolled affiliates of snacks bearing Company-owned or licensed trademarks. Beverage volume reflects Company-owned or authorized bottler sales of beverages bearing Company-owned or licensed trademarks to independent distributors and retailers (see PepsiCo Americas Beverages above). In 2011, we acquired Wimm-Bill-Dann Foods OJSC, Russia leading branded food and beverage company. WBD portfolio of products is included within Europe snacks or beverage reporting, depending on product type. 35 Table of Contents See Note 15 for additional information about our acquisition of WBD in 2011. Asia, Middle East & Africa Either independently or through contract manufacturers, AMEA makes, markets, sells and distributes a number of leading snack food brands including Lay s, Chipsy, Kurkure, Doritos, Cheetos and Smith through consolidated businesses as well as through noncontrolled affiliates. Further, either independently or through contract manufacturers, AMEA makes, markets and sells many Quaker-brand cereals and snacks. AMEA also makes, markets, sells and distributes beverage concentrates, fountain syrups and finished goods, under various beverage brands including Pepsi, Mirinda, 7UP, Mountain Dew, Aquafina and Tropicana. These branded products are sold to authorized bottlers, independent distributors and retailers. However, in certain markets, AMEA operates its own bottling plants and distribution facilities. In addition, AMEA licenses the Aquafina water brand to certain of its authorized bottlers. AMEA also, either independently or through contract manufacturers, makes, markets and sells ready-to-drink tea products through an international joint venture with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name). AMEA reports two measures of volume (see Europe above). Our Customers Our primary customers include wholesale distributors, grocery stores, convenience stores, mass merchandisers, membership stores, authorized independent bottlers and foodservice distributors, including hotels and restaurants. We normally grant our independent bottlers exclusive contracts to sell and manufacture certain beverage products bearing our trademarks within a specific geographic area. These arrangements provide us with the right to charge our independent bottlers for concentrate, finished goods and Aquafina royalties and specify the manufacturing process required for product quality. Since we do not sell directly to the consumer, we rely on and provide financial incentives to our customers to assist in the distribution and promotion of our products. For our independent distributors and retailers, these incentives include volume-based rebates, product placement fees, promotions and displays. For our independent bottlers, these incentives are referred to as bottler funding and are negotiated annually with each bottler to support a variety of trade and consumer programs, such as consumer incentives, advertising support, new product support, and vending and cooler equipment placement. Consumer incentives include coupons, pricing discounts and promotions, and other promotional offers. Advertising support is directed at advertising programs and supporting independent bottler media. New product support includes targeted consumer and retailer incentives and direct marketplace support, such as point-of-purchase materials, product placement fees, media and advertising. Vending and cooler equipment placement programs support the acquisition and placement of vending machines and cooler equipment. The nature and type of programs vary annually. In 2011, sales to Wal-Mart (including Sam s) represented approximately 11% of our total net revenue. Our top five retail customers represented approximately 30% of our 2011 North American net revenue, with Wal-Mart (including Sam s) representing approximately 18%. These percentages include concentrate sales to our independent bottlers which were used in finished goods sold by them to these retailers. 36 Table of Contents Our Distribution Network Our products are brought to market through DSD, customer warehouse and foodservice and vending distribution networks. The distribution system used depends on customer needs, product characteristics and local trade practices. Direct-Store-Delivery We, our independent bottlers and our distributors operate DSD systems that deliver snacks and beverages directly to retail stores where the products are merchandised by our employees or our bottlers. DSD enables us to merchandise with maximum visibility and appeal. DSD is especially well-suited to products that are restocked often and respond to in-store promotion and merchandising. Customer Warehouse Some of our products are delivered from our manufacturing plants and warehouses to customer warehouses and retail stores. These less costly systems generally work best for products that are less fragile and perishable, have lower turnover, and are less likely to be impulse purchases. Foodservice and Vending Our foodservice and vending sales force distributes snacks, foods and beverages to third-party foodservice and vending distributors and operators. Our foodservice and vending sales force also distributes certain beverages through our independent bottlers. This distribution system supplies our products to restaurants, businesses, schools, stadiums and similar locations. Our Competition Our businesses operate in highly competitive markets. Our beverage, snack and food brands compete against global, regional, local and private label manufacturers and other value competitors. In U.S. measured channels, our chief beverage competitor, The Coca-Cola Company, has a larger share of CSD consumption, while we have a larger share of liquid refreshment beverages consumption. In addition, The Coca-Cola Company has a significant CSD share advantage in many markets outside the United States. Our snack and food brands hold significant leadership positions in the snack and food industry worldwide. Our beverage, snack and food brands compete on the basis of price, quality, product variety and distribution. Success in this competitive environment is dependent on effective promotion of existing products, the introduction of new products and the effectiveness of our advertising campaigns, marketing programs, product packaging, pricing, increased efficiency in production techniques and brand and trademark development and protection. We believe that the strength of our brands, innovation and marketing, coupled with the quality of our products and flexibility of our distribution network, allows us to compete effectively. 37 Table of Contents Other Relationships Certain members of our Board of Directors also serve on the boards of certain vendors and customers. Those Board members do not participate in our vendor selection and negotiations nor in our customer negotiations. Our transactions with these vendors and customers are in the normal course of business and are consistent with terms negotiated with other vendors and customers. In addition, certain of our employees serve on the boards of Pepsi Bottling Ventures LLC and other affiliated companies of PepsiCo and do not receive incremental compensation for their Board services. Our Business Risks We are subject to risks in the normal course of business. During 2011, the economic environment in Europe deteriorated and certain countries experienced debt and credit issues as well as currency fluctuations. We are identifying actions to potentially mitigate the unfavorable impact, if any, on our 2012 financial results. See also Risk Factors in Item 1A., Executive Overview above and Market Risks below for more information about these risks. Risk Management Framework The achievement of our strategic and operating objectives necessarily involves taking risks. Our risk management process is intended to ensure that risks are taken knowingly and purposefully. As such, we leverage an integrated risk management framework to identify, assess, prioritize, address, manage, monitor and communicate risks across the Company. This framework includes: PepsiCo Board of Directors, which is responsible for overseeing the Company risk assessment and mitigation, receives updates on key risks throughout the year. The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors helps define PepsiCo risk management processes and assists the Board in its oversight of strategic, financial, operating, business, compliance, safety, reputational and other risks facing PepsiCo. The Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors assists the Board in overseeing potential risks that may be associated with the Company compensation programs. The PepsiCo Risk Committee (PRC), comprised of a cross-functional, geographically diverse, senior management group which meets regularly to identify, assess, prioritize and address our key risks; Division Risk Committees (DRCs), comprised of cross-functional senior management teams which meet regularly to identify, assess, prioritize and address division-specific business risks; PepsiCo Risk Management Office, which manages the overall risk management process, provides ongoing guidance, tools and analytical support to the PRC and the DRCs, identifies and assesses potential risks and facilitates ongoing communication between the parties, as well as with PepsiCo Audit Committee and Board of Directors; PepsiCo Corporate Audit, which evaluates the ongoing effectiveness of our key internal controls through periodic audit and review procedures; and PepsiCo Compliance Department, which leads and coordinates our compliance policies and practices. Market Risks We are exposed to market risks arising from adverse changes in: commodity prices, affecting the cost of our raw materials and energy; foreign exchange rates; and interest rates. 38 Table of Contents In the normal course of business, we manage these risks through a variety of strategies, including productivity initiatives, global purchasing programs and hedging strategies. Ongoing productivity initiatives involve the identification and effective implementation of meaningful cost-saving opportunities or efficiencies. Our global purchasing programs include fixed-price purchase orders and pricing agreements. See Note 9 for further information on our non-cancelable purchasing commitments. Our hedging strategies include the use of derivatives. Certain derivatives are designated as either cash flow or fair value hedges and qualify for hedge accounting treatment, while others do not qualify and are marked to market through earnings. Cash flows from derivatives used to manage commodity, foreign exchange or interest risks are classified as operating activities. We do not use derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We perform assessments of our counterparty credit risk regularly, including a review of credit ratings, credit default swap rates and potential nonperformance of the counterparty. Based on our most recent assessment of our counterparty credit risk, we consider this risk to be low. In addition, we enter into derivative contracts with a variety of financial institutions that we believe are creditworthy in order to reduce our concentration of credit risk. See Unfavorable economic conditions may have an adverse impact on our business results or financial condition. in Risk Factors in Item 1A. The fair value of our derivatives fluctuates based on market rates and prices. The sensitivity of our derivatives to these market fluctuations is discussed below. See Note 10 for further discussion of these derivatives and our hedging policies. See Our Critical Accounting Policies for a discussion of the exposure of our pension plan assets and pension and retiree medical liabilities to risks related to market fluctuations. Inflationary, deflationary and recessionary conditions impacting these market risks also impact the demand for and pricing of our products. See Risk Factors in Item 1A. for further discussion. Commodity Prices We expect to be able to reduce the impact of volatility in our raw material and energy costs through our hedging strategies and ongoing sourcing initiatives. We use derivatives, with terms of no more than three years, to economically hedge price fluctuations related to a portion of our anticipated commodity purchases, primarily for metals, energy and agricultural products. Our open commodity derivative contracts that qualify for hedge accounting had a face value of $598 million as of December 31, 2011 and $590 million as of December 25, 2010. At the end of 2011, the potential change in fair value of commodity derivative instruments, assuming a 10% decrease in the underlying commodity price, would have increased our net unrealized losses in 2011 by $52 million. Our open commodity derivative contracts that do not qualify for hedge accounting had a face value of $630 million as of December 31, 2011 and $266 million as of December 25, 2010. At the end of 2011, the potential change in fair value of commodity derivative instruments, assuming a 10% decrease in the underlying commodity price, would have increased our net losses in 2011 by $58 million. Foreign Exchange Financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars using period-end exchange rates for assets and liabilities and weighted-average exchange rates for revenues and expenses. Adjustments resulting from translating net assets are reported as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive loss within shareholders equity under the caption currency translation adjustment. 39 Table of Contents Our operations outside of the U.S. generate approximately 50% of our net revenue, with Russia, Mexico, Canada and the United Kingdom comprising approximately 23% of our net revenue. As a result, we are exposed to foreign currency risks. During 2011, favorable foreign currency contributed 1 percentage point to net revenue growth, primarily due to appreciation of the euro, Canadian dollar and Mexican peso. Currency declines against the U.S. dollar which are not offset could adversely impact our future results. In addition, we continue to use the official exchange rate to translate the financial statements of our snack and beverage businesses in Venezuela. We use the official rate as we currently intend to remit dividends solely through the government-operated Foreign Exchange Administration Board (CADIVI). As of the beginning of our 2010 fiscal year, the results of our Venezuelan businesses were reported under hyperinflationary accounting. Consequently, the functional currency of our Venezuelan entities was changed from the bolivar fuerte (bolivar) to the U.S. dollar. Effective January 11, 2010, the Venezuelan government devalued the bolivar by resetting the official exchange rate from 2.15 bolivars per dollar to 4.3 bolivars per dollar; however, certain activities were permitted to access an exchange rate of 2.6 bolivars per dollar. We continue to use all available options to obtain U.S. dollars to meet our operational needs. In 2011 and 2010, the majority of our transactions were remeasured at the 4.3 exchange rate, and as a result of the change to hyperinflationary accounting and the devaluation of the bolivar, we recorded a one-time net charge of $120 million in the first quarter of 2010. In 2011 and 2010, our operations in Venezuela comprised 8% and 4% of our cash and cash equivalents balance, respectively, and generated less than 1% of our net revenue. As of January 1, 2011, the Venezuelan government unified the country two official exchange rates (4.3 and 2.6 bolivars per dollar) by eliminating the 2.6 bolivars per dollar rate, which was previously permitted for certain activities. This change did not have a material impact on our financial statements. Exchange rate gains or losses related to foreign currency transactions are recognized as transaction gains or losses in our income statement as incurred. We may enter into derivatives, primarily forward contracts with terms of no more than two years, to manage our exposure to foreign currency transaction risk. Our foreign currency derivatives had a total face value of $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2011 and $1.7 billion as of December 25, 2010. At the end of 2011, we estimate that an unfavorable 10% change in the exchange rates would have decreased our net unrealized gains by $105 million. For foreign currency derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment, all losses and gains were offset by changes in the underlying hedged items, resulting in no net material impact on earnings. Interest Rates We centrally manage our debt and investment portfolios considering investment opportunities and risks, tax consequences and overall financing strategies. We use various interest rate derivative instruments including, but not limited to, interest rate swaps, cross-currency interest rate swaps, Treasury locks and swap locks to manage our overall interest expense and foreign exchange risk. These instruments effectively change the interest rate and currency of specific debt issuances. Certain of our fixed rate indebtedness has been swapped to floating rates. The notional amount, interest payment and maturity date of the interest rate and cross-currency swaps match the principal, interest payment and maturity date of the related debt. Our Treasury locks and swap locks are entered into to protect against unfavorable interest rate changes relating to forecasted debt transactions. 40 Table of Contents Assuming year-end 2011 variable rate debt and investment levels, a 1-percentage-point increase in interest rates would have increased net interest expense by $55 million in 2011. OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES An appreciation of our critical accounting policies is necessary to understand our financial results. These policies may require management to make difficult and subjective judgments regarding uncertainties, and as a result, such estimates may significantly impact our financial results. The precision of these estimates and the likelihood of future changes depend on a number of underlying variables and a range of possible outcomes. Other than our accounting for pension plans, our critical accounting policies do not involve a choice between alternative methods of accounting. We applied our critical accounting policies and estimation methods consistently in all material respects, and for all periods presented, and have discussed these policies with our Audit Committee. Our critical accounting policies arise in conjunction with the following: revenue recognition; goodwill and other intangible assets; income tax expense and accruals; and pension and retiree medical plans. Revenue Recognition Our products are sold for cash or on credit terms. Our credit terms, which are established in accordance with local and industry practices, typically require payment within 30 days of delivery in the U.S., and generally within 30 to 90 days internationally, and may allow discounts for early payment. We recognize revenue upon shipment or delivery to our customers based on written sales terms that do not allow for a right of return. However, our policy for DSD and certain chilled products is to remove and replace damaged and out-of-date products from store shelves to ensure that consumers receive the product quality and freshness they expect. Similarly, our policy for certain warehouse-distributed products is to replace damaged and out-of-date products. Based on our experience with this practice, we have reserved for anticipated damaged and out-of-date products. Our policy is to provide customers with product when needed. In fact, our commitment to freshness and product dating serves to regulate the quantity of product shipped or delivered. In addition, DSD products are placed on the shelf by our employees with customer shelf space and storerooms limiting the quantity of product. For product delivered through our other distribution networks, we monitor customer inventory levels. As discussed in Our Customers, we offer sales incentives and discounts through various programs to customers and consumers. Sales incentives and discounts are accounted for as a reduction of revenue and totaled $34.6 billion in 2011, $29.1 billion in 2010 and $12.9 billion in 2009. Sales incentives include payments to customers for performing merchandising activities on our behalf, such as payments for in-store displays, payments to gain distribution of new products, payments for shelf space and discounts to promote lower retail prices. A number of our sales incentives, such as bottler funding to independent bottlers and customer volume rebates, are based on annual targets, and accruals are established during the year for the expected payout. These accruals are based on contract terms and our historical experience with similar programs and 41 Table of Contents require management judgment with respect to estimating customer participation and performance levels. Differences between estimated expense and actual incentive costs are normally insignificant and are recognized in earnings in the period such differences are determined. The terms of most of our incentive arrangements do not exceed a year, and therefore do not require highly uncertain long-term estimates. Certain arrangements, such as fountain pouring rights and sponsorship contracts, may extend beyond one year. Payments made to obtain these rights are recognized over the shorter of the economic or contractual life, as a reduction of revenue, and the remaining balances of $288 million as of December 31, 2011 and $296 million as of December 25, 2010 are included in current assets and other assets on our balance sheet. For interim reporting, our policy is to allocate our forecasted full-year sales incentives for most of our programs to each of our interim reporting periods in the same year that benefits from the programs. The allocation methodology is based on our forecasted sales incentives for the full year and the proportion of each interim period actual gross revenue to our forecasted annual gross revenue. Based on our review of the forecasts at each interim period, any changes in estimates and the related allocation of sales incentives are recognized in the interim period as they are identified. In addition, we apply a similar allocation methodology for interim reporting purposes for other marketplace spending, which includes the costs of advertising and other marketing activities. See Note 2 for additional information on our sales incentives and other marketplace spending. Our annual financial statements are not impacted by this interim allocation methodology. We estimate and reserve for our bad debt exposure based on our experience with past due accounts and collectibility, the aging of accounts receivable and our analysis of customer data. Bad debt expense is classified within selling, general and administrative expenses in our income statement. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets We sell products under a number of brand names, many of which were developed by us. The brand development costs are expensed as incurred. We also purchase brands in acquisitions. In a business combination, the consideration is first assigned to identifiable assets and liabilities, including brands, based on estimated fair values, with any excess recorded as goodwill. Determining fair value requires significant estimates and assumptions based on an evaluation of a number of factors, such as marketplace participants, product life cycles, market share, consumer awareness, brand history and future expansion expectations, amount and timing of future cash flows and the discount rate applied to the cash flows. We believe that a brand has an indefinite life if it has a history of strong revenue and cash flow performance, and we have the intent and ability to support the brand with marketplace spending for the foreseeable future. If these perpetual brand criteria are not met, brands are amortized over their expected useful lives, which generally range from five to 40 years. Determining the expected life of a brand requires management judgment and is based on an evaluation of a number of factors, including market share, consumer awareness, brand history and future expansion expectations, as well as the macroeconomic environment of the countries in which the brand is sold. Perpetual brands and goodwill are not amortized and are assessed for impairment at least annually. If the carrying amount of a perpetual brand exceeds its fair value, as determined by its discounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Goodwill is evaluated using a two-step impairment test at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit can be a division or business within a division. The first step compares the book value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, with its fair value, as determined by its discounted cash flows. If the book 42 Table of Contents value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we complete the second step to determine the amount of goodwill impairment loss that we should record, if any. In the second step, we determine an implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill by allocating the fair value of the reporting unit to all of the assets and liabilities other than goodwill (including any unrecognized intangible assets). The amount of impairment loss is equal to the excess of the book value of the goodwill over the implied fair value of that goodwill. Amortizable brands are only evaluated for impairment upon a significant change in the operating or macroeconomic environment. If an evaluation of the undiscounted future cash flows indicates impairment, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value, which is based on its discounted future cash flows. In connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we reacquired certain franchise rights which provided PBG and PAS with the exclusive and perpetual rights to manufacture and/or distribute beverages for sale in specified territories. In determining the useful life of these reacquired franchise rights, we considered many factors, including the pre-existing perpetual bottling arrangements, the indefinite period expected for the reacquired rights to contribute to our future cash flows, as well as the lack of any factors that would limit the useful life of the reacquired rights to us, including legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors. Therefore, certain reacquired franchise rights, as well as perpetual brands and goodwill, are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment at least annually. Certain reacquired and acquired franchise rights are amortized over the remaining contractual period of the contract in which the right was granted. On December 7, 2009, we reached an agreement with DPSG to manufacture and distribute Dr Pepper and certain other DPSG products in the territories where they were previously sold by PBG and PAS. Under the terms of the agreement, we made an upfront payment of $900 million to DPSG on February 26, 2010. Based upon the terms of the agreement with DPSG, the amount of the upfront payment was capitalized and is not amortized, but instead is tested for impairment at least annually. Significant management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating and macroeconomic changes and to estimate future cash flows. Assumptions used in our impairment evaluations, such as forecasted growth rates and our cost of capital, are based on the best available market information and are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. These assumptions could be adversely impacted by certain of the risks discussed in Risk Factors in Item 1A. and Our Business Risks. We did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill in the years presented. In addition, as of December 31, 2011, we did not have any reporting units that were at risk of failing the first step of the goodwill impairment test. In connection with the merger and integration of WBD in 2011, we recorded a $14 million impairment charge for discontinued brands. We did not recognize any impairment charges for other nonamortizable intangible assets in 2010 and 2009. As of December 31, 2011, we had $31.4 billion of goodwill and other nonamortizable intangible assets, of which approximately 70% related to the acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD. Income Tax Expense and Accruals Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining our annual tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions. We establish reserves when, 43 Table of Contents despite our belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable, we believe that certain positions are subject to challenge and that we may not succeed. We adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest, in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of a tax audit. An estimated effective tax rate for a year is applied to our quarterly operating results. In the event there is a significant or unusual item recognized in our quarterly operating results, the tax attributable to that item is separately calculated and recorded at the same time as that item. We consider the tax adjustments from the resolution of prior year tax matters to be among such items. Tax law requires items to be included in our tax returns at different times than the items are reflected in our financial statements. As a result, our annual tax rate reflected in our financial statements is different than that reported in our tax returns (our cash tax rate). Some of these differences are permanent, such as expenses that are not deductible in our tax return, and some differences reverse over time, such as depreciation expense. These temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in our tax returns in future years for which we have already recorded the tax benefit in our income statement. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent tax expense recognized in our financial statements for which payment has been deferred, or expense for which we have already taken a deduction in our tax return but have not yet recognized as expense in our financial statements. In 2011, our annual tax rate was 26.8% compared to 23.0% in 2010, as discussed in Other Consolidated Results. The tax rate in 2011 increased 3.8 percentage points primarily reflecting the prior year non-taxable gain and reversal of deferred taxes attributable to our previously held equity interests in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Pension and Retiree Medical Plans Our pension plans cover certain full-time employees in the U.S. and certain international employees. Benefits are determined based on either years of service or a combination of years of service and earnings. Certain U.S. and Canada retirees are also eligible for medical and life insurance benefits (retiree medical) if they meet age and service requirements. Generally, our share of retiree medical costs is capped at specified dollar amounts which vary based upon years of service, with retirees contributing the remainder of the cost. As of February 2012, certain U.S. employees earning a benefit under one of our defined benefit pension plans will no longer be eligible for Company matching contributions on their 401(k) contributions. See Note 7 for information about certain changes to our U.S. pension and retiree medical plans and changes in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Our Assumptions The determination of pension and retiree medical plan obligations and related expenses requires the use of assumptions to estimate the amount of benefits that employees earn while working, as well as the present value of those benefits. Annual pension and retiree medical expense amounts are principally based on four components: (1) the value of benefits earned by employees for 44 Table of Contents working during the year (service cost), (2) the increase in the liability due to the passage of time (interest cost), and (3) other gains and losses as discussed below, reduced by (4) the expected return on plan assets for our funded plans. Significant assumptions used to measure our annual pension and retiree medical expense include: the interest rate used to determine the present value of liabilities (discount rate); certain employee-related factors, such as turnover, retirement age and mortality; the expected return on assets in our funded plans; for pension expense, the rate of salary increases for plans where benefits are based on earnings; and for retiree medical expense, health care cost trend rates. Our assumptions reflect our historical experience and management best judgment regarding future expectations. Due to the significant management judgment involved, our assumptions could have a material impact on the measurement of our pension and retiree medical benefit expenses and obligations. At each measurement date, the discount rates are based on interest rates for high-quality, long-term corporate debt securities with maturities comparable to those of our liabilities. Our U.S. discount rate is determined using the Mercer Pension Discount Yield Curve (Mercer Yield Curve). The Mercer Yield Curve uses a portfolio of high-quality bonds rated Aa or higher by Moody s. The Mercer Yield Curve includes bonds that closely match the timing and amount of our expected benefit payments. The expected return on pension plan assets is based on our pension plan investment strategy, our expectations for long-term rates of return by asset class, taking into account volatility and correlation among asset classes and our historical experience. We also review current levels of interest rates and inflation to assess the reasonableness of the long-term rates. We evaluate our expected return assumptions annually to ensure that they are reasonable. Our pension plan investment strategy includes the use of actively managed securities and is reviewed periodically in conjunction with plan liabilities, an evaluation of market conditions, tolerance for risk and cash requirements for benefit payments. Our investment objective is to ensure that funds are available to meet the plans benefit obligations when they become due. Our overall investment strategy is to prudently invest plan assets in a well-diversified portfolio of equity and high-quality debt securities to achieve our long-term return expectations. Our investment policy also permits the use of derivative instruments which are primarily used to reduce risk. Our expected long-term rate of return on U.S. plan assets is 7.8%. Our 2011 target investment allocation was 40% for U.S. equity, 20% for international equity and 40% for fixed income. For 2012, our target allocations are as follows: 40% for fixed income, 33% for U.S. equity, 22% for international equity and 5% for real estate. The change to the 2012 target asset allocations was made to increase diversification. Actual investment allocations may vary from our target investment allocations due to prevailing market conditions. We regularly review our actual investment allocations and periodically rebalance our investments to our target allocations. To calculate the expected return on pension plan assets, our market-related value of assets for fixed income is the actual fair value. For all other asset categories, we use a method that recognizes investment gains or losses (the difference between the expected and actual return based on the market-related value of assets) over a five-year period. This has the effect of reducing year-to-year volatility. 45 Table of Contents The difference between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets is added to, or subtracted from, other gains and losses resulting from actual experience differing from our assumptions and from changes in our assumptions determined at each measurement date. If this net accumulated gain or loss exceeds 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or plan liabilities, a portion of the net gain or loss is included in expense for the following year based upon the average remaining service period of active plan participants, which is approximately 10 years for pension expense and approximately 8 years for retiree medical expense. The cost or benefit of plan changes that increase or decrease benefits for prior employee service (prior service cost/(credit)) is included in earnings on a straight-line basis over the average remaining service period of active plan participants. The health care trend rate used to determine our retiree medical plan liability and expense is reviewed annually. Our review is based on our claim experience, information provided by our health plans and actuaries, and our knowledge of the health care industry. Our review of the trend rate considers factors such as demographics, plan design, new medical technologies and changes in medical carriers. Weighted-average assumptions for pension and retiree medical expense are as follows: 2012 2011 2010 Pension Expense discount rate 4.6 % 5.6 % 6.0 % Expected rate of return on plan assets 7.6 % 7.6 % 7.6 % Expected rate of salary increases 3.8 % 4.1 % 4.4 % Retiree medical Expense discount rate 4.4 % 5.2 % 5.8 % Expected rate of return on plan assets 7.8 % 7.8 % Current health care cost trend rate 6.8 % 7.0 % 7.5 % Based on our assumptions, we expect our pension and retiree medical expenses to increase in 2012 primarily driven by lower discount rates, partially offset by expected asset returns on contributions and changes to other actuarial assumptions. Sensitivity of Assumptions A decrease in the discount rate or in the expected rate of return assumptions would increase pension expense. The estimated impact of a 25-basis-point decrease in the discount rate on 2012 pension expense is an increase of approximately $62 million. The estimated impact on 2012 pension expense of a 25-basis-point decrease in the expected rate of return is an increase of approximately $31 million. See Note 7 for information about the sensitivity of our retiree medical cost assumptions. Funding We make contributions to pension trusts maintained to provide plan benefits for certain pension plans. These contributions are made in accordance with applicable tax regulations that provide for current tax deductions for our contributions and taxation to the employee only upon receipt of plan benefits. Generally, we do not fund our pension plans when our contributions would not be currently tax deductible. As our retiree medical plans are not subject to regulatory funding requirements, we generally fund these plans on a pay-as-you-go basis, although we periodically review available options to make additional contributions toward these benefits. 46 Table of Contents Our pension contributions for 2011 were $239 million, of which $61 million was discretionary. Our retiree medical contributions for 2011 were $110 million, none of which was discretionary. In 2012, we expect to make pension and retiree medical contributions of approximately $1.3 billion, with up to approximately $1 billion expected to be discretionary. Our cash payments for retiree medical benefits are estimated to be approximately $124 million in 2012. Our pension and retiree medical contributions are subject to change as a result of many factors, such as changes in interest rates, deviations between actual and expected asset returns and changes in tax or other benefit laws. For estimated future benefit payments, including our pay-as-you-go payments as well as those from trusts, see Note 7. OUR FINANCIAL RESULTS Items Affecting Comparability The year-over-year comparisons of our financial results are affected by the following items: 2011 2010 2009 Net revenue 53 rd week $ 623 Operating profit 53 rd week $ 109 Mark-to-market net impact (losses)/gains $ (102 ) $ 91 $ 274 Restructuring and impairment charges $ (383 ) $ (36 ) Merger and integration charges $ (313 ) $ (769 ) $ (50 ) Inventory fair value adjustments $ (46 ) $ (398 ) Venezuela currency devaluation $ (120 ) Asset write-off $ (145 ) Foundation contribution $ (100 ) Bottling equity income Gain on previously held equity interests $ 735 Merger and integration charges $ (9 ) $ (11 ) Interest expense 53 rd week $ (16 ) Merger and integration charges $ (16 ) $ (30 ) Debt repurchase $ (178 ) Net income attributable to PepsiCo 53 rd week $ 64 Mark-to-market net impact (losses)/gains $ (71 ) $ 58 $ 173 Restructuring and impairment charges $ (286 ) $ (29 ) Gain on previously held equity interests $ 958 Merger and integration charges $ (271 ) $ (648 ) $ (44 ) Inventory fair value adjustments $ (28 ) $ (333 ) Venezuela currency devaluation $ (120 ) Asset write-off $ (92 ) Foundation contribution $ (64 ) Debt repurchase $ (114 ) Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted 53 rd week $ 0.04 Mark-to-market net impact (losses)/gains $ (0.04 ) $ 0.04 $ 0.11 Restructuring and impairment charges $ (0.18 ) $ (0.02 ) Gain on previously held equity interests $ 0.60 Merger and integration charges $ (0.17 ) $ (0.40 ) $ (0.03 ) Inventory fair value adjustments $ (0.02 ) $ (0.21 ) Venezuela currency devaluation $ (0.07 ) Asset write-off $ (0.06 ) Foundation contribution $ (0.04 ) Debt repurchase $ (0.07 ) 47 Table of Contents 53 rd Week In 2011, we had an additional week of results (53 rd week). Our fiscal year ends on the last Saturday of each December, resulting in an additional week of results every five or six years. The 53 rd week increased 2011 net revenue by $623 million and operating profit by $109 million ($64 million after-tax or $0.04 per share). Mark-to-Market Net Impact We centrally manage commodity derivatives on behalf of our divisions. These commodity derivatives include metals, energy and agricultural products. Certain of these commodity derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment and are marked to market with the resulting gains and losses recognized in corporate unallocated expenses. These gains and losses are subsequently reflected in division results when the divisions take delivery of the underlying commodity. Therefore, the divisions realize the economic effects of the derivative without experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2011, we recognized $102 million ($71 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) of mark-to-market net losses on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2010, we recognized $91 million ($58 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) of mark-to-market net gains on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2009, we recognized $274 million ($173 million after-tax or $0.11 per share) of mark-to-market net gains on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. Restructuring and Impairment Charges In 2011, we incurred restructuring charges of $383 million ($286 million after-tax or $0.18 per share) in conjunction with our multi-year productivity plan (Productivity Plan), including $76 million recorded in the FLNA segment, $18 million recorded in the QFNA segment, $48 million recorded in the LAF segment, $81 million recorded in the PAB segment, $77 million recorded in the Europe segment, $9 million recorded in the AMEA segment and $74 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses. The Productivity Plan includes actions in every aspect of our business that we believe will strengthen our complementary food, snack and beverage businesses by leveraging new technologies and processes across PepsiCo operations, go-to-market and information systems; heightening the focus on best practice sharing across the globe; consolidating manufacturing, warehouse and sales facilities; and implementing simplified organization structures, with wider spans of control and fewer layers of management. The Productivity Plan is expected to enhance PepsiCo cost-competitiveness, provide a source of funding for future brand-building and innovation initiatives, and serve as a financial cushion for potential macroeconomic uncertainty beyond 2012. As a result, we expect to incur pre-tax charges of approximately $910 million, $383 million of which was reflected in our 2011 results, approximately $425 million of which will be reflected in our 2012 results and the balance of which will be reflected in our 2013, 2014 and 2015 results. These charges will be comprised of approximately $500 million of severance and other employee-related costs; approximately $325 million for other costs, including consulting-related costs and the termination of leases and other contracts; and approximately $85 million for asset impairments (all non-cash) resulting from plant closures and related actions. These charges resulted in cash expenditures of $30 million in 2011, and we anticipate approximately $550 million of related cash expenditures during 2012, with the 48 Table of Contents balance of approximately $175 million of related cash expenditures in 2013 through 2015. The Productivity Plan will be substantially completed by the end of 2012 with incremental productivity initiatives continuing through the end of 2015. In 2009, we incurred charges of $36 million ($29 million after-tax or $0.02 per share) in conjunction with our Productivity for Growth program that began in 2008. The program included actions in all divisions of the business, including the closure of six plants, to increase cost competitiveness across the supply chain, upgrade and streamline our product portfolio, and simplify the organization for more effective and timely decision-making. This program was completed in the second quarter of 2009. Gain on Previously Held Equity Interests In 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded a gain on our previously held equity interests of $958 million ($0.60 per share), comprising $735 million which was non-taxable and recorded in bottling equity income and $223 million related to the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with these previously held equity interests. Merger and Integration Charges In 2011, we incurred merger and integration charges of $329 million ($271 million after-tax or $0.17 per share) related to our acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD, including $112 million recorded in the PAB segment, $123 million recorded in the Europe segment, $78 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses and $16 million recorded in interest expense. These charges also include closing costs and advisory fees related to our acquisition of WBD. In 2010, we incurred merger and integration charges of $799 million related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as advisory fees in connection with our acquisition of WBD. $467 million of these charges were recorded in the PAB segment, $111 million recorded in the Europe segment, $191 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses and $30 million recorded in interest expense. The merger and integration charges related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS were incurred to help create a more fully integrated supply chain and go-to-market business model, to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the distribution of our brands and to enhance our revenue growth. These charges also include closing costs, one-time financing costs and advisory fees related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. In addition, we recorded $9 million of merger-related charges, representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS, in bottling equity income. In total, the above charges had an after-tax impact of $648 million or $0.40 per share. In 2009, we incurred $50 million of merger-related charges, as well as an additional $11 million of merger-related charges, representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS, recorded in bottling equity income. In total, these charges had an after-tax impact of $44 million or $0.03 per share. Inventory Fair Value Adjustments In 2011, we recorded $46 million ($28 million after-tax or $0.02 per share) of incremental costs in cost of sales related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory included in WBD balance sheet at the acquisition date and hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. 49 Table of Contents In 2010, we recorded $398 million ($333 million after-tax or $0.21 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory and other related hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. Substantially all of these costs were recorded in cost of sales. Venezuela Currency Devaluation As of the beginning of our 2010 fiscal year, we recorded a one-time $120 million net charge related to our change to hyperinflationary accounting for our Venezuelan businesses and the related devaluation of the bolivar. $129 million of this net charge was recorded in corporate unallocated expenses, with the balance (income of $9 million) recorded in our PAB segment. In total, this net charge had an after-tax impact of $120 million or $0.07 per share. Asset Write-Off In 2010, we recorded a $145 million charge ($92 million after-tax or $0.06 per share) related to a change in scope of one release in our ongoing migration to SAP software. This change was driven, in part, by a review of our North America systems strategy following our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. This change does not impact our overall commitment to continue our implementation of SAP across our global operations over the next few years. Foundation Contribution In 2010, we made a $100 million ($64 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) contribution to The PepsiCo Foundation, Inc., in order to fund charitable and social programs over the next several years. This contribution was recorded in corporate unallocated expenses. Debt Repurchase In 2010, we paid $672 million in a cash tender offer to repurchase $500 million (aggregate principal amount) of our 7.90% senior unsecured notes maturing in 2018. As a result of this debt repurchase, we recorded a $178 million charge to interest expense ($114 million after-tax or $0.07 per share), primarily representing the premium paid in the tender offer. Non-GAAP Measures Certain measures contained in this Form 10-K are financial measures that are adjusted for items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability for a detailed list and description of each of these items), as well as, in certain instances, adjusted for foreign currency. These measures are not in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Items adjusted for currency assume foreign currency exchange rates used for translation based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-year period. In order to compute our constant currency results, we multiply or divide, as appropriate, our current year U.S. dollar results by the current year average foreign exchange rates and then multiply or divide, as appropriate, those amounts by the prior year average foreign exchange rates. We believe investors should consider these non-GAAP measures in evaluating our results as they are more indicative of our ongoing performance and with how management evaluates our operational results and trends. These measures are not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP reporting measures. 50 Table of Contents Results of Operations Consolidated Review In the discussions of net revenue and operating profit below, effective net pricing reflects the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries. Additionally, acquisitions and divestitures reflect all mergers and acquisitions activity, including the impact of acquisitions, divestitures and changes in ownership or control in consolidated subsidiaries and nonconsolidated equity investees. Servings Since our divisions each use different measures of physical unit volume (i.e., kilos, gallons, pounds and case sales), a common servings metric is necessary to reflect our consolidated physical unit volume. Our divisions physical volume measures are converted into servings based on U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines for single-serving sizes of our products. In 2011, total servings increased 6% compared to 2010. Excluding the impact of the 53 rd week, total servings increased 5% compared to 2010. In 2010, total servings increased 7% compared to 2009. 2011 servings growth reflects an adjustment to the base year (2010) for divestitures that occurred in 2011, as applicable. Total Net Revenue and Operating Profit Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 Total net revenue $ 66,504 $ 57,838 $ 43,232 15 % 34 % Operating profit FLNA $ 3,621 $ 3,376 $ 3,105 7 % 9 % QFNA 797 741 781 8 % (5 )% LAF 1,078 1,004 904 7 % 11 % PAB 3,273 2,776 2,172 18 % 28 % Europe 1,210 1,054 948 15 % 11 % AMEA 887 708 700 25 % 1 % Corporate Unallocated 53 rd week (18 ) n/m Mark-to-market net impact (losses)/gains (102 ) 91 274 n/m (67 )% Restructuring and impairment charges (74 ) n/m Merger and integration charges (78 ) (191 ) (49 ) (59 )% 284 % Venezuela currency devaluation (129 ) n/m n/m Asset write-off (145 ) n/m n/m Foundation contribution (100 ) n/m n/m Other (961 ) (853 ) (791 ) 13 % 8 % Total operating profit $ 9,633 $ 8,332 $ 8,044 16 % 4 % Total operating profit margin 14.5 % 14.4 % 18.6 % 0.1 (4.2 ) n/m represents year-over-year changes that are not meaningful. 51 Table of Contents 2011 On a reported basis, total operating profit increased 16% and operating margin increased 0.1 percentage points. Operating profit growth was primarily driven by the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs. Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) contributed 10 percentage points to the total operating profit growth and 1.2 percentage points to the total operating margin increase. 2010 On a reported basis, total operating profit increased 4% and operating margin decreased 4.2 percentage points. Operating profit performance was impacted by items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ), which reduced operating profit by 21 percentage points and contributed 2.9 percentage points to the total operating margin decline. Operating profit performance also reflects the incremental operating results from our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. 52 Table of Contents Other Consolidated Results Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 Bottling equity income $ 735 $ 365 $ (735 ) $ 370 Interest expense, net $ (799 ) $ (835 ) $ (330 ) $ 36 $ (505 ) Annual tax rate 26.8 % 23.0 % 26.0 % Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,443 $ 6,320 $ 5,946 2 % 6 % Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 4.03 $ 3.91 $ 3.77 3 % 4 % 53 rd week (0.04 ) Mark-to-market net impact losses/(gains) 0.04 (0.04 ) (0.11 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 0.18 0.02 Gain on previously held equity interests (0.60 ) Merger and integration charges 0.17 0.40 0.03 Inventory fair value adjustments 0.02 0.21 Venezuela currency devaluation 0.07 Asset write-off 0.06 Foundation contribution 0.04 Debt repurchase 0.07 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted, excluding above items* $ 4.40 $ 4.13 ** $ 3.71 7 % 12 % Impact of foreign currency translation (1 ) 1 Growth in net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted, excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* 5 %** 12 %** * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 53 Table of Contents Prior to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS on February 26, 2010, we had noncontrolling interests in each of these bottlers and consequently included our share of their net income in bottling equity income. Upon consummation of the acquisitions in the first quarter of 2010, we began to consolidate the results of these bottlers and recorded a $735 million gain in bottling equity income associated with revaluing our previously held equity interests in PBG and PAS to fair value. 2011 Bottling equity income decreased $735 million, reflecting the gain in the prior year on our previously held equity interests in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Net interest expense decreased $36 million, primarily reflecting interest expense in the prior year in connection with our cash tender offer to repurchase debt in 2010, partially offset by higher average debt balances in 2011. The reported tax rate increased 3.8 percentage points compared to 2010, primarily reflecting the prior year non-taxable gain and reversal of deferred taxes attributable to our previously held equity interests in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Net income attributable to PepsiCo increased 2% and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share increased 3%. Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) decreased net income attributable to PepsiCo by 3 percentage points and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share by 3.5 percentage points. 2010 Bottling equity income increased $370 million, primarily reflecting the gain on our previously held equity interests in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, partially offset by the consolidation of the related financial results of the acquired bottlers. Net interest expense increased $505 million, primarily reflecting higher average debt balances, interest expense incurred in connection with our cash tender offer to repurchase debt, and bridge and term financing costs in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. These increases were partially offset by lower average rates on our debt balances. The reported tax rate decreased 3.0 percentage points compared to the prior year, primarily reflecting the impact of our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, which includes the reversal of deferred taxes attributable to our previously held equity interests in PBG and PAS, as well as the favorable resolution of certain tax matters in 2010. Net income attributable to PepsiCo increased 6% and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share increased 4%. Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) decreased net income attributable to PepsiCo and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share by 8 percentage points. 54 Table of Contents Results of Operations Division Review The results and discussions below are based on how our Chief Executive Officer monitors the performance of our divisions. Accordingly, 2011 volume growth measures reflect an adjustment to the base year (2010) for divestitures that occurred in 2011. See Items Affecting Comparability for a discussion of items to consider when evaluating our results and related information regarding non-GAAP measures. FLNA QFNA LAF PAB Europe AMEA Total Net Revenue, 2011 $ 13,322 $ 2,656 $ 7,156 $ 22,418 $ 13,560 $ 7,392 $ 66,504 Net Revenue, 2010 $ 12,573 $ 2,656 $ 6,315 $ 20,401 $ 9,602 $ 6,291 $ 57,838 % Impact of: Volume (a) 2 % (5 )% 3.5 % * * 10 % * Effective net pricing (b) 3 4 8 * * 6 * Foreign exchange 1 2 1 3 2 1 Acquisitions and divestitures * * * % Change (c) 6 % % 13 % 10 % 41 % 17 % 15 % FLNA QFNA LAF PAB Europe AMEA Total Net Revenue, 2010 $ 12,573 $ 2,656 $ 6,315 $ 20,401 $ 9,602 $ 6,291 $ 57,838 Net Revenue, 2009 $ 12,421 $ 2,687 $ 5,703 $ 10,116 $ 7,028 $ 5,277 $ 43,232 % Impact of: Volume (a) % % 3 % * * 12 % * Effective net pricing (b) (2 ) 6 * * 3 * Foreign exchange 1 1 1 (1 ) 3 1 Acquisitions and divestitures * * 1 * % Change (c) 1 % (1 )% 11 % 102 % 37 % 19 % 34 % (a) Excludes the impact of acquisitions and divestitures. In certain instances, volume growth varies from the amounts disclosed in the following divisional discussions due to nonconsolidated joint venture volume, and, for our beverage businesses, temporary timing differences between BCS and CSE. Our net revenue excludes nonconsolidated joint venture volume, and, for our beverage businesses, is based on CSE. (b) Includes the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries. (c) Amounts may not sum due to rounding. * It is impractical to separately determine and quantify the impact of our acquisitions of PBG and PAS from changes in our pre-existing beverage business since we now manage these businesses as an integrated system. 55 Table of Contents Frito-Lay North America % Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 Net revenue $ 13,322 $ 12,573 $ 12,421 6 1 53 rd week (260 ) Net revenue excluding above item* $ 13,062 $ 12,573 $ 12,421 4 1 Impact of foreign currency translation (1 ) Net revenue growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 3.5 ** Operating profit $ 3,621 $ 3,376 $ 3,105 7 9 53 rd week (72 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 76 1 Operating profit excluding above items* $ 3,625 $ 3,376 $ 3,106 7 9 Impact of foreign currency translation (1 ) Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* 7 8 * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2011 Net revenue increased 6% and pound volume grew 3%. The volume growth primarily reflects double-digit growth in our Sabra joint venture and in variety packs, as well as mid-single-digit growth in trademark Doritos, Cheetos and Ruffles. These gains were partially offset by a double-digit decline in trademark SunChips. Net revenue growth also benefited from effective net pricing. The 53 rd week contributed 2 percentage points to both net revenue and volume growth. Operating profit grew 7%, primarily reflecting the net revenue growth. Restructuring charges reduced operating profit growth by 2 percentage points and were offset by the 53 rd week, which contributed 2 percentage points to operating profit growth. 2010 Pound volume decreased 1%, primarily due to the overlap of the 2009 20% More Free promotion, as well as a double-digit decline in SunChips, partially offset by mid-single-digit growth in trademark Lay s. Net revenue grew 1%, primarily reflecting mid-single-digit revenue growth in trademark Lay s, double-digit revenue growth in variety packs and high-single-digit revenue growth in trademark Ruffles. These gains were partially offset by a double-digit revenue decline in SunChips and a mid-single-digit revenue decline in Tostitos. Foreign currency contributed 1 percentage point to the net revenue growth. Operating profit grew 9%, reflecting lower commodity costs, primarily cooking oil. 56 Table of Contents Quaker Foods North America % Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 Net revenue $ 2,656 $ 2,656 $ 2,687 (1 ) 53 rd week (42 ) Net revenue excluding above item* $ 2,614 $ 2,656 $ 2,687 (2 ) (1 ) Impact of foreign currency translation (1 ) (1 ) Net revenue growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* (2 )** (2 ) Operating profit $ 797 $ 741 $ 781 8 (5 ) 53 rd week (12 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 18 2 Operating profit excluding above items* $ 803 $ 741 $ 783 8 (5 ) Impact of foreign currency translation (0.5 ) (1 ) Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* 8 ** (6 ) * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2011 Net revenue was flat and volume declined 5%. The volume decline primarily reflects double-digit volume declines in ready-to-eat cereals and Chewy granola bars, as well as a mid-single-digit decline in Aunt Jemima syrup and mix. The impact of positive net pricing, driven primarily by price increases taken in the fourth quarter of 2010, was partially offset by negative mix. Favorable foreign currency contributed nearly 1 percentage point to the net revenue performance. The 53 rd week positively contributed almost 2 percentage points to both the net revenue and volume performance. Operating profit grew 8%, primarily reflecting the favorable effective net pricing, partially offset by the volume declines. Gains on the divestiture of a business and the sale of a distribution center increased operating profit growth by 4 percentage points, and a change in accounting methodology for inventory contributed 2 percentage points to operating profit growth (see Note 1). Restructuring charges reduced operating profit growth by over 2 percentage points and were mostly offset by the 53 rd week, which contributed 2 percentage points to operating profit growth. 57 Table of Contents 2010 Net revenue declined 1% and volume was flat. Low-single-digit volume declines in Oatmeal and ready-to-eat cereals were mostly offset by high-single-digit growth in Chewy granola bars. Unfavorable mix and net pricing contributed to the net revenue decline. Favorable foreign currency positively contributed 1 percentage point to net revenue performance. Operating profit declined 5%, primarily reflecting the net revenue performance, as well as insurance settlement recoveries recorded in the prior year related to the Cedar Rapids flood, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by over 2 percentage points. Latin America Foods % Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 Net revenue $ 7,156 $ 6,315 $ 5,703 13 11 Impact of foreign currency translation (2 ) (1 ) Net revenue growth, on a constant currency basis* 11 10 Operating profit $ 1,078 $ 1,004 $ 904 7 11 Restructuring and impairment charges 48 3 Operating profit excluding above item* $ 1,126 $ 1,004 $ 907 12 11 Impact of foreign currency translation (1 ) Operating profit growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 11 11 * See Non-GAAP Measures 2011 Volume increased 5%, primarily reflecting mid-single-digit increases in Brazil (excluding the impact of an acquisition in the fourth quarter) and at Gamesa in Mexico. Additionally, Sabritas in Mexico was up slightly. Acquisitions contributed 1 percentage point to the volume growth. Net revenue increased 13%, primarily reflecting effective net pricing and the volume growth. Favorable foreign currency contributed 2 percentage points to net revenue growth. Acquisitions and divestitures had a nominal impact on the net revenue growth rate. Operating profit grew 7%, driven by the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs. Acquisitions and divestitures, which included a gain from the sale of a fish business in Brazil, contributed nearly 4 percentage points to operating profit growth. Restructuring charges reduced operating profit growth by 5 percentage points. 58 Table of Contents 2010 Volume increased 4%, reflecting mid-single-digit increases at Sabritas in Mexico and Brazil. Additionally, Gamesa in Mexico grew at a low-single-digit rate. Net revenue increased 11%, primarily reflecting favorable effective net pricing and the volume growth. Net revenue growth reflected 1 percentage point of favorable foreign currency, which was net of a 6-percentage-point unfavorable impact from Venezuela. Operating profit grew 11%, primarily reflecting the net revenue growth. Unfavorable foreign currency reduced operating profit growth slightly, as an 8-percentage-point unfavorable impact from Venezuela was offset by favorable foreign currency in other markets. PepsiCo Americas Beverages % Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 Net revenue $ 22,418 $ 20,401 $ 10,116 10 102 53 rd week (288 ) Net revenue excluding above item* $ 22,130 $ 20,401 $ 10,116 8 102 Impact of foreign currency translation (1 ) Net revenue growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 8 ** 102 Operating profit $ 3,273 $ 2,776 $ 2,172 18 28 53 rd week (35 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 81 16 Merger and integration costs 112 467 Inventory fair value adjustments 21 358 Venezuela currency devaluation (9 ) Operating profit excluding above items* $ 3,452 $ 3,592 $ 2,188 (4 ) 64 Impact of foreign currency translation (0.5 ) 4 Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* (4 )** 68 * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 59 Table of Contents 2011 Volume increased 2%, primarily reflecting a 3% increase in Latin America volume, as well as volume from incremental brands related to our DPSG manufacturing and distribution agreement, which contributed 1 percentage point to volume growth. North America volume, excluding the impact of the incremental DPSG volume, increased slightly, as a 4% increase in non-carbonated beverage volume was partially offset by a 2% decline in CSD volume. The non-carbonated beverage volume growth primarily reflected a double-digit increase in Gatorade sports drinks. The 53 rd week contributed 1 percentage point to volume growth. Net revenue increased 10%, primarily reflecting the incremental finished goods revenue related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Favorable foreign currency contributed nearly 1 percentage point to net revenue growth and the 53 rd week contributed over 1 percentage point to net revenue growth. Reported operating profit increased 18%, primarily reflecting the items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Excluding these items, operating profit decreased 4%, mainly driven by higher commodity costs and higher selling and distribution costs, partially offset by the net revenue growth. Operating profit performance also benefited from the impact of certain insurance adjustments and more-favorable settlements of promotional spending accruals in the current year, which collectively contributed 2 percentage points to the reported operating profit growth. The net impact of the divestiture of our Mexico beverage business in the fourth quarter contributed 1 percentage point to reported operating profit growth and included a one-time gain associated with the contribution of this business to form a joint venture with both Grupo Embotelladoras Unidas S.A.B. de C.V. and Empresas Polar. 2010 Volume increased 10%, primarily reflecting volume from incremental brands related to our acquisition of PBG operations in Mexico, which contributed over 6 percentage points to volume growth, as well as incremental volume related to our DPSG manufacturing and distribution agreement, entered into in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, which contributed over 5 percentage points to volume growth. North America volume, excluding the impact of the incremental DPSG volume, declined 1%, driven by a 3% decline in CSD volume, partially offset by a 1% increase in non-carbonated beverage volume. The non-carbonated beverage volume growth primarily reflected a mid-single-digit increase in Gatorade sports drinks and a high-single-digit increase in Lipton ready-to-drink teas, mostly offset by mid-single-digit declines in our base Aquafina water and Tropicana businesses. Net revenue increased 102%, primarily reflecting the incremental finished goods revenue related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Reported operating profit increased 28%, primarily reflecting the incremental operating results from our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, partially offset by the items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Excluding the items affecting comparability, operating profit increased 64%. Unfavorable foreign currency reduced operating profit performance by 4 percentage points, driven primarily by a 6-percentage-point unfavorable impact from Venezuela. 60 Table of Contents Europe % Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 Net revenue $ 13,560 $ 9,602 $ 7,028 41 37 53 rd week (33 ) Net revenue excluding above item* $ 13,527 $ 9,602 $ 7,028 41 37 Impact of foreign currency translation (3 ) 1 Net revenue growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 38 38 Operating profit $ 1,210 $ 1,054 $ 948 15 11 53 rd week (8 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 77 2 Merger and integration costs 123 111 1 Inventory fair value adjustments 25 40 Operating profit excluding above items* $ 1,427 $ 1,205 $ 951 18 27 Impact of foreign currency translation (4 ) 1 Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis* 14 27 ** * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2011 Snacks volume grew 35%, primarily reflecting our acquisition of WBD, which contributed 31 percentage points to volume growth. Double-digit growth in Turkey and South Africa and high-single-digit growth in Russia (ex-WBD) was partially offset by a mid-single-digit decline in Spain. Additionally, Walkers in the United Kingdom experienced low-single-digit growth. Beverage volume increased 21%, primarily reflecting our acquisition of WBD, which contributed 20 percentage points to volume growth, and incremental brands related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, which contributed nearly 1 percentage point to volume growth. A double-digit increase in Turkey and mid-single-digit increases in the United Kingdom and France were offset by a high-single-digit decline in Russia (ex-WBD). Net revenue grew 41%, primarily reflecting our acquisition of WBD, which contributed 29 percentage points to net revenue growth, and the incremental finished goods revenue related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Favorable foreign currency contributed 3 percentage points to net revenue growth. 61 Table of Contents Reported operating profit increased 15%, primarily reflecting the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs. Our acquisition of WBD contributed 19 percentage points to the reported operating profit growth and reflected net charges of $56 million included in items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Excluding the items affecting comparability, operating profit increased 18%. Favorable foreign currency contributed 4 percentage points to operating profit growth. 2010 Snacks volume increased 2%, reflecting high-single-digit growth in South Africa and Quaker in the United Kingdom, a double-digit increase in France and mid-single-digit increases in Russia and Turkey. These gains were partially offset by a double-digit decline in Romania and a low-single-digit decline in Spain. Additionally, Walkers in the United Kingdom experienced low-single-digit growth. Beverage volume increased 10%, reflecting double-digit increases in Russia and Turkey, high-single-digit growth in Poland and France and a mid-single-digit increase in the United Kingdom. These gains were partially offset by a double-digit decline in Romania. Additionally, incremental brands related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS contributed 5 percentage points to the beverage volume growth. Net revenue grew 37%, primarily reflecting the incremental finished goods revenue related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Unfavorable foreign currency reduced net revenue growth by over 1 percentage point. Operating profit grew 11%, primarily reflecting incremental operating results from our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. Operating profit growth was also adversely impacted by the items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Excluding these items, operating profit increased 27%. Unfavorable foreign currency reduced operating profit growth by 1 percentage point. 62 Table of Contents Asia, Middle East & Africa % Change 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 Net revenue $ 7,392 $ 6,291 $ 5,277 17 19 Impact of foreign currency translation (2 ) (3 ) Net revenue growth, on a constant currency basis* 16 ** 16 Operating profit $ 887 $ 708 $ 700 25 1 Restructuring and impairment charges 9 12 Operating profit excluding above item* $ 896 $ 708 $ 712 27 (1 ) Impact of foreign currency translation (2.5 ) (3 ) Operating profit growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis* 24 ** (4 ) * See Non-GAAP Measures ** Does not sum due to rounding 2011 Snacks volume grew 15%, reflecting broad-based increases driven by double-digit growth in India, China and the Middle East. Beverage volume grew 5%, driven by double-digit growth in India and mid-single-digit growth in China and the Middle East. Acquisitions had a nominal impact on the beverage volume growth rate. Net revenue grew 17%, reflecting the volume growth and favorable effective net pricing. Foreign currency contributed 2 percentage points to net revenue growth. Acquisitions had a nominal impact on net revenue growth. Operating profit grew 25%, driven primarily by the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs. Acquisitions and divestitures increased operating profit growth by 16 percentage points, primarily as a result of a one-time gain associated with the sale of our investment in our franchise bottler in Thailand. Favorable foreign currency contributed 2.5 percentage points to the operating profit growth. 2010 Snacks volume grew 16%, reflecting broad-based increases driven by double-digit growth in India, the Middle East and China, partially offset by a low-single-digit decline in Australia. Acquisitions contributed nearly 3 percentage points to the snacks volume growth. Beverage volume grew 7%, driven by double-digit growth in India and China, partially offset by a low-single-digit decline in the Middle East. Acquisitions had a nominal impact on the beverage volume growth rate. 63 Table of Contents Net revenue grew 19%, reflecting the volume growth and favorable effective net pricing. Foreign currency contributed 3 percentage points to the net revenue growth. The net impact of acquisitions and divestitures contributed 1 percentage point to the net revenue growth. Operating profit grew 1%, driven primarily by the net revenue growth, partially offset by higher commodity costs and increased investments in strategic markets. The net impact of acquisitions and divestitures reduced operating profit growth by 10 percentage points, primarily as a result of a one-time gain in the prior year associated with the contribution of our snacks business in Japan to form a joint venture with Calbee Foods Company. Favorable foreign currency contributed over 3 percentage points to the operating profit growth and the absence of restructuring and impairment charges in the current year contributed 2 percentage points. Our Liquidity and Capital Resources We believe that our cash generating capability and financial condition, together with our revolving credit facilities and other available methods of debt financing (including long-term debt financing which, depending upon market conditions, we may use to replace a portion of our commercial paper borrowings), will be adequate to meet our operating, investing and financing needs. However, there can be no assurance that volatility in the global capital and credit markets will not impair our ability to access these markets on terms commercially acceptable to us or at all. See Note 9 for a description of our credit facilities. See also Unfavorable economic conditions may have an adverse impact on our business results or financial condition. in Risk Factors in Item 1A. In addition, currency restrictions enacted by the government in Venezuela have impacted our ability to pay dividends outside of the country from our snack and beverage operations in Venezuela. As of December 31, 2011, our operations in Venezuela comprised 8% of our cash and cash equivalents balance. Furthermore, our cash provided from operating activities is somewhat impacted by seasonality. Working capital needs are impacted by weekly sales, which are generally highest in the third quarter due to seasonal and holiday-related sales patterns, and generally lowest in the first quarter. On a continuing basis, we consider various transactions to increase shareholder value and enhance our business results, including acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures and share repurchases. These transactions may result in future cash proceeds or payments. The table below summarizes our cash activity: 2011 2010 2009 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 8,944 $ 8,448 $ 6,796 Net cash used for investing activities $ (5,618 ) $ (7,668 ) $ (2,401 ) Net cash (used for)/provided by financing activities $ (5,135 ) $ 1,386 $ (2,497 ) 64 Table of Contents Operating Activities During 2011, net cash provided by operating activities was $8.9 billion, compared to net cash provided of $8.4 billion in the prior year. The increase over the prior year primarily reflects the overlap of discretionary pension contributions of $1.3 billion ($1.0 billion after-tax) in the prior year, partially offset by unfavorable working capital comparisons to the prior year. During 2010, net cash provided by operating activities was $8.4 billion, compared to net cash provided of $6.8 billion in the prior year. The increase over the prior year primarily reflects the incremental operating results from our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as favorable working capital comparisons to the prior year. Also see Management Operating Cash Flow below for certain other items impacting net cash provided by operating activities. Investing Activities During 2011, net cash used for investing activities was $5.6 billion, primarily reflecting $3.3 billion for net capital spending and $2.4 billion of cash paid, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired, in connection with our acquisition of WBD. During 2010, net cash used for investing activities was $7.7 billion, primarily reflecting $3.2 billion for net capital spending, $2.8 billion of net cash paid in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, and $0.9 billion of cash paid in connection with our manufacturing and distribution agreement with DPSG. We also paid $0.5 billion to acquire WBD American Depositary Shares (ADS) in the open market. We anticipate capital spending in 2012 of approximately $3.0 billion. Financing Activities During 2011, net cash used for financing activities was $5.1 billion, primarily reflecting the return of operating cash flow to our shareholders through share repurchases and dividend payments of $5.6 billion, our purchase of an additional $1.4 billion of WBD ordinary shares (including shares underlying ADSs) and our repurchase of certain WBD debt obligations of $0.8 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from long-term debt of $1.4 billion and stock option proceeds of $0.9 billion. During 2010, net cash provided by financing activities was $1.4 billion, primarily reflecting proceeds from issuances of long-term debt of $6.5 billion, mostly in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, and net proceeds from short-term borrowings of $2.5 billion. These increases were largely offset by the return of operating cash flow to our shareholders through share repurchases and dividend payments of $8.0 billion. We annually review our capital structure with our Board, including our dividend policy and share repurchase activity. In the first quarter of 2012, our Board of Directors approved a 4% dividend increase, raising the dividend payable on our common stock, effective with the dividend payable in June 2012, to $2.15 per share. We expect to repurchase approximately $3.0 billion of our common stock in 2012. 65 Table of Contents Management Operating Cash Flow We focus on management operating cash flow as a key element in achieving maximum shareholder value, and it is the primary measure we use to monitor cash flow performance. However, it is not a measure provided by accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Therefore, this measure is not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP cash flow measures. Since net capital spending is essential to our product innovation initiatives and maintaining our operational capabilities, we believe that it is a recurring and necessary use of cash. As such, we believe investors should also consider net capital spending when evaluating our cash from operating activities. Additionally, we consider certain items (included in the table below), in evaluating management operating cash flow. We believe investors should consider these items in evaluating our management operating cash flow results. The table below reconciles net cash provided by operating activities, as reflected in our cash flow statement, to our management operating cash flow excluding the impact of the items below. 2011 2010 2009 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 8,944 $ 8,448 $ 6,796 Capital spending (3,339 ) (3,253 ) (2,128 ) Sales of property, plant and equipment 84 81 58 Management operating cash flow 5,689 5,276 4,726 Discretionary pension and retiree medical contributions (after-tax) 44 983 640 Payments related to restructuring charges (after-tax) 21 20 168 Merger and integration payments (after-tax) 283 299 49 Foundation contribution (after-tax) 64 Debt repurchase (after-tax) 112 Capital investments related to the PBG/PAS integration 108 138 Management operating cash flow excluding above items $ 6,145 $ 6,892 $ 5,583 In 2011 and 2010, management operating cash flow was used primarily to repurchase shares and pay dividends. In 2009, management operating cash flow was used primarily to pay dividends. We expect to continue to return management operating cash flow to our shareholders through dividends and share repurchases while maintaining credit ratings that provide us with ready access to global and capital credit markets. However, see Our borrowing costs and access to capital and credit markets may be adversely affected by a downgrade or potential downgrade of our credit ratings. in Risk Factors in Item 1A. and Our Business Risks for certain factors that may impact our operating cash flows. Any downgrade of our credit ratings by a credit rating agency, especially any downgrade to below investment grade, could increase our future borrowing costs or impair our ability to access capital and credit markets on terms commercially acceptable to us, or at all. In addition, any downgrade of our current short-term credit ratings could impair our ability to access the commercial paper market with the same flexibility that we have experienced historically, and therefore require us to rely more heavily on more expensive types of debt financing. See Our Business Risks , Note 9 and Our borrowing costs and access to capital and credit markets may be adversely affected by a downgrade or potential downgrade of our credit ratings. in Risk Factors in Item 1A. 66 Table of Contents Credit Facilities and Long-Term Contractual Commitments See Note 9 for a description of our credit facilities and long-term contractual commitments. Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements It is not our business practice to enter into off-balance-sheet arrangements, other than in the normal course of business. Additionally, we do not enter into off-balance-sheet transactions specifically structured to provide income or tax benefits or to avoid recognizing or disclosing assets or liabilities. See Note 9. 67 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Income PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2011, December 25, 2010 and December 26, 2009 (in millions except per share amounts) 2011 2010 2009 Net Revenue $ 66,504 $ 57,838 $ 43,232 Cost of sales 31,593 26,575 20,099 Selling, general and administrative expenses 25,145 22,814 15,026 Amortization of intangible assets 133 117 63 Operating Profit 9,633 8,332 8,044 Bottling equity income 735 365 Interest expense (856 ) (903 ) (397 ) Interest income and other 57 68 67 Income before income taxes 8,834 8,232 8,079 Provision for income taxes 2,372 1,894 2,100 Net income 6,462 6,338 5,979 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 19 18 33 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,443 $ 6,320 $ 5,946 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share Basic $ 4.08 $ 3.97 $ 3.81 Diluted $ 4.03 $ 3.91 $ 3.77 Weighted-average common shares outstanding Basic 1,576 1,590 1,558 Diluted 1,597 1,614 1,577 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 2.025 $ 1.89 $ 1.775 See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 68 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2011, December 25, 2010 and December 26, 2009 (in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Operating Activities Net income $ 6,462 $ 6,338 $ 5,979 Depreciation and amortization 2,737 2,327 1,635 Stock-based compensation expense 326 299 227 Restructuring and impairment charges 383 36 Cash payments for restructuring charges (31 ) (31 ) (196 ) Merger and integration costs 329 808 50 Cash payments for merger and integration costs (377 ) (385 ) (49 ) Gain on previously held equity interests in PBG and PAS (958 ) Asset write-off 145 Non-cash foreign exchange loss related to Venezuela devaluation 120 Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements (70 ) (107 ) (42 ) Pension and retiree medical plan contributions (349 ) (1,734 ) (1,299 ) Pension and retiree medical plan expenses 571 453 423 Bottling equity income, net of dividends 42 (235 ) Deferred income taxes and other tax charges and credits 495 500 284 Change in accounts and notes receivable (666 ) (268 ) 188 Change in inventories (331 ) 276 17 Change in prepaid expenses and other current assets (27 ) 144 (127 ) Change in accounts payable and other current liabilities 520 488 (133 ) Change in income taxes payable (340 ) 123 319 Other, net (688 ) (132 ) (281 ) Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities 8,944 8,448 6,796 Investing Activities Capital spending (3,339 ) (3,253 ) (2,128 ) Sales of property, plant and equipment 84 81 58 Acquisitions of PBG and PAS, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired (2,833 ) Acquisition of manufacturing and distribution rights from DPSG (900 ) Acquisition of WBD, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired (2,428 ) Investment in WBD (164 ) (463 ) Other acquisitions and investments in noncontrolled affiliates (601 ) (83 ) (500 ) Divestitures 780 12 99 Cash restricted for pending acquisitions 15 Short-term investments, by original maturity More than three months purchases (12 ) (29 ) More than three months maturities 21 29 71 Three months or less, net 45 (229 ) 13 Other investing, net (16 ) (17 ) Net Cash Used for Investing Activities (5,618 ) (7,668 ) (2,401 ) (Continued on following page) 69 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows (continued) PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2011, December 25, 2010 and December 26, 2009 (in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Financing Activities Proceeds from issuances of long-term debt $ 3,000 $ 6,451 $ 1,057 Payments of long-term debt (1,596 ) (59 ) (226 ) Debt repurchase (771 ) (500 ) Short-term borrowings, by original maturity More than three months proceeds 523 227 26 More than three months payments (559 ) (96 ) (81 ) Three months or less, net 339 2,351 (963 ) Cash dividends paid (3,157 ) (2,978 ) (2,732 ) Share repurchases common (2,489 ) (4,978 ) Share repurchases preferred (7 ) (5 ) (7 ) Proceeds from exercises of stock options 945 1,038 413 Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements 70 107 42 Acquisition of noncontrolling interests (1,406 ) (159 ) Other financing (27 ) (13 ) (26 ) Net Cash (Used for)/Provided by Financing Activities (5,135 ) 1,386 (2,497 ) Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (67 ) (166 ) (19 ) Net (Decrease)/Increase in Cash and Cash Equivalents (1,876 ) 2,000 1,879 Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning of Year 5,943 3,943 2,064 Cash and Cash Equivalents, End of Year $ 4,067 $ 5,943 $ 3,943 Non-cash activity: Issuance of common stock and equity awards in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as reflected in investing and financing activities $ 4,451 See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 70 Table of Contents Consolidated Balance Sheet PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 (in millions except per share amounts) 2011 2010 ASSETS Current Assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 4,067 $ 5,943 Short-term investments 358 426 Accounts and notes receivable, net 6,912 6,323 Inventories 3,827 3,372 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 2,277 1,505 Total Current Assets 17,441 17,569 Property, Plant and Equipment, net 19,698 19,058 Amortizable Intangible Assets, net 1,888 2,025 Goodwill 16,800 14,661 Other nonamortizable intangible assets 14,557 11,783 Nonamortizable Intangible Assets 31,357 26,444 Investments in Noncontrolled Affiliates 1,477 1,368 Other Assets 1,021 1,689 Total Assets $ 72,882 $ 68,153 LIABILITIES AND EQUITY Current Liabilities Short-term obligations $ 6,205 $ 4,898 Accounts payable and other current liabilities 11,757 10,923 Income taxes payable 192 71 Total Current Liabilities 18,154 15,892 Long-Term Debt Obligations 20,568 19,999 Other Liabilities 8,266 6,729 Deferred Income Taxes 4,995 4,057 Total Liabilities 51,983 46,677 Commitments and Contingencies Preferred Stock, no par value 41 41 Repurchased Preferred Stock (157 ) (150 ) PepsiCo Common Shareholders Equity Common stock, par value 1 2 / 3 per share (authorized 3,600 shares, issued 1,865 shares) 31 31 Capital in excess of par value 4,461 4,527 Retained earnings 40,316 37,090 Accumulated other comprehensive loss (6,229 ) (3,630 ) Repurchased common stock, at cost (301 and 284 shares, respectively) (17,875 ) (16,745 ) Total PepsiCo Common Shareholders Equity 20,704 21,273 Noncontrolling interests 311 312 Total Equity 20,899 21,476 Total Liabilities and Equity $ 72,882 $ 68,153 See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 71 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Equity PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2011, December 25, 2010 and December 26, 2009 (in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Shares Amount Shares Amount Shares Amount Preferred Stock 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 Repurchased Preferred Stock Balance, beginning of year (0.6 ) (150 ) (0.6 ) (145 ) (0.5 ) (138 ) Redemptions ( ) (7 ) ( ) (5 ) (0.1 ) (7 ) Balance, end of year (0.6 ) (157 ) (0.6 ) (150 ) (0.6 ) (145 ) Common Stock Balance, beginning of year 1,865 31 1,782 30 1,782 30 Shares issued in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS 83 1 Balance, end of year 1,865 31 1,865 31 1,782 30 Capital in Excess of Par Value Balance, beginning of year 4,527 250 351 Stock-based compensation expense 326 299 227 Stock option exercises/RSUs converted (a) (361 ) (500 ) (292 ) Withholding tax on RSUs converted (56 ) (68 ) (36 ) Equity issued in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS 4,451 Other 25 95 Balance, end of year 4,461 4,527 250 Retained Earnings Balance, beginning of year 37,090 33,805 30,638 Net income attributable to PepsiCo 6,443 6,320 5,946 Cash dividends declared common (3,192 ) (3,028 ) (2,768 ) Cash dividends declared preferred (1 ) (1 ) (2 ) Cash dividends declared RSUs (24 ) (12 ) (9 ) Other 6 Balance, end of year 40,316 37,090 33,805 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Balance, beginning of year (3,630 ) (3,794 ) (4,694 ) Currency translation adjustment (1,529 ) 312 800 Cash flow hedges, net of tax: Net derivative losses (83 ) (111 ) (55 ) Reclassification of net losses to net income 14 53 28 Pension and retiree medical, net of tax: Net pension and retiree medical (losses)/gains (1,110 ) (280 ) 21 Reclassification of net losses to net income 133 166 86 Unrealized (losses)/gains on securities, net of tax (8 ) 23 20 Other (16 ) 1 Balance, end of year (6,229 ) (3,630 ) (3,794 ) Repurchased Common Stock Balance, beginning of year (284 ) (16,745 ) (217 ) (13,383 ) (229 ) (14,122 ) Share repurchases (39 ) (2,489 ) (76 ) (4,978 ) Stock option exercises 20 1,251 24 1,487 11 649 Other 2 108 (15 ) 129 1 90 Balance, end of year (301 ) (17,875 ) (284 ) (16,745 ) (217 ) (13,383 ) Total Common Shareholders Equity 20,704 21,273 16,908 Noncontrolling Interests Balance, beginning of year 312 638 476 Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 19 18 33 Distributions to noncontrolling interests, net (24 ) (6 ) Currency translation adjustment 65 (13 ) (12 ) Acquisitions and divestitures (57 ) (326 ) 150 Other, net (4 ) 1 (9 ) Balance, end of year 311 312 638 Total Equity $ 20,899 $ 21,476 $ 17,442 (a) Includes total tax benefits of $43 million in 2011, $75 million in 2010 and $31 million in 2009. (Continued on following page) 72 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Equity (continued) PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2011, December 25, 2010 and December 26, 2009 (in millions) 2011 2010 2009 Comprehensive Income Net income $ 6,462 $ 6,338 $ 5,979 Other comprehensive (loss)/income Currency translation adjustment (1,464 ) 299 788 Cash flow hedges, net of tax (69 ) (58 ) (27 ) Pension and retiree medical, net of tax: Net prior service (cost)/credit (10 ) 22 (3 ) Net (losses)/gains (967 ) (136 ) 110 Unrealized (losses)/gains on securities, net of tax (8 ) 23 20 Other (16 ) 1 (2,534 ) 151 888 Comprehensive income 3,928 6,489 6,867 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests (84 ) (5 ) (21 ) Comprehensive Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 3,844 $ 6,484 $ 6,846 See accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements. 73 Table of Contents Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Our Divisions Basis of Presentation Our financial statements include the consolidated accounts of PepsiCo, Inc. and the affiliates that we control. In addition, we include our share of the results of certain other affiliates using the equity method based on our economic ownership interest, our ability to exercise significant influence over the operating or financial decisions of these affiliates or our ability to direct their economic resources. We do not control these other affiliates, as our ownership in these other affiliates is generally less than 50%. Intercompany balances and transactions are eliminated. Our fiscal year ends on the last Saturday of each December, resulting in an additional week of results every five or six years. In 2011, we had an additional week of results (53 rd week). On February 26, 2010, we completed our acquisitions of The Pepsi Bottling Group, Inc. (PBG) and PepsiAmericas, Inc. (PAS). The results of the acquired companies in the U.S. and Canada are reflected in our consolidated results as of the acquisition date, and the international results of the acquired companies have been reported as of the beginning of our second quarter of 2010, consistent with our monthly international reporting calendar. The results of the acquired companies in the U.S., Canada and Mexico are reported within our PAB segment, and the results of the acquired companies in Europe, including Russia, are reported within our Europe segment. Prior to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded our share of equity income or loss from the acquired companies in bottling equity income in our income statement. Our share of income or loss from other noncontrolled affiliates is reflected as a component of selling, general and administrative expenses. Additionally, in the first quarter of 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded a gain on our previously held equity interests of $958 million, comprising $735 million which was non-taxable and recorded in bottling equity income and $223 million related to the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with these previously held equity interests. See Notes 8 and 15 and for additional unaudited information on items affecting the comparability of our consolidated results, see Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. As of the beginning of our 2010 fiscal year, the results of our Venezuelan businesses are reported under hyperinflationary accounting. See Our Business Risks and Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. In the first quarter of 2011, Quaker Foods North America (QFNA) changed its method of accounting for certain U.S. inventories from the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method to the average cost method. This change is considered preferable by management as we believe that the average cost method of accounting for all U.S. foods inventories will improve our financial reporting by better matching revenues and expenses and better reflecting the current value of inventory. In addition, the change from the LIFO method to the average cost method will enhance the comparability of QFNA financial results with our other 74 Table of Contents food businesses, as well as with peer companies where the average cost method is widely used. The impact of this change on consolidated net income in the first quarter of 2011 was approximately $9 million (or less than a penny per share). Prior periods were not restated as the impact of the change on previously issued financial statements was not considered material. Raw materials, direct labor and plant overhead, as well as purchasing and receiving costs, costs directly related to production planning, inspection costs and raw material handling facilities, are included in cost of sales. The costs of moving, storing and delivering finished product are included in selling, general and administrative expenses. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are used in determining, among other items, sales incentives accruals, tax reserves, stock-based compensation, pension and retiree medical accruals, useful lives for intangible assets, and future cash flows associated with impairment testing for perpetual brands, goodwill and other long-lived assets. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis using our historical experience, as well as other factors we believe appropriate under the circumstances, such as current economic conditions, and adjust or revise our estimates as circumstances change. As future events and their effect cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. While our North America results are reported on a weekly calendar basis, most of our international operations report on a monthly calendar basis. The following chart details our quarterly reporting schedule in 2011, reflecting the extra week in the fourth quarter this year: Quarter U.S. and Canada International First Quarter 12 weeks January, February Second Quarter 12 weeks March, April and May Third Quarter 12 weeks June, July and August Fourth Quarter 17 weeks September, October, November and December See Our Divisions below and for additional unaudited information on items affecting the comparability of our consolidated results, see Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Tabular dollars are in millions, except per share amounts. All per share amounts reflect common per share amounts, assume dilution unless noted, and are based on unrounded amounts. Certain reclassifications were made to prior years amounts to conform to the 2011 presentation. 75 Table of Contents Our Divisions We manufacture or use contract manufacturers, market and sell a variety of salty, convenient, sweet and grain-based snacks, carbonated and non-carbonated beverages, dairy products and other foods in over 200 countries and territories with our largest operations in North America (United States and Canada), Russia, Mexico and the United Kingdom. Division results are based on how our Chief Executive Officer assesses the performance of and allocates resources to our divisions. For additional unaudited information on our divisions, see Our Operations in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The accounting policies for the divisions are the same as those described in Note 2, except for the following allocation methodologies: stock-based compensation expense; pension and retiree medical expense; and derivatives. Stock-Based Compensation Expense Our divisions are held accountable for stock-based compensation expense and, therefore, this expense is allocated to our divisions as an incremental employee compensation cost. The allocation of stock-based compensation expense in 2011 was approximately 15% to FLNA, 2% to QFNA, 4% to LAF, 31% to PAB, 12% to Europe, 9% to AMEA and 27% to corporate unallocated expenses. We had similar allocations of stock-based compensation expense to our divisions in 2010 and 2009. The expense allocated to our divisions excludes any impact of changes in our assumptions during the year which reflect market conditions over which division management has no control. Therefore, any variances between allocated expense and our actual expense are recognized in corporate unallocated expenses. Pension and Retiree Medical Expense Pension and retiree medical service costs measured at a fixed discount rate, as well as amortization of costs related to certain pension plan amendments and gains and losses due to demographics, including salary experience, are reflected in division results for North American employees. Division results also include interest costs, measured at a fixed discount rate, for retiree medical plans. Interest costs for the pension plans, pension asset returns and the impact of pension funding, and gains and losses other than those due to demographics, are all reflected in corporate unallocated expenses. In addition, corporate unallocated expenses include the difference between the service costs measured at a fixed discount rate (included in division results as noted above) and the total service costs determined using the plans discount rates as disclosed in Note 7. Derivatives We centrally manage commodity derivatives on behalf of our divisions. These commodity derivatives include metals, energy and agricultural products. Certain of these commodity derivatives do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment and are marked to 76 Table of Contents market with the resulting gains and losses recognized in corporate unallocated expenses. These gains and losses are subsequently reflected in division results when the divisions take delivery of the underlying commodity. Therefore, the divisions realize the economic effects of the derivative without experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in corporate unallocated expenses. These derivatives hedge underlying commodity price risk and were not entered into for speculative purposes. Net Revenue Operating Profit (a) 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 FLNA $ 13,322 $ 12,573 $ 12,421 $ 3,621 $ 3,376 $ 3,105 QFNA 2,656 2,656 2,687 797 741 781 LAF 7,156 6,315 5,703 1,078 1,004 904 PAB 22,418 20,401 10,116 3,273 2,776 2,172 Europe (b) 13,560 9,602 7,028 1,210 1,054 948 AMEA 7,392 6,291 5,277 887 708 700 Total division 66,504 57,838 43,232 10,866 9,659 8,610 Corporate Unallocated 53 rd week (18 ) Net impact of mark-to-market on commodity hedges (102 ) 91 274 Merger and integration costs (78 ) (191 ) (49 ) Restructuring and impairment charges (74 ) Venezuela currency devaluation (129 ) Asset write-off (145 ) Foundation contribution (100 ) Other (961 ) (853 ) (791 ) $ 66,504 $ 57,838 $ 43,232 $ 9,633 $ 8,332 $ 8,044 (a) For information on the impact of restructuring, impairment and integration charges on our divisions, see Note 3. (b) Change in net revenue in 2011 relates primarily to our acquisition of WBD. 77 Table of Contents Corporate Corporate includes costs of our corporate headquarters, centrally managed initiatives, such as our ongoing global business transformation initiative and research and development projects, unallocated insurance and benefit programs, foreign exchange transaction gains and losses, certain commodity derivative gains and losses and certain other items. Other Division Information Total Assets Capital Spending 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 FLNA $ 6,120 $ 6,027 $ 6,093 $ 439 $ 515 $ 478 QFNA 1,174 1,217 1,241 43 48 45 LAF 4,731 4,053 3,575 413 370 310 PAB 31,187 31,622 7,670 1,006 973 182 Europe (a) 18,479 13,032 9,471 588 517 370 AMEA 6,048 5,569 4,787 693 610 572 Total division 67,739 61,520 32,837 3,182 3,033 1,957 Corporate (b) 5,143 6,394 3,933 157 220 171 Investments in bottling affiliates 239 3,078 $ 72,882 $ 68,153 $ 39,848 $ 3,339 $ 3,253 $ 2,128 (a) Changes in total assets in 2011 relate primarily to our acquisition of WBD. (b) Corporate assets consist principally of cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, derivative instruments and property, plant and equipment. 78 Table of Contents Amortization of Intangible Assets Depreciation and Other Amortization 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 FLNA $ 7 $ 7 $ 7 $ 458 $ 448 $ 428 QFNA 54 52 48 LAF 10 6 5 238 213 189 PAB 65 56 18 865 749 345 Europe 39 35 22 522 355 236 AMEA 12 13 11 350 294 239 Total division 133 117 63 2,487 2,111 1,485 Corporate 117 99 87 $ 133 $ 117 $ 63 $ 2,604 $ 2,210 $ 1,572 Net Revenue Long-Lived Assets (a) 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 U.S. $ 33,053 $ 30,618 $ 22,446 $ 28,999 $ 28,631 $ 12,496 Russia (b) 4,954 1,890 1,006 8,236 2,744 2,094 Mexico 4,782 4,531 3,210 1,027 1,671 1,044 Canada 3,364 3,081 1,996 3,097 3,133 688 United Kingdom 2,075 1,888 1,826 1,011 1,019 1,358 All other countries 18,276 15,830 12,748 12,050 11,697 8,632 $ 66,504 $ 57,838 $ 43,232 $ 54,420 $ 48,895 $ 26,312 (a) Long-lived assets represent property, plant and equipment, nonamortizable intangible assets, amortizable intangible assets and investments in noncontrolled affiliates. These assets are reported in the country where they are primarily used. (b) Changes in 2011 relate primarily to our acquisition of WBD. 79 Table of Contents Note 2 Our Significant Accounting Policies Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue upon shipment or delivery to our customers based on written sales terms that do not allow for a right of return. However, our policy for DSD and certain chilled products is to remove and replace damaged and out-of-date products from store shelves to ensure that our consumers receive the product quality and freshness that they expect. Similarly, our policy for certain warehouse-distributed products is to replace damaged and out-of-date products. Based on our experience with this practice, we have reserved for anticipated damaged and out-of-date products. For additional unaudited information on our revenue recognition and related policies, including our policy on bad debts, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. We are exposed to concentration of credit risk by our customers, including Wal-Mart. In 2011, Wal-Mart (including Sam s) represented approximately 11% of our total net revenue, including concentrate sales to our independent bottlers which are used in finished goods sold by them to Wal-Mart. We have not experienced credit issues with these customers. Sales Incentives and Other Marketplace Spending We offer sales incentives and discounts through various programs to our customers and consumers. Sales incentives and discounts are accounted for as a reduction of revenue and totaled $34.6 billion in 2011, $29.1 billion in 2010 and $12.9 billion in 2009. While most of these incentive arrangements have terms of no more than one year, certain arrangements, such as fountain pouring rights, may extend beyond one year. Costs incurred to obtain these arrangements are recognized over the shorter of the economic or contractual life, as a reduction of revenue, and the remaining balances of $288 million as of December 31, 2011 and $296 million as of December 25, 2010, are included in current assets and other assets on our balance sheet. For additional unaudited information on our sales incentives, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Other marketplace spending, which includes the costs of advertising and other marketing activities, totaled $3.5 billion in 2011, $3.4 billion in 2010 and $2.8 billion in 2009 and is reported as selling, general and administrative expenses. Included in these amounts were advertising expenses of $1.9 billion in 2011 and 2010 and $1.7 billion in 2009. Deferred advertising costs are not expensed until the year first used and consist of: media and personal service prepayments; promotional materials in inventory; and production costs of future media advertising. Deferred advertising costs of $163 million and $158 million at year-end 2011 and 2010, respectively, are classified as prepaid expenses on our balance sheet. 80 Table of Contents Distribution Costs Distribution costs, including the costs of shipping and handling activities, are reported as selling, general and administrative expenses. Shipping and handling expenses were $9.2 billion in 2011, $7.7 billion in 2010 and $5.6 billion in 2009. Cash Equivalents Cash equivalents are investments with original maturities of three months or less. Software Costs We capitalize certain computer software and software development costs incurred in connection with developing or obtaining computer software for internal use when both the preliminary project stage is completed and it is probable that the software will be used as intended. Capitalized software costs include only (i) external direct costs of materials and services utilized in developing or obtaining computer software, (ii) compensation and related benefits for employees who are directly associated with the software project and (iii) interest costs incurred while developing internal-use computer software. Capitalized software costs are included in property, plant and equipment on our balance sheet and amortized on a straight-line basis when placed into service over the estimated useful lives of the software, which approximate five to ten years. Software amortization totaled $156 million in 2011, $137 million in 2010 and $119 million in 2009. Net capitalized software and development costs were $1.3 billion as of December 31, 2011 and $1.1 billion as of December 25, 2010. Commitments and Contingencies We are subject to various claims and contingencies related to lawsuits, certain taxes and environmental matters, as well as commitments under contractual and other commercial obligations. We recognize liabilities for contingencies and commitments when a loss is probable and estimable. For additional information on our commitments, see Note 9. Research and Development We engage in a variety of research and development activities and continue to invest to accelerate growth in these activities and to drive innovation globally. These activities principally involve the development of new products, improvement in the quality of existing products, improvement and modernization of production processes, and the development and implementation of new technologies to enhance the quality and value of both current and proposed product lines. Consumer research is excluded from research and development costs and included in other marketing costs. Research and development costs were $525 million in 2011, $488 million in 2010 and $414 million in 2009 and are reported within selling, general and administrative expenses. 81 Table of Contents Other Significant Accounting Policies Our other significant accounting policies are disclosed as follows: Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets Note 4, and for additional unaudited information on goodwill and other intangible assets, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Income Taxes Note 5, and for additional unaudited information, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Stock-Based Compensation Note 6. Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans Note 7, and for additional unaudited information, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Financial Instruments Note 10, and for additional unaudited information, see Our Business Risks in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In June 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) amended its accounting guidance on the consolidation of variable interest entities (VIE). Among other things, the new guidance requires a qualitative rather than a quantitative assessment to determine the primary beneficiary of a VIE based on whether the entity (1) has the power to direct matters that most significantly impact the activities of the VIE and (2) has the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. In addition, the amended guidance requires an ongoing reconsideration of the primary beneficiary. The provisions of this guidance were effective as of the beginning of our 2010 fiscal year, and the adoption did not have a material impact on our financial statements. In the second quarter of 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) was signed into law. The PPACA changes the tax treatment related to an existing retiree drug subsidy (RDS) available to sponsors of retiree health benefit plans that provide a benefit that is at least actuarially equivalent to the benefits under Medicare Part D. As a result of the PPACA, RDS payments will effectively become taxable in tax years beginning in 2013, by requiring the amount of the subsidy received to be offset against our deduction for health care expenses. The provisions of the PPACA required us to record the effect of this tax law change beginning in our second quarter of 2010, and consequently we recorded a one-time related tax charge of $41 million in the second quarter of 2010. We continue to evaluate the longer-term impacts of this legislation. In June 2011, the FASB amended its accounting guidance on the presentation of comprehensive income in financial statements to improve the comparability, consistency and transparency of financial reporting and to increase the prominence of items that are recorded in other comprehensive income. The new accounting guidance requires entities 82 Table of Contents to report components of comprehensive income in either (1) a continuous statement of comprehensive income or (2) two separate but consecutive statements. In December 2011, the FASB approved a deferral of the effective date of certain requirements related to the presentation and disclosure of reclassification adjustments from other comprehensive income to net income. The provisions of the retained guidance are effective as of the beginning of our 2012 fiscal year. We do not expect the adoption of this guidance to have a material impact on our financial statements. In September 2011, the FASB issued new accounting guidance that permits an entity to first assess qualitative factors of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit fair value is less than its carrying amount before applying the two-step goodwill impairment test. An entity would continue to perform the historical first step of the impairment test if it fails the qualitative assessment, while no further analysis would be required if it passes. The provisions of the new guidance are effective for our 2012 goodwill impairment test. We are currently evaluating the impact of the new guidance on our financial statements. In September 2011, the FASB amended its guidance regarding the disclosure requirements for employers participating in multiemployer pension and other postretirement benefit plans (multiemployer plans) to improve transparency and increase awareness of the commitments and risks involved with participation in multiemployer plans. The new accounting guidance requires employers participating in multiemployer plans to provide additional quantitative and qualitative disclosures to provide users with more detailed information regarding an employer involvement in multiemployer plans. The provisions of this new guidance were effective as of the beginning of our 2011 fiscal year. We have reviewed our level of participation in multiemployer plans and determined that the impact of adopting this new guidance did not have a material impact on our financial statements. In December 2011, the FASB issued new disclosure requirements that are intended to enhance current disclosures on offsetting financial assets and liabilities. The new disclosures require an entity to disclose both gross and net information about financial instruments eligible for offset on the balance sheet and instruments and transactions subject to an agreement similar to a master netting arrangement. The provisions of the new disclosure requirements are effective as of the beginning of our 2014 fiscal year. We are currently evaluating the impact of the new guidance on our financial statements. Note 3 Restructuring, Impairment and Integration Charges In 2011, we incurred restructuring charges of $383 million ($286 million after-tax or $0.18 per share) in conjunction with our multi-year Productivity Plan. All of these charges were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. The Productivity Plan includes actions in every aspect of our business, that we believe will strengthen our complementary food, snack and beverage businesses by leveraging new technologies and processes across PepsiCo operations, go-to-market and information systems; heightening the focus on best practice sharing across the globe; consolidating manufacturing, warehouse and sales facilities; and implementing simplified organization 83 Table of Contents structures, with wider spans of control and fewer layers of management. The Productivity Plan is expected to enhance PepsiCo cost-competitiveness, provide a source of funding for future brand-building and innovation initiatives, and serve as a financial cushion for potential macroeconomic uncertainty beyond 2012. A summary of our Productivity Plan charges in 2011 is as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Other Costs Total FLNA $ 74 $ 2 $ 76 QFNA 18 18 LAF 46 2 48 PAB 75 6 81 Europe 65 12 77 AMEA 9 9 Corporate 40 34 74 $ 327 $ 56 $ 383 A summary of our Productivity Plan activity in 2011 is as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Other Costs Total 2011 restructuring charges $ 327 $ 56 $ 383 Cash payments (1 ) (29 ) (30 ) Non-cash charges (25 ) (25 ) Liability as of December 31, 2011 $ 301 $ 27 $ 328 In 2011, we incurred merger and integration charges of $329 million ($271 million after-tax or $0.17 per share) related to our acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD, including $112 million recorded in the PAB segment, $123 million recorded in the Europe segment, $78 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses and $16 million recorded in interest expense. All of these net charges, other than the interest expense portion, were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. These charges also include closing costs and advisory fees related to our acquisition of WBD. Substantially all cash payments related to the above charges were made by the end of 2011. In 2010, we incurred merger and integration charges of $799 million related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as advisory fees in connection with our acquisition of WBD. $467 million of these charges were recorded in the PAB segment, $111 million recorded in the Europe segment, $191 million recorded in corporate unallocated expenses and $30 million recorded in interest expense. All of these charges, other than the interest expense portion, were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. The merger and integration charges related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS were incurred to help create a more fully integrated supply chain and go-to-market business model, to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the distribution of our brands and to enhance 84 Table of Contents our revenue growth. These charges also include closing costs, one-time financing costs and advisory fees related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. In addition, we recorded $9 million of merger related charges, representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS, in bottling equity income. Substantially all cash payments related to the above charges were made by the end of 2011. In total, these charges had an after-tax impact of $648 million or $0.40 per share. A summary of our merger and integration activity is as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairment Other Costs Total 2010 merger and integration charges $ 396 $ 132 $ 280 $ 808 Cash payments (114 ) (271 ) (385 ) Non-cash charges (103 ) (132 ) 16 (219 ) Liability as of December 25, 2010 179 25 204 2011 merger and integration charges 146 34 149 329 Cash payments (191 ) (186 ) (377 ) Non-cash charges (88 ) (34 ) 19 (103 ) Liability as of December 31, 2011 $ 46 $ $ 7 $ 53 In 2009, we incurred $50 million of charges related to the merger of PBG and PAS, of which substantially all was paid in 2009. In 2009, we also incurred charges of $36 million ($29 million after-tax or $0.02 per share) in conjunction with our Productivity for Growth program that began in 2008. The program included actions in all divisions of the business, including the closure of six plants, to increase cost competitiveness across the supply chain, upgrade and streamline our product portfolio, and simplify the organization for more effective and timely decision-making. These charges were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. This program was completed in the second quarter of 2009 and substantially all cash payments related to these charges were made by the end of 2010. 85 Table of Contents A summary of our Productivity for Growth charges in 2009 is as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Other Costs Total FLNA $ $ 1 $ 1 QFNA 2 2 LAF 3 3 PAB 6 10 16 Europe 2 2 AMEA 6 6 12 $ 17 $ 19 $ 36 A summary of our Productivity for Growth activity is as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairment Other Costs Total Liability as of December 27, 2008 $ 134 $ $ 64 $ 198 2009 restructuring and impairment charges 17 12 7 36 Cash payments (128 ) (68 ) (196 ) Currency translation (14 ) (12 ) 25 (1 ) Liability as of December 26, 2009 9 28 37 Cash payments (6 ) (25 ) (31 ) Non-cash charges (2 ) (1 ) (3 ) Currency translation (1 ) (1 ) Liability as of December 25, 2010 $ 1 $ $ 1 $ 2 86 Table of Contents Note 4 Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets Average Useful Life 2011 2010 2009 Property, plant and equipment, net Land and improvements 10 34 yrs. $ 1,951 $ 1,976 Buildings and improvements 15 44 7,565 7,054 Machinery and equipment, including fleet and software 5 15 23,798 22,091 Construction in progress 1,826 1,920 35,140 33,041 Accumulated depreciation (15,442 ) (13,983 ) $ 19,698 $ 19,058 Depreciation expense $ 2,476 $ 2,124 $ 1,500 Amortizable intangible assets, net Acquired franchise rights 56 60 $ 916 $ 949 Reacquired franchise rights 1 14 110 110 Brands 5 40 1,417 1,463 Other identifiable intangibles 10 24 777 747 3,220 3,269 Accumulated amortization (1,332 ) (1,244 ) $ 1,888 $ 2,025 Amortization expense $ 133 $ 117 $ 63 Property, plant and equipment is recorded at historical cost. Depreciation and amortization are recognized on a straight-line basis over an asset estimated useful life. Land is not depreciated and construction in progress is not depreciated until ready for service. Amortization of intangible assets for each of the next five years, based on existing intangible assets as of December 31, 2011 and using average 2011 foreign exchange rates, is expected to be $122 million in 2012, $113 million in 2013, $98 million in 2014, $89 million in 2015 and $81 million in 2016. Depreciable and amortizable assets are only evaluated for impairment upon a significant change in the operating or macroeconomic environment. In these circumstances, if an evaluation of the undiscounted cash flows indicates impairment, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value, which is based on discounted future cash flows. Useful lives are periodically evaluated to determine whether events or circumstances have occurred which indicate the need for revision. For additional unaudited information on our policies for amortizable brands, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Nonamortizable Intangible Assets Perpetual brands and goodwill are assessed for impairment at least annually. If the carrying amount of a perpetual brand exceeds its fair value, as determined by its discounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill in the years 87 Table of Contents presented. In connection with the merger and integration of WBD in 2011, we recorded a $14 million impairment charge for discontinued brands. We did not recognize any impairment charges for other nonamortizable intangible assets in 2010. The change in the book value of nonamortizable intangible assets is as follows: Balance, Beginning 2010 Acquisitions Translation and Other Balance, End of 2010 Acquisitions/ (Divestitures) Translation and Other Balance, End of 2011 FLNA Goodwill $ 306 $ $ 7 $ 313 $ $ (2 ) $ 311 Brands 30 1 31 (1 ) 30 336 8 344 (3 ) 341 QFNA Goodwill 175 175 175 LAF Goodwill 479 18 497 331 (35 ) 793 Brands 136 7 143 20 (6 ) 157 615 25 640 351 (41 ) 950 PAB (a) Goodwill 2,431 7,476 39 9,946 (27 ) 13 9,932 Reacquired franchise rights 7,229 54 7,283 77 (18 ) 7,342 Acquired franchise rights 660 905 (b) 1,565 (1 ) (2 ) 1,562 Brands 112 66 4 182 (20 ) 6 168 Other 10 10 (9 ) (1 ) 2,543 15,441 1,002 18,986 20 (2 ) 19,004 Europe (a) (c) Goodwill 2,625 583 (168 ) 3,040 2,131 (271 ) 4,900 Reacquired franchise rights 810 (17 ) 793 (61 ) 732 Acquired franchise rights 232 (5 ) 227 (9 ) 218 Brands 1,378 88 (86 ) 1,380 3,114 (316 ) 4,178 4,003 1,713 (276 ) 5,440 5,245 (657 ) 10,028 AMEA Goodwill 518 116 56 690 (1 ) 689 Brands 126 26 17 169 1 170 644 142 73 859 859 Total goodwill 6,534 8,175 (48 ) 14,661 2,435 (296 ) 16,800 Total reacquired franchise rights 8,039 37 8,076 77 (79 ) 8,074 Total acquired franchise rights 892 900 1,792 (1 ) (11 ) 1,780 Total brands 1,782 180 (57 ) 1,905 3,114 (316 ) 4,703 Total other 10 10 (9 ) (1 ) $ 8,316 $ 17,296 $ 832 $ 26,444 $ 5,616 $ (703 ) $ 31,357 (a) Net increases in 2010 relate primarily to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS. (b) Includes $900 million related to our upfront payment to DPSG to manufacture and distribute Dr Pepper and certain other DPSG products. (c) Net increases in 2011 relate primarily to our acquisition of WBD. 88 Table of Contents Note 5 Income Taxes 2011 2010 2009 Income before income taxes U.S. $ 3,964 $ 4,008 $ 4,209 Foreign 4,870 4,224 3,870 $ 8,834 $ 8,232 $ 8,079 Provision for income taxes Current: U.S. Federal $ 611 $ 932 $ 1,238 Foreign 882 728 473 State 124 137 124 1,617 1,797 1,835 Deferred: U.S. Federal 789 78 223 Foreign (88 ) 18 21 State 54 1 21 755 97 265 $ 2,372 $ 1,894 $ 2,100 Tax rate reconciliation U.S. Federal statutory tax rate 35.0 % 35.0 % 35.0 % State income tax, net of U.S. Federal tax benefit 1.3 1.1 1.2 Lower taxes on foreign results (8.7 ) (9.4 ) (7.9 ) Acquisitions of PBG and PAS (3.1 ) Other, net (0.8 ) (0.6 ) (2.3 ) Annual tax rate 26.8 % 23.0 % 26.0 % Deferred tax liabilities Investments in noncontrolled affiliates $ 41 $ 74 Debt guarantee of wholly owned subsidiary 828 828 Property, plant and equipment 2,466 1,984 Intangible assets other than nondeductible goodwill 4,297 3,726 Other 184 647 Gross deferred tax liabilities 7,816 7,259 Deferred tax assets Net carryforwards 1,373 1,264 Stock-based compensation 429 455 Retiree medical benefits 504 579 Other employee-related benefits 695 527 Pension benefits 545 291 Deductible state tax and interest benefits 339 320 Long-term debt obligations acquired 223 291 Other 822 904 Gross deferred tax assets 4,930 4,631 Valuation allowances (1,264 ) (875 ) Deferred tax assets, net 3,666 3,756 Net deferred tax liabilities $ 4,150 $ 3,503 89 Table of Contents 2011 2010 2009 Deferred taxes included within: Assets: Prepaid expenses and other current assets $ 845 $ 554 Liabilities: Deferred income taxes $ 4,995 $ 4,057 Analysis of valuation allowances Balance, beginning of year $ 875 $ 586 $ 657 Provision/(Benefit) 464 75 (78 ) Other (deductions)/additions (75 ) 214 7 Balance, end of year $ 1,264 $ 875 $ 586 For additional unaudited information on our income tax policies, including our reserves for income taxes, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Reserves A number of years may elapse before a particular matter, for which we have established a reserve, is audited and finally resolved. The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. Our major taxing jurisdictions and the related open tax audits are as follows: U.S. during 2011, our tax court trial related to classification of financial instruments was completed for the 1998-2002 audit cycle. We are currently awaiting a decision by the judge. We continue to dispute with the IRS Appeals Division three matters related to the 2003-2005 audit cycle. During 2011, all but three issues, which are currently under review by the IRS Appeals Division, were resolved for tax years 2006-2007. We are currently under audit for tax years 2008-2009; Mexico audits have been completed for all taxable years through 2005. We are currently under audit for 2006; United Kingdom audits have been completed for all taxable years through 2007; Canada domestic audits have been substantially completed for all taxable years through 2007. International audits have been completed for all taxable years through 2005; and Russia audits have been substantially completed for all taxable years through 2008. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular tax matter, we believe that our reserves reflect the probable outcome of known tax contingencies. We adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest, in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular issue would usually require the use of cash. Favorable resolution would be recognized as a reduction to our annual tax rate in the year of resolution. For further unaudited information on the impact of the resolution of open tax issues, see Other Consolidated Results. 90 Table of Contents As of December 31, 2011, the total gross amount of reserves for income taxes, reported in other liabilities, was $2,167 million. Any prospective adjustments to these reserves will be recorded as an increase or decrease to our provision for income taxes and would impact our effective tax rate. In addition, we accrue interest related to reserves for income taxes in our provision for income taxes and any associated penalties are recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. The gross amount of interest accrued, reported in other liabilities, was $660 million as of December 31, 2011, of which $90 million was recognized in 2011. The gross amount of interest accrued was $570 million as of December 25, 2010, of which $135 million was recognized in 2010. A rollforward of our reserves for all federal, state and foreign tax jurisdictions, is as follows: 2011 2010 Balance, beginning of year $ 2,022 $ 1,731 Additions for tax positions related to the current year 233 204 Additions for tax positions from prior years 147 517 Reductions for tax positions from prior years (46 ) (391 ) Settlement payments (156 ) (30 ) Statute of limitations expiration (15 ) (7 ) Translation and other (18 ) (2 ) Balance, end of year $ 2,167 $ 2,022 Carryforwards and Allowances Operating loss carryforwards totaling $10.0 billion at year-end 2011 are being carried forward in a number of foreign and state jurisdictions where we are permitted to use tax operating losses from prior periods to reduce future taxable income. These operating losses will expire as follows: $0.1 billion in 2012, $8.2 billion between 2013 and 2031 and $1.7 billion may be carried forward indefinitely. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Undistributed International Earnings As of December 31, 2011, we had approximately $34.1 billion of undistributed international earnings. We intend to continue to reinvest earnings outside the U.S. for the foreseeable future and, therefore, have not recognized any U.S. tax expense on these earnings. Note 6 Stock-Based Compensation Our stock-based compensation program is designed to attract and retain employees while also aligning employees interests with the interests of our shareholders. Stock options and restricted stock units (RSU) are granted to employees under the shareholder-approved 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan (LTIP), the only stock-based plan under which we currently grant stock options and 91 Table of Contents RSUs. Stock-based compensation expense was $343 million in 2011, $352 million in 2010 and $227 million in 2009. In 2011, $326 million was recorded as stock-based compensation expense, $13 million was included in merger and integration charges and $4 million was included in restructuring charges. In 2010, $299 million was recorded as stock-based compensation expense and $53 million was included in merger and integration charges. $86 million of the $352 million recorded in 2010 was related to the unvested acquisition-related grants described below. Income tax benefits related to stock-based compensation expense and recognized in earnings were $101 million in 2011, $89 million in 2010 and $67 million in 2009. At year-end 2011, 136 million shares were available for future stock-based compensation grants. In connection with our acquisition of PBG in 2010, we issued 13.4 million stock options and 2.7 million RSUs at weighted-average grant prices of $42.89 and $62.30, respectively, to replace previously held PBG equity awards. In connection with our acquisition of PAS in 2010, we issued 0.4 million stock options at a weighted-average grant price of $31.72 to replace previously held PAS equity awards. Our equity issuances included 8.3 million stock options and 0.6 million RSUs which were vested at the acquisition date and were included in the purchase price. The remaining 5.5 million stock options and 2.1 million RSUs issued were unvested at the issuance date and are being amortized over their remaining vesting period, up to 3 years from the issuance date. As a result of our annual benefits review in 2010, the Company approved certain changes to our benefits programs to remain market competitive relative to other leading global companies. These changes included ending the Company broad-based SharePower stock option program. Consequently, beginning in 2011, no new awards were granted under the SharePower program. Outstanding SharePower awards from 2010 and earlier continue to vest and are exercisable according to the terms and conditions of the program. See Note 7 for additional information regarding other related changes. Method of Accounting and Our Assumptions We account for our employee stock options under the fair value method of accounting using a Black-Scholes valuation model to measure stock option expense at the date of grant. All stock option grants have an exercise price equal to the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant and generally have a 10-year term. We do not backdate, reprice or grant stock-based compensation awards retroactively. Repricing of awards would require shareholder approval under the LTIP. The fair value of stock option grants is amortized to expense over the vesting period, generally three years. Executives who are awarded long-term incentives based on their performance are generally offered the choice of stock options or RSUs. Executives who elect RSUs receive one RSU for every four stock options that would have otherwise been granted. Senior officers do not have a choice and, through 2011, are granted 50% stock options and 50% performance-based RSUs. Beginning in 2012, senior officers will be granted 60% market stock units and 40% long-term cash awards, each of which will be subject to pre-established performance targets. Vesting of RSU awards for senior officers is contingent upon the achievement of pre-established performance targets approved by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors. RSU expense is based on the fair value of PepsiCo stock on the date of grant and is amortized over the vesting period, generally three years. Each RSU is settled in a share of our stock after the vesting period. 92 Table of Contents Our weighted-average Black-Scholes fair value assumptions are as follows: 2011 2010 2009 Expected life 6 yrs. 5 yrs. 6 yrs. Risk-free interest rate 2.5% 2.3% 2.8% Expected volatility 16% 17% 17% Expected dividend yield 2.9% 2.8% 3.0% The expected life is the period over which our employee groups are expected to hold their options. It is based on our historical experience with similar grants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the expected U.S. Treasury rate over the expected life. Volatility reflects movements in our stock price over the most recent historical period equivalent to the expected life. Dividend yield is estimated over the expected life based on our stated dividend policy and forecasts of net income, share repurchases and stock price. A summary of our stock-based compensation activity for the year ended December 31, 2011 is presented below: Our Stock Option Activity Options (a) Average Price (b) Average Life (years) (c) Aggregate Intrinsic Value (d) Outstanding at December 25, 2010 106,203 $ 54.03 Granted 7,150 $ 64.31 Exercised (19,980 ) $ 47.74 Forfeited/expired (2,298 ) $ 65.73 Outstanding at December 31, 2011 91,075 $ 55.92 5.07 $ 932,748 Exercisable at December 31, 2011 58,708 $ 53.86 4.94 $ 725,781 (a) Options are in thousands and include options previously granted under PBG, PAS and Quaker legacy plans. No additional options or shares may be granted under the PBG, PAS and Quaker plans. (b) Weighted-average exercise price. (c) Weighted-average contractual life remaining. (d) In thousands. 93 Table of Contents Our RSU Activity RSUs (a) Average Intrinsic Value (b) Average Life (years) (c) Aggregate Intrinsic Value (d) Outstanding at December 25, 2010 10,662 $ 63.27 Granted 5,333 $ 63.87 Converted (2,610 ) $ 65.81 Forfeited/expired (1,045 ) $ 63.71 Outstanding at December 31, 2011 12,340 $ 62.96 1.57 $ 818,776 (a) RSUs are in thousands and include RSUs previously granted under a PBG plan. No additional RSUs or shares may be granted under the PBG plan. (b) Weighted-average intrinsic value at grant date. (c) Weighted-average contractual life remaining. (d) In thousands. Other Stock-Based Compensation Data 2011 2010 2009 Stock Options Weighted-average fair value of options granted $ 7.79 $ 13.93 $ 7.02 Total intrinsic value of options exercised (a) $ 385,678 $ 502,354 $ 194,545 RSUs Total number of RSUs granted (a) 5,333 8,326 2,653 Weighted-average intrinsic value of RSUs granted $ 63.87 $ 65.01 $ 53.22 Total intrinsic value of RSUs converted (a) $ 173,433 $ 202,717 $ 124,193 (a) In thousands. As of December 31, 2011, there was $436 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested share-based compensation grants. This unrecognized compensation is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of two years. Note 7 Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans Our pension plans cover certain full-time employees in the U.S. and certain international employees. Benefits are determined based on either years of service or a combination of years of service and earnings. Certain U.S. and Canada retirees are also eligible for medical and life insurance benefits (retiree medical) if they meet age and service requirements. Generally, our share of retiree medical costs is capped at specified dollar amounts, which vary based upon years of service, with retirees contributing the remainder of the costs. 94 Table of Contents Gains and losses resulting from actual experience differing from our assumptions, including the difference between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets, and from changes in our assumptions are determined at each measurement date. If this net accumulated gain or loss exceeds 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or plan liabilities, a portion of the net gain or loss is included in expense for the following year based upon the average remaining service period of active plan participants, which is approximately 10 years for pension expense and approximately 8 years for retiree medical expense. The cost or benefit of plan changes that increase or decrease benefits for prior employee service (prior service cost/(credit)) is included in earnings on a straight-line basis over the average remaining service period of active plan participants. In connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we assumed sponsorship of pension and retiree medical plans that provide benefits to certain U.S. and international employees. Subsequently, during the third quarter of 2010, we merged the pension plan assets of the legacy PBG and PAS U.S. pension plans with those of PepsiCo into one master trust. During 2010, the Compensation Committee of PepsiCo Board of Directors approved certain changes to the U.S. pension and retiree medical plans, effective January 1, 2011. Pension plan design changes included implementing a new employer contribution to the 401(k) savings plan for all future salaried new hires of the Company, as salaried new hires are no longer eligible to participate in the defined benefit pension plan, as well as implementing a new defined benefit pension formula for certain hourly new hires of the Company. Pension plan design changes also included implementing a new employer contribution to the 401(k) savings plan for certain legacy PBG and PAS salaried employees (as such employees are also not eligible to participate in the defined benefit pension plan), as well as implementing a new defined benefit pension formula for certain legacy PBG and PAS hourly employees. The retiree medical plan design change included phasing out Company subsidies of retiree medical benefits. As a result of these changes, we remeasured our pension and retiree medical expenses and liabilities in the third quarter of 2010, which resulted in a one-time pre-tax curtailment gain of $62 million included in retiree medical expenses. The provisions of both the PPACA and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act are reflected in our retiree medical expenses and liabilities and were not material to our financial statements. 95 Table of Contents Selected financial information for our pension and retiree medical plans is as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 Change in projected benefit liability Liability at beginning of year $ 9,851 $ 6,606 $ 2,142 $ 1,709 $ 1,770 $ 1,359 Acquisitions/(divestitures) 11 2,161 (63 ) 90 396 Service cost 350 299 95 81 51 54 Interest cost 547 506 117 106 88 93 Plan amendments 21 28 (16 ) 3 (132 ) Participant contributions 3 3 Experience loss/(gain) 1,484 583 224 213 (239 ) 95 Benefit payments (414 ) (375 ) (69 ) (69 ) (110 ) (100 ) Settlement/curtailment gain (20 ) (2 ) (15 ) (3 ) Special termination benefits 71 45 1 3 1 3 Foreign currency adjustment (41 ) (18 ) (1 ) 2 Other 3 27 Liability at end of year $ 11,901 $ 9,851 $ 2,381 $ 2,142 $ 1,563 $ 1,770 Change in fair value of plan assets Fair value at beginning of year $ 8,870 $ 5,420 $ 1,896 $ 1,561 $ 190 $ 13 Acquisitions/(divestitures) 11 1,633 (1 ) 52 Actual return on plan assets 542 943 79 164 7 Employer contributions/funding 63 1,249 176 215 110 270 Participant contributions 3 3 Benefit payments (414 ) (375 ) (69 ) (69 ) (110 ) (100 ) Settlement (30 ) (2 ) Foreign currency adjustment (23 ) (28 ) Fair value at end of year $ 9,072 $ 8,870 $ 2,031 $ 1,896 $ 190 $ 190 Funded status $ (2,829 ) $ (981 ) $ (350 ) $ (246 ) $ (1,373 ) $ (1,580 ) 96 Table of Contents Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 Amounts recognized Other assets $ $ 47 $ 55 $ 66 $ $ Other current liabilities (91 ) (54 ) (1 ) (10 ) (124 ) (145 ) Other liabilities (2,738 ) (974 ) (404 ) (302 ) (1,249 ) (1,435 ) Net amount recognized $ (2,829 ) $ (981 ) $ (350 ) $ (246 ) $ (1,373 ) $ (1,580 ) Amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive loss (pre-tax) Net loss $ 4,217 $ 2,726 $ 977 $ 767 $ 32 $ 270 Prior service cost/(credit) 122 117 (2 ) 17 (118 ) (150 ) Total $ 4,339 $ 2,843 $ 975 $ 784 $ (86 ) $ 120 Components of the increase/(decrease) in net loss Change in discount rate $ 1,710 $ 556 $ 302 $ 213 $ 115 $ 101 Employee-related assumption changes (140 ) 4 (51 ) (4 ) (125 ) 8 Liability-related experience different from assumptions (85 ) 43 (27 ) 5 (210 ) (22 ) Actual asset return different from expected return 162 (300 ) 57 (41 ) 14 (6 ) Amortization of losses (147 ) (119 ) (55 ) (24 ) (12 ) (9 ) Other, including foreign currency adjustments (9 ) (21 ) (16 ) (7 ) (20 ) 8 Total $ 1,491 $ 163 $ 210 $ 142 $ (238 ) $ 80 Liability at end of year for service to date $ 11,205 $ 9,163 $ 1,921 $ 1,743 The components of benefit expense are as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 Components of benefit expense Service cost $ 350 $ 299 $ 238 $ 95 $ 81 $ 54 $ 51 $ 54 $ 44 Interest cost 547 506 373 117 106 82 88 93 82 Expected return on plan assets (704 ) (643 ) (462 ) (136 ) (123 ) (105 ) (14 ) (1 ) Amortization of prior service cost/(credit) 14 12 12 2 2 2 (28 ) (22 ) (17 ) Amortization of net loss 145 119 110 40 24 9 12 9 11 352 293 271 118 90 42 109 133 120 Settlement/curtailment (gain)/loss (8 ) (2 ) (13 ) 30 1 3 (62 ) Special termination benefits 71 45 1 3 1 3 Total $ 415 $ 336 $ 258 $ 149 $ 94 $ 45 $ 110 $ 74 $ 120 97 Table of Contents The estimated amounts to be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into benefit expense in 2012 for our pension and retiree medical plans are as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International Net loss $ 259 $ 52 $ Prior service cost/(credit) 17 1 (26 ) Total $ 276 $ 53 $ (26 ) The following table provides the weighted-average assumptions used to determine projected benefit liability and benefit expense for our pension and retiree medical plans: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 Weighted-average assumptions Liability discount rate 4.6 % 5.7 % 6.1 % 4.8 % 5.5 % 5.9 % 4.4 % 5.2 % 6.1 % Expense discount rate 5.7 % 6.0 % 6.2 % 5.5 % 6.0 % 6.3 % 5.2 % 5.8 % 6.2 % Expected return on plan assets 7.8 % 7.8 % 7.8 % 6.7 % 7.1 % 7.1 % 7.8 % 7.8 % Liability rate of salary increases 3.7 % 4.1 % 4.4 % 4.1 % 4.1 % 4.1 % Expense rate of salary increases 4.1 % 4.4 % 4.4 % 4.1 % 4.1 % 4.2 % The following table provides selected information about plans with liability for service to date and total benefit liability in excess of plan assets: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 Selected information for plans with liability for service to date in excess of plan assets Liability for service to date $ (11,205 ) $ (525 ) $ (471 ) $ (610 ) Fair value of plan assets $ 9,072 $ $ 344 $ 474 Selected information for plans with projected benefit liability in excess of plan assets Benefit liability $ (11,901 ) $ (5,806 ) $ (2,191 ) $ (1,949 ) $ (1,563 ) $ (1,770 ) Fair value of plan assets $ 9,072 $ 4,778 $ 1,786 $ 1,638 $ 190 $ 190 Of the total projected pension benefit liability at year-end 2011, $787 million relates to plans that we do not fund because the funding of such plans does not receive favorable tax treatment. 98 Table of Contents Future Benefit Payments and Funding Our estimated future benefit payments are as follows: 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017-21 Pension $ 560 $ 560 $ 560 $ 600 $ 645 $ 4,050 Retiree medical (a) $ 135 $ 135 $ 140 $ 145 $ 145 $ 730 (a) Expected future benefit payments for our retiree medical plans do not reflect any estimated subsidies expected to be received under the 2003 Medicare Act. Subsidies are expected to be approximately $13 million for each of the years from 2012 through 2016 and approximately $100 million in total for 2017 through 2021. These future benefits to beneficiaries include payments from both funded and unfunded pension plans. In 2012, we expect to make pension and retiree medical contributions of approximately $1.3 billion, with up to approximately $1 billion expected to be discretionary. Our net cash payments for retiree medical are estimated to be approximately $124 million in 2012. Plan Assets Pension Our pension plan investment strategy includes the use of actively managed securities and is reviewed periodically in conjunction with plan liabilities, an evaluation of market conditions, tolerance for risk and cash requirements for benefit payments. Our investment objective is to ensure that funds are available to meet the plans benefit obligations when they become due. Our overall investment strategy is to prudently invest plan assets in a well-diversified portfolio of equity and high-quality debt securities to achieve our long-term return expectations. Our investment policy also permits the use of derivative instruments which are primarily used to reduce risk. Our expected long-term rate of return on U.S. plan assets is 7.8%. Our 2011 target investment allocation was 40% for U.S. equity, 20% for international equity and 40% for fixed income. For 2012, our target allocations are as follows: 40% for fixed income, 33% for U.S. equity, 22% for international equity and 5% for real estate. The change to the 2012 target asset allocations was made to increase diversification. Actual investment allocations may vary from our target investment allocations due to prevailing market conditions. We regularly review our actual investment allocations and periodically rebalance our investments to our target allocations. The expected return on pension plan assets is based on our pension plan investment strategy, our expectations for long-term rates of return by asset class taking into account volatility and correlation among asset classes and our historical experience. We also review current levels of interest rates and inflation to assess the reasonableness of the long-term rates. We evaluate our expected return assumptions annually to ensure that they are reasonable. To calculate the expected return on pension plan assets, our market-related value of assets for fixed income is the actual fair value. For all other asset categories, we use a method that recognizes investment gains or losses (the difference between the expected and actual return based on the market-related value of assets) over a five-year period. This has the effect of reducing year-to-year volatility. 99 Table of Contents Retiree Medical In 2011 and 2010, we made non-discretionary contributions of $110 million and $100 million, respectively, to fund the payment of retiree medical claims. In 2010, we made a discretionary contribution of $170 million to fund future U.S. retiree medical plan benefits. This contribution was invested consistent with the allocation of existing assets in the U.S. pension plan. Fair Value The guidance on fair value measurements defines fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value, and expands disclosures about fair value measurements. The fair value framework requires the categorization of assets and liabilities into three levels based upon the assumptions (inputs) used to price the assets. Level 1 provides the most reliable measure of fair value, whereas Level 3 generally requires significant management judgment. 100 Table of Contents Plan assets measured at fair value as of fiscal year-end 2011 and 2010 are categorized consistently by level in both years, and are as follows: 2011 2010 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total U.S. plan assets * Equity securities: U.S. common stock (a) $ 514 $ 514 $ $ $ 304 U.S. commingled funds (b) 3,003 3,003 3,426 International common stock (a) 1,089 1,089 834 International commingled fund (c) 776 776 992 Preferred stock (d) 19 19 4 Fixed income securities: Government securities (d) 1,032 1,032 950 Corporate bonds (d) (e) 2,653 2,653 2,374 Mortgage-backed securities (d) 24 24 20 Other: Contracts with insurance companies (f) 24 24 28 Cash and cash equivalents 78 78 81 Sub-total U.S. plan assets 9,212 $ 1,681 $ 7,507 $ 24 9,013 Dividends and interest receivable 50 47 Total U.S. plan assets $ 9,262 $ 9,060 International plan assets Equity securities: U.S. commingled funds (b) $ 246 $ $ 246 $ $ 193 International commingled funds (c) 729 729 779 Fixed income securities: Government securities (d) 171 171 184 Corporate bonds (d) 196 196 152 Fixed income commingled funds (g) 530 530 393 Other: Contracts with insurance companies (f) 30 30 28 Currency commingled funds (h) 52 52 42 Other commingled fund (i) 56 56 Cash and cash equivalents 16 16 120 Sub-total international plan assets 2,026 $ 16 $ 1,980 $ 30 1,891 Dividends and interest receivable 5 5 Total international plan assets $ 2,031 $ 1,896 (a) Based on quoted market prices in active markets. (b) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds that track various U.S. large, mid-cap and small company indices. Includes one large-cap fund that represents 30% and 32%, respectively, of total U.S. plan assets for 2011 and 2010. (c) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds that track various non-U.S. equity indices. (d) Based on quoted bid prices for comparable securities in the marketplace and broker/dealer quotes that are not observable. (e) Corporate bonds of U.S.-based companies represent 24% and 22%, respectively, of total U.S. plan assets for 2011 and 2010. (f) Based on the fair value of the contracts as determined by the insurance companies using inputs that are not observable. (g) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds that track various government and corporate bond indices. (h) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds. Includes managed hedge funds that invest primarily in derivatives to reduce currency exposure. (i) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by this fund that tracks various indices. * 2011 and 2010 amounts include $190 million of retiree medical plan assets that are restricted for purposes of providing health benefits for U.S. retirees and their beneficiaries. 101 Table of Contents Retiree Medical Cost Trend Rates An average increase of 7% in the cost of covered retiree medical benefits is assumed for 2012. This average increase is then projected to decline gradually to 5% in 2020 and thereafter. These assumed health care cost trend rates have an impact on the retiree medical plan expense and liability. However, the cap on our share of retiree medical costs limits the impact. In addition, as of January 1, 2011, the Company started phasing out Company subsidies of retiree medical benefits. A 1-percentage-point change in the assumed health care trend rate would have the following effects: 1% Increase 1% Decrease 2011 service and interest cost components $ 4 $ (4 ) 2011 benefit liability $ 39 $ (29 ) Savings Plan Certain U.S. employees are eligible to participate in 401(k) savings plans, which are voluntary defined contribution plans. The plans are designed to help employees accumulate additional savings for retirement, and we make Company matching contributions on a portion of eligible pay based on years of service. In 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we also made Company retirement contributions for certain employees on a portion of eligible pay based on years of service. As of January 1, 2011, a new employer contribution to the 401(k) savings plan became effective for certain eligible legacy PBG and PAS salaried employees as well as all eligible salaried new hires of PepsiCo who are not eligible to participate in the defined benefit pension plan as a result of plan design changes approved during 2010. In 2011 and 2010, our total Company contributions were $144 million and $135 million, respectively. As of February 2012, certain U.S. employees earning a benefit under one of our defined benefit pension plans will no longer be eligible for the Company matching contributions on their 401(k) contributions. For additional unaudited information on our pension and retiree medical plans and related accounting policies and assumptions, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Note 8 Related Party Transactions On February 26, 2010, we completed our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, at which time we gained control over their operations and began to consolidate their results. See Notes 1 and 15. Prior to these acquisitions, PBG and PAS represented our most significant noncontrolled bottling affiliates. Sales to PBG in 2010 (prior to the acquisition date) represented less than 1% of our total net revenue in 2010 and 6% of our total net revenue in 2009. 102 Table of Contents PBG and PAS summarized income statements for 2009 are as follows: PBG PAS Net revenue $ 13,219 $ 4,421 Gross profit $ 5,840 $ 1,767 Operating income $ 1,048 $ 381 Net income attributable to parent $ 612 $ 181 Prior to the completion of our acquisitions of PBG and PAS on February 26, 2010, our significant related party transactions were primarily with PBG and PAS, as well as with other noncontrolled bottling affiliates. Related party transactions in 2011 are not material as we now consolidate PBG and PAS. All such transactions were settled on terms consistent with other trade receivables and payables. The transactions primarily consisted of (1) selling concentrate to these affiliates, which they use in the production of CSDs and non-carbonated beverages, (2) selling certain finished goods to these affiliates, (3) receiving royalties for the use of our trademarks for certain products and (4) paying these affiliates to act as our manufacturing and distribution agent for product associated with our national account fountain customers. Sales of concentrate and finished goods are reported net of bottler funding. For further unaudited information on these bottlers, see Our Customers in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. These transactions with our bottling affiliates are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as follows: 2010 (a) 2009 Net revenue $ 993 $ 3,922 Cost of sales $ 116 $ 634 Selling, general and administrative expenses $ 6 $ 24 Accounts and notes receivable $ 27 Accounts payable and other liabilities $ 42 (a) Includes transactions with PBG and PAS in 2010 prior to the date of acquisition. 2010 balance sheet information for PBG and PAS is not applicable as we consolidated their balance sheets at the date of acquisition. We also coordinate, on an aggregate basis, the contract negotiations of sweeteners and other raw material requirements, including aluminum cans and plastic bottles and closures for certain of our independent bottlers. Once we have negotiated the contracts, the bottlers order and take delivery directly from the supplier and pay the suppliers directly. Consequently, these transactions are not reflected in our consolidated financial statements. As the contracting party, we could be liable to these suppliers in the event of any nonpayment by our bottlers, but we consider this exposure to be remote. In addition, our joint ventures with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name) and Starbucks sell finished goods (ready-to-drink teas, coffees and water products) to our noncontrolled bottling affiliates. Consistent with accounting for equity method investments, our joint venture revenue is not included in our consolidated net revenue and therefore is not included in the above table. In 2010, we repurchased $357 million (5.5 million shares) of PepsiCo stock from the Master Trust which holds assets of PepsiCo U.S. qualified pension plans at market value. 103 Table of Contents Note 9 Debt Obligations and Commitments 2011 2010 Short-term debt obligations Current maturities of long-term debt $ 2,549 $ 1,626 Commercial paper (0.1% and 0.2%) 2,973 2,632 Other borrowings (7.6% and 5.3%) 683 640 $ 6,205 $ 4,898 Long-term debt obligations Notes due 2011 (4.4%) $ $ 1,513 Notes due 2012 (3.0% and 3.1%) 2,353 2,437 Notes due 2013 (2.3% and 3.0%) 2,841 2,110 Notes due 2014 (4.6% and 5.3%) 3,335 2,888 Notes due 2015 (2.3% and 2.6%) 1,632 1,617 Notes due 2016 (3.9% and 5.5%) 1,876 875 Notes due 2017-2040 (4.8% and 4.9%) 10,806 9,953 Other, due 2012-2020 (9.9% and 9.8%) 274 232 23,117 21,625 Less: current maturities of long-term debt obligations (2,549 ) (1,626 ) Total $ 20,568 $ 19,999 The interest rates in the above table reflect weighted-average rates at year-end. In the second quarter of 2011, we issued: $750 million of floating rate notes maturing in 2013, which bear interest at a rate equal to the three-month London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (LIBOR) plus 8 basis points; and $1.0 billion of 2.500% senior notes maturing in 2016. In the third quarter of 2011, we issued: $500 million of 0.800% senior notes maturing in 2014; and $750 million of 3.000% senior notes maturing in 2021. The net proceeds from the issuances of all the above notes were used for general corporate purposes. In the third quarter of 2011, we entered into a new four-year unsecured revolving credit agreement (Four-Year Credit Agreement) which expires in June 2015. Effective August 8, 2011, commitments under this agreement were increased to enable us to borrow up to $2.925 billion, subject to customary terms and conditions. We may request that commitments under this agreement be increased up to $3.5 billion. Additionally, we may, once a year, request renewal of the agreement for an additional one-year period. Also, in the third quarter of 2011, we entered into a new 364-day unsecured revolving credit agreement (364-Day Credit Agreement) which expires in June 2012. Effective August 8, 2011, commitments under this agreement were increased to enable us to borrow up to $2.925 billion, subject to customary terms and conditions. We may request that commitments under this 104 Table of Contents agreement be increased up to $3.5 billion. We may request renewal of this facility for an additional 364-day period or convert any amounts outstanding into a term loan for a period of up to one year, which would mature no later than June 2013. The Four-Year Credit Agreement and the 364-Day Credit Agreement, together replaced our $2 billion unsecured revolving credit agreement, our $2.575 billion 364-day unsecured revolving credit agreement and our $1.080 billion amended PBG credit facility. Funds borrowed under the Four-Year Credit Agreement and the 364-Day Credit Agreement may be used for general corporate purposes, including but not limited to repayment of outstanding commercial paper issued by us and our subsidiaries, working capital, capital investments and/or acquisitions. In the third quarter of 2011, we paid $784 million in a cash tender offer to repurchase $766 million (aggregate principal amount) of certain WBD debt obligations. As a result of this debt repurchase, we recorded a $16 million charge to interest expense (included in merger and integration charges) in the third quarter, primarily representing the premium paid in the tender offer. In addition, as of December 31, 2011, $848 million of our debt related to borrowings from various lines of credit that are primarily maintained for our international divisions. These lines of credit are subject to normal banking terms and conditions and are fully committed at least to the extent of our borrowings. Long-Term Contractual Commitments (a) Payments Due by Period Total 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 and beyond Long-term debt obligations (b) $ 19,738 $ $ 6,084 $ 3,451 $ 10,203 Interest on debt obligations (c) 7,445 852 1,394 1,091 4,108 Operating leases 1,825 423 598 337 467 Purchasing commitments 2,434 1,113 957 302 62 Marketing commitments 2,519 240 589 535 1,155 $ 33,961 $ 2,628 $ 9,622 $ 5,716 $ 15,995 (a) Reflects non-cancelable commitments as of December 31, 2011 based on year-end foreign exchange rates and excludes any reserves for uncertain tax positions as we are unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount or timing of settlement. (b) Excludes $2,549 million related to current maturities of long-term debt, $470 million related to the fair value step-up of debt acquired in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS and $360 million related to the increase in carrying value of long-term debt representing the gains on our fair value interest rate swaps. (c) Interest payments on floating-rate debt are estimated using interest rates effective as of December 31, 2011. 105 Table of Contents Most long-term contractual commitments, except for our long-term debt obligations, are not recorded on our balance sheet. Non-cancelable operating leases primarily represent building leases. Non-cancelable purchasing commitments are primarily for sugar and other sweeteners, packaging materials, oranges and orange juice. Non-cancelable marketing commitments are primarily for sports marketing. Bottler funding to independent bottlers is not reflected in our long-term contractual commitments as it is negotiated on an annual basis. Accrued liabilities for pension and retiree medical plans are not reflected in our long-term contractual commitments because they do not represent expected future cash outflows. See Note 7 for additional information regarding our pension and retiree medical obligations. Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements It is not our business practice to enter into off-balance-sheet arrangements, other than in the normal course of business. See Note 8 regarding contracts related to certain of our bottlers. See Our Liquidity and Capital Resources in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further unaudited information on our borrowings. Note 10 Financial Instruments We are exposed to market risks arising from adverse changes in: commodity prices, affecting the cost of our raw materials and energy, foreign exchange risks, and interest rates. In the normal course of business, we manage these risks through a variety of strategies, including the use of derivatives. Certain derivatives are designated as either cash flow or fair value hedges and qualify for hedge accounting treatment, while others do not qualify and are marked to market through earnings. Cash flows from derivatives used to manage commodity, foreign exchange or interest risks are classified as operating activities. See Our Business Risks in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further unaudited information on our business risks. For cash flow hedges, changes in fair value are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive loss within common shareholders equity until the underlying hedged item is recognized in net income. For fair value hedges, changes in fair value are recognized immediately in earnings, consistent with the underlying hedged item. Hedging transactions are limited to an underlying exposure. As a result, any change in the value of our derivative instruments would be substantially offset by an opposite change in the value of the underlying hedged items. Hedging ineffectiveness and a net earnings impact occur when the change in the value of the hedge does not offset the change in the value of the underlying hedged item. If the derivative instrument is terminated, we continue to defer the related gain or loss and then include it as a component of the cost of the underlying hedged item. Upon determination that the underlying hedged item will not be part of an actual transaction, we recognize the related gain or loss in net income immediately. 106 Table of Contents We also use derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment. We account for such derivatives at market value with the resulting gains and losses reflected in our income statement. We do not use derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We perform assessments of our counterparty credit risk regularly, including a review of credit ratings, credit default swap rates and potential nonperformance of the counterparty. Based on our most recent assessment of our counterparty credit risk, we consider this risk to be low. In addition, we enter into derivative contracts with a variety of financial institutions that we believe are creditworthy in order to reduce our concentration of credit risk. Commodity Prices We are subject to commodity price risk because our ability to recover increased costs through higher pricing may be limited in the competitive environment in which we operate. This risk is managed through the use of fixed-price purchase orders, pricing agreements and derivatives. In addition, risk to our supplies of certain raw materials is mitigated through purchases from multiple geographies and suppliers. We use derivatives, with terms of no more than three years, to economically hedge price fluctuations related to a portion of our anticipated commodity purchases, primarily for metals, energy and agricultural products. For those derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting, any ineffectiveness is recorded immediately in corporate unallocated expenses. We classify both the earnings and cash flow impact from these derivatives consistent with the underlying hedged item. During the next 12 months, we expect to reclassify net losses of $59 million related to these hedges from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net income. Derivatives used to hedge commodity price risk that do not qualify for hedge accounting are marked to market each period and reflected in our income statement. Our open commodity derivative contracts that qualify for hedge accounting had a face value of $598 million as of December 31, 2011 and $590 million as of December 25, 2010. Ineffectiveness for our commodity hedges is not material. Our open commodity derivative contracts that do not qualify for hedge accounting had a face value of $630 million as of December 31, 2011 and $266 million as of December 25, 2010. Foreign Exchange Financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars using period-end exchange rates for assets and liabilities and weighted-average exchange rates for revenues and expenses. Adjustments resulting from translating net assets are reported as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive loss within common shareholders equity as currency translation adjustment. Our operations outside of the U.S. generate approximately 50% of our net revenue, with Russia, Mexico, Canada and the United Kingdom comprising approximately 23% of our net revenue. As a result, we are exposed to foreign currency risks. We also enter into derivatives, primarily forward contracts with terms of no more than two years, to manage our exposure to foreign currency transaction risk. Exchange rate gains or losses related to foreign currency transactions are recognized as transaction gains or losses in our income statement as incurred. Our foreign currency derivatives had a total face value of $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2011 and $1.7 billion as of December 25, 2010. During the next 12 months, we expect to reclassify net gains 107 Table of Contents of $20 million related to foreign currency contracts that qualify for hedge accounting from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net income. Additionally, ineffectiveness for our foreign currency hedges is not material. For foreign currency derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment, all losses and gains were offset by changes in the underlying hedged items, resulting in no net material impact on earnings. Interest Rates We centrally manage our debt and investment portfolios considering investment opportunities and risks, tax consequences and overall financing strategies. We use various interest rate derivative instruments including, but not limited to, interest rate swaps, cross-currency interest rate swaps, Treasury locks and swap locks to manage our overall interest expense and foreign exchange risk. These instruments effectively change the interest rate and currency of specific debt issuances. Certain of our fixed rate indebtedness has been swapped to floating rates. The notional amount, interest payment and maturity date of the interest rate and cross-currency swaps match the principal, interest payment and maturity date of the related debt. Our Treasury locks and swap locks are entered into to protect against unfavorable interest rate changes relating to forecasted debt transactions. The notional amounts of the interest rate derivative instruments outstanding as of December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 were $8.33 billion and $9.23 billion, respectively. For those interest rate derivative instruments that qualify for cash flow hedge accounting, any ineffectiveness is recorded immediately. Ineffectiveness for our interest rate hedges is not material. We classify both the earnings and cash flow impact from these interest rate derivative instruments consistent with the underlying hedged item. During the next 12 months, we expect to reclassify net losses of $16 million related to these hedges from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net income. As of December 31, 2011, approximately 38% of total debt, after the impact of the related interest rate derivative instruments, was exposed to variable rates, compared to 43% as of December 25, 2010. 108 Table of Contents Fair Value Measurements The fair values of our financial assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 are categorized as follows: 2011 2010 Assets (a) Liabilities (a) Assets (a) Liabilities (a) Available-for-sale securities (b) $ 59 $ $ 636 $ Short-term investments index funds (c) $ 157 $ $ 167 $ Prepaid forward contracts (d) $ 40 $ $ 48 $ Deferred compensation (e) $ $ 519 $ $ 559 Derivatives designated as fair value hedging instruments: Interest rate derivatives (f) $ 300 $ $ 276 $ 7 Derivatives designated as cash flow hedging instruments: Forward exchange contracts (g) $ 25 $ 5 $ 8 $ 23 Interest rate derivatives (f) 69 8 5 Commodity contracts other (h) 3 77 70 2 Commodity contracts futures (i) 1 1 23 $ 28 $ 152 $ 87 $ 53 Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments: Forward exchange contracts (g) $ 17 $ 20 $ 1 $ 7 Interest rate derivatives (f) 107 141 6 45 Commodity contracts other (h) 10 51 28 1 Commodity contracts futures (i) 11 1 $ 134 $ 223 $ 35 $ 54 Total derivatives at fair value $ 462 $ 375 $ 398 $ 114 Total $ 718 $ 894 $ 1,249 $ 673 (a) Financial assets are classified on our balance sheet within prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets, with the exception of available-for-sale securities and short-term investments, which are classified as short-term investments. Financial liabilities are classified on our balance sheet within accounts payable and other current liabilities and other liabilities. Unless specifically indicated, all financial assets and liabilities are categorized as Level 2 assets or liabilities. (b) Based on the price of common stock. Categorized as a Level 1 asset. (c) Based on price changes in index funds used to manage a portion of market risk arising from our deferred compensation liability. Categorized as a Level 1 asset. (d) Based primarily on the price of our common stock. (e) Based on the fair value of investments corresponding to employees investment elections. As of December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010, $44 million and $170 million, respectively, are categorized as Level 1 liabilities. The remaining balances are categorized as Level 2 liabilities. (f) Based on LIBOR and recently reported transactions in the marketplace. (g) Based on observable market transactions of spot and forward rates. (h) Based on recently reported transactions in the marketplace, primarily swap arrangements. (i) Based on average prices on futures exchanges. Categorized as a Level 1 asset or liability. 109 Table of Contents The effective portion of the pre-tax (gains)/losses on our derivative instruments are categorized in the table below. Fair Value/Non- designated Hedges Cash Flow Hedges Losses/(Gains) Recognized in Income Statement (a) (Gains)/Losses Recognized in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Losses/(Gains) Reclassified from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss into Income Statement (b) 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 Forward exchange contracts $ 14 $ 6 $ (9 ) $ 26 $ 26 $ 40 Interest rate derivatives (113 ) (104 ) 84 75 15 7 Commodity contracts 25 (30 ) 51 (32 ) (36 ) 28 Total $ (74 ) $ (128 ) $ 126 $ 69 $ 5 $ 75 (a) Interest rate derivative gains are primarily from fair value hedges and are included in interest expense. These gains are substantially offset by increases in the value of the underlying debt, which is also included in interest expense. All other gains/losses are from non-designated hedges and are included in corporate unallocated expenses. (b) Interest rate derivative losses are included in interest expense. All other gains/losses are primarily included in cost of sales. The carrying amounts of our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments approximate fair value due to the short-term maturity. Short-term investments consist principally of short-term time deposits and index funds used to manage a portion of market risk arising from our deferred compensation liability. The fair value of our debt obligations as of December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010 was $29.8 billion and $25.9 billion, respectively, based upon prices of similar instruments in the marketplace. Note 11 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share Basic net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share is net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders divided by the weighted average of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share is calculated using the weighted average of common shares outstanding adjusted to include the effect that would occur if in-the-money employee stock options were exercised and RSUs and preferred shares were converted into common shares. Options to purchase 25.9 million shares in 2011, 24.4 million shares in 2010 and 39.0 million shares in 2009 were not included in the calculation of diluted earnings per common share because these options were out-of-the-money. Out-of-the-money options had average exercise prices of $66.99 in 2011, $67.26 in 2010 and $61.52 in 2009. 110 Table of Contents The computations of basic and diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share are as follows: 2011 2010 2009 Income Shares (a) Income Shares (a) Income Shares (a) Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,443 $ 6,320 $ 5,946 Preferred shares: Dividends (1 ) (1 ) (1 ) Redemption premium (6 ) (5 ) (5 ) Net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders $ 6,436 1,576 $ 6,314 1,590 $ 5,940 1,558 Basic net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share $ 4.08 $ 3.97 $ 3.81 Net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders $ 6,436 1,576 $ 6,314 1,590 $ 5,940 1,558 Dilutive securities: Stock options and RSUs 20 23 17 ESOP convertible preferred stock 7 1 6 1 6 2 Diluted $ 6,443 1,597 $ 6,320 1,614 $ 5,946 1,577 Diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share $ 4.03 $ 3.91 $ 3.77 (a) Weighted-average common shares outstanding (in millions). Note 12 Preferred Stock As of December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010, there were 3 million shares of convertible preferred stock authorized. The preferred stock was issued for an ESOP established by Quaker and these shares are redeemable for common stock by the ESOP participants. The preferred stock accrues dividends at an annual rate of $5.46 per share. At year-end 2011 and 2010, there were 803,953 preferred shares issued and 206,653 and 227,653 shares outstanding, respectively. The outstanding preferred shares had a fair value of $68 million as of December 31, 2011 and $74 million as of December 25, 2010. Each share is convertible at the option of the holder into 4.9625 shares of common stock. The preferred shares may be called by us upon written notice at $78 per share plus accrued and unpaid dividends. Quaker made the final award to its ESOP plan in June 2001. 111 Table of Contents 2011 2010 2009 Shares (a) Amount Shares (a) Amount Shares (a) Amount Preferred stock 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 Repurchased preferred stock Balance, beginning of year 0.6 $ 150 0.6 $ 145 0.5 $ 138 Redemptions 7 5 0.1 7 Balance, end of year 0.6 $ 157 0.6 $ 150 0.6 $ 145 (a) In millions. Note 13 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Attributable to PepsiCo Comprehensive income is a measure of income which includes both net income and other comprehensive income or loss. Other comprehensive income or loss results from items deferred from recognition into our income statement. Accumulated other comprehensive income or loss is separately presented on our balance sheet as part of common shareholders equity. Other comprehensive (loss)/income attributable to PepsiCo was $(2,599) million in 2011, $164 million in 2010 and $900 million in 2009. The accumulated balances for each component of other comprehensive loss attributable to PepsiCo were as follows: 2011 2010 2009 Currency translation adjustment $ (2,688 ) $ (1,159 ) $ (1,471 ) Cash flow hedges, net of tax (a) (169 ) (100 ) (42 ) Unamortized pension and retiree medical, net of tax (b) (3,419 ) (2,442 ) (2,328 ) Unrealized gain on securities, net of tax 62 70 47 Other (15 ) 1 Accumulated other comprehensive loss attributable to PepsiCo $ (6,229 ) $ (3,630 ) $ (3,794 ) (a) Includes $23 million after-tax gain in 2009 for our share of our equity investees accumulated derivative activity. (b) Net of taxes of $1,831 million in 2011, $1,322 million in 2010 and $1,211 million in 2009. 112 Table of Contents Note 14 Supplemental Financial Information 2011 2010 2009 Accounts receivable Trade receivables $ 6,036 $ 5,514 Other receivables 1,033 953 7,069 6,467 Allowance, beginning of year 144 90 $ 70 Net amounts charged to expense 30 12 40 Deductions (a) (41 ) (37 ) (21 ) Other (b) 24 79 1 Allowance, end of year 157 144 $ 90 Net receivables $ 6,912 $ 6,323 Inventories (c) Raw materials $ 1,883 $ 1,654 Work-in-process 207 128 Finished goods 1,737 1,590 $ 3,827 $ 3,372 (a) Includes accounts written off. (b) Includes adjustments related to acquisitions, currency translation effects and other adjustments. (c) Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined using the average, first-in, first-out (FIFO) or last-in, first-out (LIFO) methods. Approximately 3% in 2011 and 8% in 2010 of the inventory cost was computed using the LIFO method. The differences between LIFO and FIFO methods of valuing these inventories were not material. 2011 2010 Other assets Noncurrent notes and accounts receivable $ 159 $ 165 Deferred marketplace spending 186 203 Pension plans 65 121 Other investments 89 653 Other 522 547 $ 1,021 $ 1,689 Accounts payable and other current liabilities Accounts payable $ 4,083 $ 3,865 Accrued marketplace spending 1,915 1,841 Accrued compensation and benefits 1,771 1,779 Dividends payable 813 766 Other current liabilities 3,175 2,672 $ 11,757 $ 10,923 113 Table of Contents 2011 2010 2009 Other supplemental information Rent expense $ 589 $ 526 $ 412 Interest paid $ 1,039 $ 1,043 $ 456 Income taxes paid, net of refunds $ 2,218 $ 1,495 $ 1,498 Note 15 Acquisitions PBG and PAS On February 26, 2010, we acquired PBG and PAS to create a more fully integrated supply chain and go-to-market business model, improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the distribution of our brands and enhancing our revenue growth. The total purchase price was approximately $12.6 billion, which included $8.3 billion of cash and equity and the fair value of our previously held equity interests in PBG and PAS of $4.3 billion. The acquisitions were accounted for as business combinations, and, accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed were recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. Our fair market valuations of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed have been completed and the final valuations did not materially differ from those fair values reported as of December 25, 2010. The following table presents unaudited consolidated pro forma financial information as if the closing of our acquisitions of PBG and PAS had occurred on December 27, 2009 for purposes of the financial information presented for the year ended December 25, 2010; and as if the closing of our acquisitions of PBG and PAS had occurred on December 28, 2008 for purposes of the financial information presented for the year ended December 26, 2009. 2010 2009 Net Revenue $ 59,582 $ 57,471 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 5,856 $ 6,752 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share Diluted $ 3.60 $ 4.09 The unaudited consolidated pro forma financial information was prepared in accordance with the acquisition method of accounting under existing standards, and the regulations of the U.S. 114 Table of Contents Securities and Exchange Commission, and is not necessarily indicative of the results of operations that would have occurred if our acquisitions of PBG and PAS had been completed on the date indicated, nor is it indicative of the future operating results of PepsiCo. The historical unaudited consolidated financial information has been adjusted to give effect to pro forma events that are (1) directly attributable to the acquisitions, (2) factually supportable, and (3) expected to have a continuing impact on the combined results of PepsiCo, PBG and PAS. The unaudited pro forma results have been adjusted with respect to certain aspects of our acquisitions of PBG and PAS to reflect: the consummation of the acquisitions; consolidation of PBG and PAS which are now owned 100% by PepsiCo and the corresponding gain resulting from the remeasurement of our previously held equity interests in PBG and PAS; the elimination of related party transactions between PepsiCo and PBG, and PepsiCo and PAS; changes in assets and liabilities to record their acquisition date fair values and changes in certain expenses resulting therefrom; and additional indebtedness, including, but not limited to, debt issuance costs and interest expense, incurred in connection with the acquisitions. The unaudited pro forma results do not reflect future events that either have occurred or may occur after the acquisitions, including, but not limited to, the anticipated realization of ongoing savings from operating synergies in subsequent periods. They also do not give effect to certain one-time charges we expect to incur in connection with the acquisitions, including, but not limited to, charges that are expected to achieve ongoing cost savings and synergies. WBD On February 3, 2011, we acquired the ordinary shares, including shares underlying ADSs and Global Depositary Shares (GDS), of WBD, a company incorporated in the Russian Federation, which represented in the aggregate approximately 66% of WBD outstanding ordinary shares, pursuant to the purchase agreement dated December 1, 2010 between PepsiCo and certain selling shareholders of WBD for approximately $3.8 billion in cash. The acquisition of those shares increased our total ownership to approximately 77%, giving us a controlling interest in WBD. Under the guidance on accounting for business combinations, once a controlling interest is obtained, we are required to recognize and measure 100% of the identifiable assets acquired, liabilities assumed and noncontrolling interests at their full fair values. 115 Table of Contents The following table summarizes the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the acquisition of WBD and the resulting goodwill as of the acquisition date: Fair value of total consideration transferred Payment in cash, for the approximately 66% of outstanding ordinary shares of WBD on February 3, 2011, including shares underlying ADSs and GDSs (or $2,428, net of cash and cash equivalents acquired) $ 3,827 Fair value of our previously held equity interest in WBD prior to the acquisition 644 Total $ 4,471 Acquisition date fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed Inventories $ 314 Property, plant and equipment 813 Amortizable intangible assets, primarily customer relationships 46 Nonamortizable intangible assets, primarily brands and tradename 3,114 Other current assets and liabilities (a) 1,244 Debt obligations (1,114 ) Other noncurrent assets and liabilities (31 ) Deferred income taxes (665 ) Total identifiable net assets 3,721 Fair value of noncontrolling interest in WBD (1,349 ) Goodwill 2,099 Total $ 4,471 (a) Includes cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other current assets, accounts payable and other current liabilities. Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the aggregate of the fair value of the consideration transferred, any noncontrolling interest and any previously held equity interest in the acquiree over the fair value of the net assets recognized. The goodwill recorded as part of the acquisition of WBD primarily reflects the value of adding economies of scale from our existing manufacturing and procurement operations in Russia and synergies expected to arise from our combined brand portfolios in the nutrition and other categories, as well as any intangible assets that do not qualify for separate recognition. Goodwill is not amortizable or deductible for tax purposes. All of the goodwill is recorded in our Europe segment. Under the guidance on accounting for business combinations, merger and integration costs are not included as components of consideration transferred but are accounted for as expenses in the period in which the costs are incurred. See Note 3 for details on the expenses incurred during 2011 and 2010. On March 10, 2011, we commenced our tender offers in Russia and the U.S. for all remaining outstanding ordinary shares and ADSs of WBD for 3,883.70 Russian rubles per ordinary share and 970.925 Russian rubles per ADS, respectively. The Russian offer was made to all holders 116 Table of Contents of ordinary shares and the U.S. offer was made to all holders of ADSs. We completed the Russian offer on May 19, 2011 and the U.S. offer on May 16, 2011. After completion of the offers, we paid approximately $1.3 billion for WBD ordinary shares (including shares underlying ADSs) and increased our total ownership of WBD to approximately 98.6%. On June 30, 2011, we elected to exercise our squeeze-out rights under Russian law with respect to all remaining WBD ordinary shares not already owned by us. Therefore, under Russian law, all remaining WBD shareholders were required to sell their ordinary shares (including those underlying ADSs) to us at the same price that was offered to WBD shareholders in the Russian tender offer. Accordingly, all registered holders of ordinary shares on August 15, 2011 (including the ADS depositary) received 3,883.70 Russian rubles per ordinary share. After completion of the squeeze-out in September 2011 (during our fourth quarter), we paid approximately $79 million for WBD ordinary shares (including shares underlying ADSs) and increased our total ownership to 100% of WBD. 117 Table of Contents Management Responsibility for Financial Reporting To Our Shareholders: At PepsiCo, our actions the actions of all our associates are governed by our Worldwide Code of Conduct. This Code is clearly aligned with our stated values a commitment to sustained growth, through empowered people, operating with responsibility and building trust. Both the Code and our core values enable us to operate with integrity both within the letter and the spirit of the law. Our Code of Conduct is reinforced consistently at all levels and in all countries. We have maintained strong governance policies and practices for many years. The management of PepsiCo is responsible for the objectivity and integrity of our consolidated financial statements. The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors has engaged independent registered public accounting firm, KPMG LLP, to audit our consolidated financial statements, and they have expressed an unqualified opinion. We are committed to providing timely, accurate and understandable information to investors. Our commitment encompasses the following: Maintaining strong controls over financial reporting. Our system of internal control is based on the control criteria framework of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission published in their report titled Internal Control Integrated Framework . The system is designed to provide reasonable assurance that transactions are executed as authorized and accurately recorded; that assets are safeguarded; and that accounting records are sufficiently reliable to permit the preparation of financial statements that conform in all material respects with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. We maintain disclosure controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the specified time periods. We monitor these internal controls through self-assessments and an ongoing program of internal audits. Our internal controls are reinforced through our Worldwide Code of Conduct, which sets forth our commitment to conduct business with integrity, and within both the letter and the spirit of the law. Exerting rigorous oversight of the business. We continuously review our business results and strategies. This encompasses financial discipline in our strategic and daily business decisions. Our Executive Committee is actively involved from understanding strategies and alternatives to reviewing key initiatives and financial performance. The intent is to ensure we remain objective in our assessments, constructively challenge our approach to potential business opportunities and issues, and monitor results and controls. Engaging strong and effective Corporate Governance from our Board of Directors. We have an active, capable and diligent Board that meets the required standards for independence, and we welcome the Board oversight as a representative of our shareholders. Our Audit Committee is comprised of independent directors with the financial literacy, knowledge and experience to provide appropriate oversight. We review our critical accounting policies, financial reporting and internal control matters with them and encourage their direct communication with KPMG LLP, with our General Auditor, and with our General Counsel. We also have a Compliance Department, led by our Chief Compliance Officer, to coordinate our compliance policies and practices. 118 Table of Contents Providing investors with financial results that are complete, transparent and understandable. The consolidated financial statements and financial information included in this report are the responsibility of management. This includes preparing the financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., which require estimates based on management best judgment. PepsiCo has a strong history of doing what right. We realize that great companies are built on trust, strong ethical standards and principles. Our financial results are delivered from that culture of accountability, and we take responsibility for the quality and accuracy of our financial reporting. February 27, 2012 /S/ MARIE T. GALLAGHER Marie T. Gallagher Senior Vice President and Controller /S/ HUGH F. JOHNSTON Hugh F. Johnston Chief Financial Officer /S/ INDRA K. NOOYI Indra K. Nooyi Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer 119 Table of Contents Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm The Board of Directors and Shareholders PepsiCo, Inc.: We have audited the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets of PepsiCo, Inc. and subsidiaries ( PepsiCo, Inc. or the Company ) as of December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010, and the related Consolidated Statements of Income, Cash Flows and Equity for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2011. We also have audited PepsiCo, Inc. internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2011, based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). PepsiCo, Inc. management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting appearing under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements and an opinion on the Company internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions. A company internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of PepsiCo, Inc. as of December 31, 2011 and December 25, 2010, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2011, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Also in our opinion, PepsiCo, Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2011, based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework issued by COSO. The scope of management assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting excluded the internal control over financial reporting of Wimm-Bill-Dann Foods OJSC and its subsidiaries ( WBD ), which the Company acquired in February 2011. WBD represented 9% of the Company consolidated total assets and 4% of the Company consolidated net revenues as of and for the year ended December 31, 2011. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting of PepsiCo, Inc. also excluded an evaluation of the internal control over financial reporting of WBD. /s/ KPMG LLP New York, New York February 27, 2012 120 Table of Contents Selected Financial Data (in millions except per share amounts, unaudited) 2011 2010 First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter Net revenue $ 11,937 $ 16,827 $ 17,582 $ 20,158 $ 9,368 $ 14,801 $ 15,514 $ 18,155 Gross profit $ 6,490 $ 8,864 $ 9,130 $ 10,427 $ 4,905 $ 8,056 $ 8,506 $ 9,796 53 rd week (a) $ (94 ) Mark-to-market net impact (b) $ (31 ) $ 9 $ 53 $ 71 $ (46 ) $ 4 $ (16 ) $ (33 ) Merger and integration charges (c) $ 55 $ 58 $ 61 $ 155 $ 321 $ 155 $ 69 $ 263 Restructuring and impairment charges (d) $ 383 Gain on previously held equity interests (e) $ (958 ) Inventory fair value adjustments (f) $ 34 $ 4 $ 3 $ 5 $ 281 $ 76 $ 17 $ 24 Venezuela currency devaluation (g) $ 120 Asset write-off (h) $ 145 Foundation contribution (i) $ 100 Debt repurchase (j) $ 178 Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 1,143 $ 1,885 $ 2,000 $ 1,415 $ 1,430 $ 1,603 $ 1,922 $ 1,365 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share basic $ 0.72 $ 1.19 $ 1.27 $ 0.90 $ 0.90 $ 1.00 $ 1.21 $ 0.86 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 0.71 $ 1.17 $ 1.25 $ 0.89 $ 0.89 $ 0.98 $ 1.19 $ 0.85 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 0.48 $ 0.515 $ 0.515 $ 0.515 $ 0.45 $ 0.48 $ 0.48 $ 0.48 Stock price per share (k) High $ 67.46 $ 71.89 $ 70.75 $ 66.78 $ 66.98 $ 67.61 $ 66.83 $ 68.11 Low $ 62.05 $ 63.50 $ 60.10 $ 58.50 $ 58.75 $ 61.04 $ 60.32 $ 63.43 Close $ 63.24 $ 68.69 $ 63.30 $ 66.35 $ 66.56 $ 63.56 $ 65.57 $ 65.69 (a) The 2011 fiscal year consisted of fifty-three weeks compared to fifty-two weeks in our normal fiscal year. The 53 rd week increased 2011 net revenue by $623 million, gross profit by $358 million, pre-tax income by $94 million and net income attributable to PepsiCo by $64 million or $0.04 per share. (b) In 2011, we recognized $102 million ($71 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) of mark-to-market net losses on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. In 2010, we recognized $91 million ($58 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) of mark-to-market net gains on commodity hedges in corporate unallocated expenses. (c) In 2011, we incurred merger and integration charges of $329 million related to our acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD. In total, these charges had an after-tax impact of $271 million or $0.17 per share. In 2010, we incurred merger and integration charges of $799 million related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as advisory fees in connection with our acquisition of WBD. In addition, we recorded $9 million of merger-related charges, representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS. In total, these charges had an after-tax impact of $648 million or $0.40 per share. See Note 3. (d) Restructuring and impairment charges in 2011 were $383 million ($286 million after-tax or $0.18 per share). See Note 3. (e) In 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded a gain on our previously held equity interests of $958 million ($0.60 per share), comprising $735 million which was non-taxable and recorded in bottling equity income and $223 million related to the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with these previously held equity interests. See Note 15. (f) In 2011, we recorded $46 million ($28 million after-tax or $0.02 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory included in WBD balance sheet at the acquisition date and hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. In 2010, we recorded $398 million ($333 million after-tax or $0.21 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory and other related hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. (g) In 2010, we recorded a one-time $120 million net charge ($120 million after-tax or $0.07 per share) related to our change to hyperinflationary accounting for our Venezuelan businesses and the related devaluation of the bolivar. (h) In 2010, we recorded a $145 million charge ($92 million after-tax or $0.06 per share) related to a change in scope of one release in our ongoing migration to SAP software. (i) In 2010, we made a $100 million ($64 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) contribution to The PepsiCo Foundation Inc., in order to fund charitable and social programs over the next several years. (j) In 2010, we paid $672 million in a cash tender offer to repurchase $500 million (aggregate principal amount) of our 7.90% senior unsecured notes maturing in 2018. As a result of this debt repurchase, we recorded a $178 million charge to interest expense ($114 million after-tax or $0.07 per share), primarily representing the premium paid in the tender offer. (k) Represents the composite high and low sales price and quarterly closing prices for one share of PepsiCo common stock. 121 Table of Contents Five-Year Summary (unaudited) 2011 2010 2009 Net revenue $ 66,504 $ 57,838 $ 43,232 Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,443 $ 6,320 $ 5,946 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share basic $ 4.08 $ 3.97 $ 3.81 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 4.03 $ 3.91 $ 3.77 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 2.025 $ 1.89 $ 1.775 Total assets $ 72,882 $ 68,153 $ 39,848 Long-term debt $ 20,568 $ 19,999 $ 7,400 Return on invested capital (a) 14.3 % 17.0 % 27.5 % 2008 2007 Net revenue $ 43,251 $ 39,474 Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 5,142 $ 5,658 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share basic $ 3.26 $ 3.48 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 3.21 $ 3.41 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 1.65 $ 1.425 Total assets $ 35,994 $ 34,628 Long-term debt $ 7,858 $ 4,203 Return on invested capital (a) 24.0 % 29.9 % (a) Return on invested capital is defined as adjusted net income attributable to PepsiCo divided by the sum of average common shareholders equity and average total debt. Adjusted net income attributable to PepsiCo is defined as net income attributable to PepsiCo plus interest expense after-tax. Interest expense after-tax was $548 million in 2011, $578 million in 2010, $254 million in 2009, $210 million in 2008 and $143 million in 2007. Includes restructuring and impairment charges of: 2011 2009 2008 2007 Pre-tax $ 383 $ 36 $ 543 $ 102 After-tax $ 286 $ 29 $ 408 $ 70 Per share $ 0.18 $ 0.02 $ 0.25 $ 0.04 Includes mark-to-market net losses/(gains) of: 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 Pre-tax $ 102 $ (91 ) $ (274 ) $ 346 $ (19 ) After-tax $ 71 $ (58 ) $ (173 ) $ 223 $ (12 ) Per share $ 0.04 $ (0.04 ) $ (0.11 ) $ 0.14 $ (0.01 ) The 2011 fiscal year consisted of fifty-three weeks compared to fifty-two weeks in our normal fiscal year. The 53 rd week increased 2011 net revenue by $623 million and net income attributable to PepsiCo by $64 million or $0.04 per share. In 2011, we incurred merger and integration charges of $329 million related to our acquisitions of PBG, PAS and WBD. In total, these costs had an after-tax impact of $271 million or $0.17 per share. In 2011, we recorded $46 million ($28 million after-tax or $0.02 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory included in WBD balance sheet at the acquisition date and hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. In 2010, we incurred merger and integration charges of $799 million related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as advisory fees in connection with our acquisition of WBD. In addition, we recorded $9 million of merger-related charges, representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS. In total, these costs had an after-tax impact of $648 million or $0.40 per share. 122 Table of Contents In 2010, in connection with our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, we recorded a gain on our previously held equity interests of $958 million ($0.60 per share), comprising $735 million which was non-taxable and recorded in bottling equity income and $223 million related to the reversal of deferred tax liabilities associated with these previously held equity interests. In 2010, we recorded $398 million ($333 million after-tax or $0.21 per share) of incremental costs related to fair value adjustments to the acquired inventory and other related hedging contracts included in PBG and PAS balance sheets at the acquisition date. In 2010, we recorded a one-time $120 million net charge ($120 million after-tax or $0.07 per share) related to our change to hyperinflationary accounting for our Venezuelan businesses and the related devaluation of the bolivar. In 2010, we recorded a $145 million charge ($92 million after-tax or $0.06 per share) related to a change in scope of one release in our ongoing migration to SAP software. In 2010, we made a $100 million ($64 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) contribution to The PepsiCo Foundation Inc., in order to fund charitable and social programs over the next several years. In 2010, we paid $672 million in a cash tender offer to repurchase $500 million (aggregate principal amount) of our 7.90% senior unsecured notes maturing in 2018. As a result of this debt repurchase, we recorded a $178 million charge to interest expense ($114 million after-tax or $0.07 per share), primarily representing the premium paid in the tender offer. In 2009, we recognized $50 million of merger-related charges related to our acquisitions of PBG and PAS, as well as an additional $11 million of costs in bottling equity income representing our share of the respective merger costs of PBG and PAS. In total, these costs had an after-tax impact of $44 million or $0.03 per share. In 2008, we recognized $138 million ($114 million after-tax or $0.07 per share) of our share of PBG restructuring and impairment charges. In 2007, we recognized $129 million ($0.08 per share) of non-cash tax benefits related to the favorable resolution of certain foreign tax matters. 123 Table of Contents GLOSSARY Acquisitions and divestitures : reflect all mergers and acquisitions activity, including the impact of acquisitions, divestitures and changes in ownership or control in consolidated subsidiaries and nonconsolidated equity investees. Bottler Case Sales (BCS) : measure of physical beverage volume shipped to retailers and independent distributors from both PepsiCo and our independent bottlers. Bottler funding : financial incentives we give to our independent bottlers to assist in the distribution and promotion of our beverage products. Concentrate Shipments and Equivalents (CSE) : measure of our physical beverage volume shipments to independent bottlers, retailers and independent distributors. This measure is reported on our fiscal year basis. Constant currency : financial results assuming constant foreign currency exchange rates used for translation based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-year period. In order to compute our constant currency results, we multiply or divide, as appropriate, our current year U.S. dollar results by the current year average foreign exchange rates and then multiply or divide, as appropriate, those amounts by the prior year average foreign exchange rates. Consumers : people who eat and drink our products. CSD : carbonated soft drinks. Customers : authorized independent bottlers, distributors and retailers. Derivatives : financial instruments, such as futures, swaps, Treasury locks, options and forward contracts that we use to manage our risk arising from changes in commodity prices, interest rates, foreign exchange rates and stock prices. Direct-Store-Delivery (DSD) : delivery system used by us and our independent bottlers to deliver snacks and beverages directly to retail stores where our products are merchandised. Effective net pricing : reflects the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries. Hedge accounting : treatment for qualifying hedges that allows fluctuations in a hedging instrument fair value to offset corresponding fluctuations in the hedged item in the same reporting period. Hedge accounting is allowed only in cases where the hedging relationship between the hedging instruments and hedged items is highly effective, and only prospectively from the date a hedging relationship is formally documented. Independent bottlers : customers to whom we have granted exclusive contracts to sell and manufacture certain beverage products bearing our trademarks within a specific geographical area. 124 Table of Contents Management operating cash flow : net cash provided by operating activities less capital spending plus sales of property, plant and equipment. It is our primary measure used to monitor cash flow performance. Mark-to-market net gain or loss or impact : the change in market value for commodity contracts that we purchase to mitigate the volatility in costs of energy and raw materials that we consume. The market value is determined based on average prices on national exchanges and recently reported transactions in the marketplace. Marketplace spending : sales incentives offered through various programs to our customers and consumers (trade spending), as well as advertising and other marketing activities. Servings : common metric reflecting our consolidated physical unit volume. Our divisions physical unit measures are converted into servings based on U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines for single-serving sizes of our products. Transaction gains and losses : the impact on our consolidated financial statements of exchange rate changes arising from specific transactions. Translation adjustment : the impact of converting our foreign affiliates financial statements into U.S. dollars for the purpose of consolidating our financial statements. 125 Table of Contents 
