CIK: 77476
Company Name: PEPSICO INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2017-02-15


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. OUR BUSINESS Executive Overview 42 Our Operations 43 Other Relationships 44 Our Business Risks 44 OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES Revenue Recognition 47 Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets 48 Income Tax Expense and Accruals 50 Pension and Retiree Medical Plans 50 OUR FINANCIAL RESULTS Results of Operations Consolidated Review 54 Non-GAAP Measures 57 Items Affecting Comparability 59 Results of Operations Division Review 62 Frito-Lay North America 64 Quaker Foods North America 65 North America Beverages 66 Latin America 67 Europe Sub-Saharan Africa 69 Asia, Middle East and North Africa 70 Our Liquidity and Capital Resources 72 Return on Invested Capital 75 Consolidated Statement of Income 76 Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 77 Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 78 Consolidated Balance Sheet 79 Consolidated Statement of Equity 80 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Our Divisions 81 Note 2 Our Significant Accounting Policies 86 Note 3 Restructuring and Impairment Charges 91 Note 4 Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets 95 Note 5 Income Taxes 98 Note 6 Share-Based Compensation 101 Note 7 Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans 105 Note 8 Debt Obligations 114 Note 9 Financial Instruments 115 Note 10 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share 120 Note 11 Preferred Stock 121 Note 12 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Attributable to PepsiCo 122 Note 13 Supplemental Financial Information 124 MANAGEMENT S RESPONSIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL REPORTING 126 REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM 128 GLOSSARY 129 41 Table of Contents Our discussion and analysis is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition and is provided as an addition to, and should be read in connection with, our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. Definitions of key terms can be found in the glossary beginning on page 1 29. Tabular dollars are presented in millions, except per share amounts. All per share amounts reflect common stock per share amounts, assume dilution unless otherwise noted, and are based on unrounded amounts. Percentage changes are based on unrounded amounts. OUR BUSINESS Executive Overview We are a leading global food and beverage company with a complementary portfolio of enjoyable brands, including Frito-Lay, Gatorade, Pepsi-Cola, Quaker and Tropicana. Through our operations, authorized bottlers, contract manufacturers and other third parties, we make, market, distribute and sell a wide variety of convenient and enjoyable beverages, foods and snacks, serving customers and consumers in more than 200 countries and territories. Our management monitors a variety of key indicators to evaluate our business results and financial condition. These indicators include growth in volume, net revenue, organic revenue, operating profit (as reported and excluding certain items and the impact of foreign exchange translation), earnings per share (EPS) (as reported and excluding certain items and the impact of foreign exchange translation), retail sales, market share, safety, innovation, product and service quality, organizational health, brand equity, media viewership and engagement, employee diversity, net commodity inflation, productivity savings, net capital spending, free cash flow and free cash flow excluding certain items, cash returned to shareholders in the forms of share repurchases and dividends, advertising and marketing expenses, research and development expenditures, return on invested capital (ROIC) and net ROIC (excluding certain items), and gross and operating margins (as reported and excluding certain items). At PepsiCo, we believe our performance is inextricably linked to the sustainability of the world in which we operate. We call this approach Performance with Purpose and it is embedded into our business and our strategy. Our commitment to Performance with Purpose enabled us to meet or exceed every financial goal we set for 2016. During 2016, we also continued our focus on productivity, prudent capital allocation, reducing our cash flow cycle, operating with a leaner cost structure and embracing innovation. For example, since 2012 our productivity agenda has delivered approximately $1 billion in annual savings by pursuing cost-saving measures ranging from developing agricultural technologies to sourcing more of our foods and beverages locally. We continued to embrace automation across the Company, leveraging new tools that we believe will deliver higher rates of production in the United States and around the world. We also continued to focus on skills upgrading and job retraining, creating new opportunities for our workers which we believe will help us navigate continued geopolitical uncertainty and unrest. As we look to 2017 and beyond, we believe our Performance with Purpose strategy will enable us to continue delivering strong financial results while positioning our Company for long-term sustainable growth. We recently announced new Performance with Purpose goals for the next ten years. We plan to continue to focus on making healthier foods and beverages for our consumers, generating healthy growth for our retail and foodservice partners; fostering a healthier planet by reducing our environmental impact and boosting our bottom line; creating a healthy workplace and culture for our associates; and promoting healthier communities wherever we operate. Our strategies are also designed to address key challenges facing our Company, including: consumer demand for healthier products; taxes or other limitations on the manufacture, sale or distribution of our products in a changing regulatory environment; uncertain and volatile macroeconomic conditions, including currency 42 Table of Contents fluctuations; climate change and water scarcity; and political, economic and social instability. See also Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional information about risks and uncertainties that the Company faces. We believe that many of these challenges also create new opportunities for our Company and we intend to focus on the following areas to address and adapt to these challenges and capitalize on these opportunities: Healthier products. Consumer demand continues to shift towards healthier products, while the risk of regulation, including taxation of certain products, continues to intensify. Given these consumer and regulatory shifts, we continue to shift our portfolio toward more good-for-you and better-for-you products, through both organic innovation and strategic mergers and acquisitions. We have increased our investment in research and development by 45 percent since 2011, investing approximately $3.5 billion on research and development cumulatively over the past five years. Healthy retail growth. Our success is dependent on the success of our retail partners. We continue to collaborate with our retail partners to sell our products faster, increase cash flow and engage consumers. We also intend to continue to invest in building the new capabilities we will need to succeed in the digital marketplace, including the evolving e-commerce landscape, and to focus on building and sustaining strong relationships with our retail partners. A healthier planet. As a global food and beverage manufacturer, our success depends on the availability of key natural resources required to make our products, including water. We believe that embracing environmentally responsible business practices, such as water conservation, water replenishment and energy efficiency will help sustain our business. We continue to take steps to reduce our environmental footprint, which also allows us to streamline costs and reinvest savings in our business. By improving our water and energy efficiency, reducing packaging materials, cutting waste and promoting sustainable farming practices around the world, we have saved over $600 million over the past five years. A healthy workplace. Our associates are our most valuable asset. We believe that by engaging our associates with opportunities for personal development and promoting ethics in the workplace we can attract the best talent, enhance productivity, spur innovation and position our company to successfully navigate a constantly changing macroeconomic environment. Healthier communities. We are a global company, operating in more than 200 countries and territories, but we consider ourselves to be a member of every local community where we operate. By being responsible and responsive to the needs of our communities, we believe we strengthen our business , positioning the Company for long-term success. Our Operations See Item 1. Business. for information on our divisions and a description of our distribution network, ingredients and other supplies, brands and intellectual property rights, seasonality, customers and competition. In addition, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for financial information about our divisions and geographic areas. 43 Table of Contents Other Relationships Certain members of our Board of Directors also serve on the boards of certain vendors and customers. These Board members do not participate in our vendor selection and negotiations nor in our customer negotiations. Our transactions with these vendors and customers are in the normal course of business and are consistent with terms negotiated with other vendors and customers. In addition, certain of our employees serve on the boards of Pepsi Bottling Ventures LLC and other affiliated companies of PepsiCo and do not receive incremental compensation for such services. Our Business Risks We are subject to risks in the normal course of business. During 2016 and 2015, certain jurisdictions in which our products are made, manufactured, distributed or sold operated in a challenging environment, experiencing unstable economic, political and social conditions, civil unrest, debt and credit issues, and currency fluctuations. We continue to monitor the economic, operating and political environment in these markets closely and to identify actions to potentially mitigate any unfavorable impacts on our future results. In addition, certain jurisdictions in which our products are made, manufactured, distributed or sold have either imposed, or are considering imposing, new or increased taxes on the manufacture, sale or distribution of our products, ingredients or substances contained in, or attributes of, our products or commodities used in the production of our products. These taxes vary in scope and form: some apply to all beverages, including non-caloric beverages, while others apply only to beverages with a caloric sweetener (e.g., sugar). Similarly, some measures apply a single tax rate per liquid ounce while others apply a graduated tax rate depending upon the amount of added sugar in the beverage. We sell a wide variety of beverages, foods and snack in more than 200 countries and territories and the profile of the products we sell, and the amount of revenue attributable to such products, varies by jurisdiction. Because of this, we cannot predict the scope or form potential taxes or other potential limitations on our products may take, and therefore cannot predict the impact of such taxes or limitations on our financial results. In addition, taxes and limitations may impact us and our competitors differently. We continue to monitor existing and proposed taxes in the jurisdictions in which our products are made, manufactured, distributed and sold and to consider actions we may take to potentially mitigate the unfavorable impact, if any, of such taxes or limitations, including advocating alternative measures with respect to the imposition, form and scope of any such taxes or limitations. See also Item 1A. Risk Factors, Executive Overview above and Market Risks below for more information about these risks and the actions we have taken to address key challenges. Risk Management Framework The achievement of our strategic and operating objectives involves taking risks. To identify, assess, prioritize, address, manage, monitor and communicate these risks across the Company operations, we leverage an integrated risk management framework. This framework includes the following: PepsiCo Board of Directors has oversight responsibility for PepsiCo integrated risk management framework. One of the Board primary responsibilities is overseeing and interacting with senior management with respect to key aspects of the Company business, including risk assessment and risk mitigation of the Company top risks. The Board receives updates on key risks throughout the year. In addition, the Board has tasked designated Committees of the Board with oversight of certain categories of risk management, and the Committees report to the Board regularly on these matters. The Audit Committee of the Board reviews and assesses the guidelines and policies governing PepsiCo risk management and oversight processes, and assists the Board oversight of financial, compliance and employee safety risks facing PepsiCo; 44 Table of Contents The Compensation Committee of the Board reviews PepsiCo employee compensation policies and practices to assess whether such policies and practices could lead to unnecessary risk-taking behavior; and In 2017, the Board established a Public Policy and Sustainability Committee to assist the Board in its oversight of PepsiCo policies, programs and related risks that concern key public policy and sustainability matters. The PepsiCo Risk Committee (PRC), which is comprised of a cross-functional, geographically diverse, senior management group, including PepsiCo Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, meets regularly to identify, assess, prioritize and address top strategic, financial, operating, compliance, safety, reputational and other risks. The PRC is also responsible for reporting progress on our risk mitigation efforts to the Board; Division and key country risk committees, comprised of cross-functional senior management teams, meet regularly to identify, assess, prioritize and address division and country-specific business risks; PepsiCo Risk Management Office, which manages the overall risk management process, provides ongoing guidance, tools and analytical support to the PRC and the division and key country risk committees, identifies and assesses potential risks and facilitates ongoing communication between the parties, as well as with PepsiCo Board of Directors and the Audit Committee of the Board; PepsiCo Corporate Audit Department evaluates the ongoing effectiveness of our key internal controls through periodic audit and review procedures; and PepsiCo Compliance & Ethics Department leads and coordinates our compliance policies and practices. Market Risks We are exposed to market risks arising from adverse changes in: commodity prices, affecting the cost of our raw materials and energy; foreign exchange rates and currency restrictions; and interest rates. In the normal course of business, we manage commodity price, foreign exchange and interest rate risks through a variety of strategies, including productivity initiatives, global purchasing programs and hedging. Ongoing productivity initiatives involve the identification and effective implementation of meaningful cost-saving opportunities or efficiencies, including the use of derivatives. Our global purchasing programs include fixed-price contracts and purchase orders and pricing agreements. See Unfavorable economic conditions may have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations. and Our business, financial condition or results of operations may be adversely affected by increased costs, disruption of supply or shortages of raw materials, energy, water and other supplies. in Item 1A. Risk Factors. See Our Liquidity and Capital Resources for further information on our non-cancelable purchasing commitments. The fair value of our derivatives fluctuates based on market rates and prices. The sensitivity of our derivatives to these market fluctuations is discussed below. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of these derivatives and our hedging policies. See Our Critical Accounting Policies for a discussion of the exposure of our pension and retiree medical plan assets and liabilities to risks related to market fluctuations. Inflationary, deflationary and recessionary conditions impacting these market risks also impact the demand for and pricing of our products. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion. 45 Table of Contents Commodity Prices Our commodity derivatives had a total notional value of $0.8 billion as of December 31, 2016 and $1.0 billion as of December 26, 2015 . At the end of 2016 , the potential change in fair value of commodity derivative instruments, assuming a 10% decrease in the underlying commodity price, would have decreased our net unrealized gains in 2016 by $89 million . Foreign Exchange Our operations outside of the United States generated 42% of our net revenue in 2016 , with Mexico, Canada, Russia, the United Kingdom and Brazil comprising approximately 19% of our net revenue in 2016 . As a result, we are exposed to foreign exchange risks in the international markets in which our products are made, manufactured, distributed or sold. During 2016 , unfavorable foreign exchange negatively impacted net revenue performance by 3 percentage points, primarily due to the Mexican peso, Russian ruble, Pound sterling, Egyptian pound, Argentine peso and the Canadian dollar. Currency declines against the U.S. dollar which are not offset could adversely impact our future financial results. In addition, volatile economic, political and social conditions and civil unrest in certain markets in which our products are made, manufactured, distributed or sold, including in Brazil, China, Greece, India, Mexico, the Middle East, Russia and Turkey, and currency fluctuations in certain of these international markets continue to result in challenging operating environments. We also continue to monitor the economic and political developments related to the referendum in the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, and the potential impact, if any, for the ESSA segment and our other businesses. Starting in 2014, Russia announced economic sanctions against the United States and other nations that include a ban on imports of certain ingredients and finished goods from specific countries. These sanctions have not had and are not expected to have a material impact on the results of our operations in Russia or our consolidated results or financial position, and we will continue to monitor the economic, operating and political environment in Russia closely. For the years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 , total net revenue generated by our operations in Russia represented 4%, 4% and 7% of our consolidated net revenue, respectively. As of December 31, 2016 , our long-lived assets in Russia were $4.4 billion . Our foreign currency derivatives had a total notional value of $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2016 and $2.1 billion as of December 26, 2015 . The total notional amount of our debt instruments designated as net investment hedges was $0.8 billion as of December 31, 2016 . At the end of 2016 , we estimate that an unfavorable 10% change in the underlying exchange rates would have decreased our net unrealized gains in 2016 by $122 million . Conditions in Venezuela, including restrictive exchange control regulations and reduced access to U.S. dollars through official currency exchange markets, have resulted in an other-than-temporary lack of exchangeability between the Venezuelan bolivar and the U.S. dollar. The exchange restrictions and other conditions have significantly impacted our ability to effectively manage our businesses in Venezuela, including limiting our ability to import certain raw materials and to settle U.S. dollar-denominated obligations, and have restricted our ability to realize the earnings generated out of our Venezuelan businesses. We expect these conditions will continue for the foreseeable future. As a result of these factors, we concluded that, effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015, we did not meet the accounting criteria for control over our wholly-owned Venezuelan subsidiaries, and we no longer had significant influence over our beverage joint venture with our franchise bottler in Venezuela. Therefore, effective at the end of the third quarter of 2015, we deconsolidated our Venezuelan subsidiaries and began accounting for our investments in our Venezuelan subsidiaries and joint venture using the cost method of 46 Table of Contents accounting. We reduced the value of the cost method investments to their estimated fair values, resulting in a full impairment. The factors that led to our conclusions at the end of the third quarter of 2015 continued to exist through the end of 2016. For further information, please refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements and Items Affecting Comparability. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2015, our financial results have not included the results of our Venezuelan businesses. We do not have any guarantees related to our Venezuelan entities, and our ongoing contractual commitments to our Venezuelan businesses are not material. We will recognize income from dividends and sales of inventory to our Venezuelan entities, which have not been and are not expected to be material, to the extent cash in U.S. dollars is received. We did not receive any cash in U.S. dollars from our Venezuelan entities during the fourth quarter of 2015 or fiscal year 2016. We will continue to monitor the conditions in Venezuela and their impact on our accounting and disclosures. In 2015, the results of our operations in Venezuela, which include the months of January through August, generated 2% of net revenue and 2% of operating profit, prior to the impairment charges of $1.4 billion. Interest Rates Our interest rate derivatives had a total notional value of $11.2 billion as of December 31, 2016 and $12.5 billion as of December 26, 2015 . Assuming year-end 2016 investment levels and variable rate debt, a 1-percentage-point increase in interest rates would have decreased our net interest expense in 2016 by $20 million due to higher cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments levels as compared with our variable rate debt. OUR CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES An appreciation of our critical accounting policies is necessary to understand our financial results. These policies may require management to make difficult and subjective judgments regarding uncertainties, and as a result, such estimates may significantly impact our financial results. The precision of these estimates and the likelihood of future changes depend on a number of underlying variables and a range of possible outcomes. Other than our accounting for pension and retiree medical plans, our critical accounting policies do not involve a choice between alternative methods of accounting. With the exception of our change in 2016 to the full yield approach to estimate the service and interest cost components for our pension and retiree medical plans as described below, we applied our critical accounting policies and estimation methods consistently in all material respects, and for all periods presented. We have discussed our critical accounting policies with our Audit Committee. Our critical accounting policies are: revenue recognition; goodwill and other intangible assets; income tax expense and accruals; and pension and retiree medical plans. Revenue Recognition Our products are sold for cash or on credit terms. Our credit terms, which are established in accordance with local and industry practices, typically require payment within 30 days of delivery in the United States, and generally within 30 to 90 days internationally, and may allow discounts for early payment. We recognize revenue upon shipment or delivery to our customers based on written sales terms that do not allow for a right of return. However, our policy for DSD and certain chilled products is to remove and replace damaged and out-of-date products from store shelves to ensure that consumers receive the product quality and freshness they expect. Similarly, our policy for certain warehouse-distributed products is to replace damaged and out- 47 Table of Contents of-date products. Based on our experience with this practice, we have reserved for anticipated damaged and out-of-date products. Our policy is to provide customers with product when needed. In fact, our commitment to freshness and product dating serves to regulate the quantity of product shipped or delivered. In addition, DSD products are placed on the shelf by our employees with customer shelf space and storerooms limiting the quantity of product. For product delivered through other distribution networks, we monitor customer inventory levels. As discussed in Our Customers in Item 1. Business, we offer sales incentives and discounts through various programs to customers and consumers. Total marketplace spending includes sales incentives, discounts, advertising and other marketing activities. Sales incentives and discounts are primarily accounted for as a reduction of revenue and include payments to customers for performing merchandising activities on our behalf, such as payments for in-store displays, payments to gain distribution of new products, payments for shelf space and discounts to promote lower retail prices. Sales incentives and discounts also include support provided to our independent bottlers through funding of advertising and other marketing activities. A number of our sales incentives, such as bottler funding to independent bottlers and customer volume rebates, are based on annual targets, and accruals are established during the year for the expected payout. These accruals are based on contract terms and our historical experience with similar programs and require management judgment with respect to estimating customer participation and performance levels. Differences between estimated expense and actual incentive costs are normally insignificant and are recognized in earnings in the period such differences are determined. In addition, certain advertising and marketing costs are also based on annual targets and recognized during the year as incurred. The terms of most of our incentive arrangements do not exceed a year, and therefore do not require highly uncertain long-term estimates. Certain arrangements, such as fountain pouring rights, may extend beyond one year. Costs incurred to obtain these arrangements are recognized over the shorter of the economic or contractual life, primarily as a reduction of revenue, and the remaining balances of $291 million as of December 31, 2016 and $ 321 million as of December 26, 2015 are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets on our balance sheet. For interim reporting, our policy is to allocate our forecasted full-year sales incentives for most of our programs to each of our interim reporting periods in the same year that benefits from the programs. The allocation methodology is based on our forecasted sales incentives for the full year and the proportion of each interim period actual gross revenue or volume, as applicable, to our forecasted annual gross revenue or volume, as applicable. Based on our review of the forecasts at each interim period, any changes in estimates and the related allocation of sales incentives are recognized beginning in the interim period that they are identified. In addition, we apply a similar allocation methodology for interim reporting purposes for certain advertising and other marketing activities. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on our total marketplace spending. Our annual financial statements are not impacted by this interim allocation methodology. We estimate and reserve for our bad debt exposure based on our experience with past due accounts and collectibility, the aging of accounts receivable and our analysis of customer data. Bad debt expense is classified within selling, general and administrative expenses in our income statement. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets We sell products under a number of brand names, many of which were developed by us. Brand development costs are expensed as incurred. We also purchase brands and other intangible assets in acquisitions. In a business combination, the consideration is first assigned to identifiable assets and liabilities, including brands and other intangible assets, based on estimated fair values, with any excess recorded as goodwill. Determining fair value requires significant estimates and assumptions based on an evaluation of a number of factors, such 48 Table of Contents as marketplace participants, product life cycles, market share, consumer awareness, brand history and future expansion expectations, amount and timing of future cash flows and the discount rate applied to the cash flows. We believe that a brand has an indefinite life if it has a history of strong revenue and cash flow performance and we have the intent and ability to support the brand with marketplace spending for the foreseeable future. If these perpetual brand criteria are not met, brands are amortized over their expected useful lives, which generally range from 20 to 40 years. Determining the expected life of a brand requires management judgment and is based on an evaluation of a number of factors, including market share, consumer awareness, brand history, future expansion expectations and regulatory restrictions, as well as the macroeconomic environment of the countries in which the brand is sold. In connection with previous acquisitions, we reacquired certain franchise rights which provided the exclusive and perpetual rights to manufacture and/or distribute beverages for sale in specified territories. In determining the useful life of these franchise rights, many factors were considered, including the pre-existing perpetual bottling arrangements, the indefinite period expected for these franchise rights to contribute to our future cash flows, as well as the lack of any factors that would limit the useful life of these franchise rights to us, including legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, economic or other factors. Therefore, certain of these franchise rights are considered as indefinite-lived, with the balance amortized over the remaining contractual period of the contract in which the right was granted. Indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill are not amortized and are assessed for impairment at least annually, using either a qualitative or quantitative approach. We perform this annual assessment during our third quarter. Where we use the qualitative assessment, first we determine if, based on qualitative factors, it is more likely than not that an impairment exists. Factors considered include macroeconomic, industry and competitive conditions, legal and regulatory environment, historical financial performance and significant changes in the brand or reporting unit. If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that an impairment exists, then a quantitative assessment is performed. The quantitative assessment requires an analysis of several estimates including future cash flows or income consistent with management strategic business plans, annual sales growth rates, perpetuity growth assumptions and the selection of assumptions underlying a discount rate (weighted-average cost of capital) based on market data available at the time. Significant management judgment is necessary to estimate the impact of competitive operating, macroeconomic and other factors to estimate future levels of sales, operating profit or cash flows. All assumptions used in our impairment evaluations for nonamortizable intangible assets, such as forecasted growth rates and weighted-average cost of capital, are based on the best available market information and are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. These assumptions could be adversely impacted by certain of the risks described in Item 1A. Risk Factors and Our Business Risks. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on performing the quantitative assessment. Amortizable intangible assets are only evaluated for impairment upon a significant change in the operating or macroeconomic environment. If an evaluation of the undiscounted future cash flows indicates impairment, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value, which is based on its discounted future cash flows. We did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill in each of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 . We recognized no material impairment charges for nonamortizable intangible assets in each of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 . As of December 31, 2016 , the estimated fair values of our indefinite-lived reacquired and acquired franchise rights recorded at NAB exceeded their carrying values. However, there could be an impairment of the carrying value of NAB reacquired and acquired franchise rights if future revenues and 49 Table of Contents their contribution to the operating results of NAB CSD business do not achieve our expected future cash flows or if macroeconomic conditions result in a future increase in the weighted-average cost of capital used to estimate fair value. We have also analyzed the impact of macroeconomic conditions in Russia and Brazil on the estimated fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets in these countries and have concluded that there is no impairment as of December 31, 2016 . However, there could be an impairment of the carrying value of certain brands in these countries if there is a further deterioration in these conditions, if future revenues and their contributions to the operating results do not achieve our expected future cash flows or if macroeconomic conditions result in a future increase in the weighted-average cost of capital used to estimate fair value. Income Tax Expense and Accruals Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining our annual tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions. We establish reserves when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are fully supportable, we believe that certain positions are subject to challenge and that we likely will not succeed. We adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest, in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of a tax audit. See Increases in income tax rates, changes in income tax laws or disagreements with tax authorities could adversely affect our business, financial condition or results of operations. in Item 1A. Risk Factors. An estimated annual effective tax rate is applied to our quarterly operating results. In the event there is a significant or unusual item recognized in our quarterly operating results, the tax attributable to that item is separately calculated and recorded at the same time as that item. We consider the tax adjustments from the resolution of prior year tax matters to be among such items. Tax law requires items to be included in our tax returns at different times than the items are reflected in our financial statements. As a result, our annual tax rate reflected in our financial statements is different than that reported in our tax returns (our cash tax rate). Some of these differences are permanent, such as expenses that are not deductible in our tax return, and some differences reverse over time, such as depreciation expense. These temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in our tax returns in future years for which we have already recorded the tax benefit in our income statement. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent tax expense recognized in our financial statements for which payment has been deferred, or expense for which we have already taken a deduction in our tax return but have not yet recognized as expense in our financial statements. In 2016 , our annual tax rate was 25.4% compared to 26.1% in 2015 , as discussed in Other Consolidated Results. The tax rate decreased 0.7 percentage points compared to 2015 reflecting the impact of the 2015 Venezuela impairment charges, which had no corresponding tax benefit, partially offset by the 2015 favorable resolution with the IRS of substantially all open matters related to the audits for taxable years 2010 and 2011, as well as the 2016 impairment charge recorded to reduce the value of our 5% indirect equity interest in TAB to its estimated fair value, which had no corresponding tax benefit. Pension and Retiree Medical Plans Our pension plans cover certain employees in the United States and certain international employees. Benefits are determined based on either years of service or a combination of years of service and earnings. Certain U.S. and Canada retirees are also eligible for medical and life insurance benefits (retiree medical) if they meet age and service requirements. Generally, our share of retiree medical costs is capped at specified dollar 50 Table of Contents amounts, which vary based upon years of service, with retirees contributing the remainder of the cost. In addition, we have been phasing out certain subsidies of retiree medical benefits. In 2016, we approved an amendment to reorganize the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plans that resulted in the combination of two plans effective December 31, 2016, and the spinoff of a portion of the combined plan into a pre-existing plan effective January 1, 2017. The benefits offered to the plans participants were unchanged. The result of the reorganization was the creation of the PepsiCo Employees Retirement Plan A, or active plan, and the PepsiCo Employees Retirement Plan I, or inactive plan. The reorganization was made to facilitate a targeted investment strategy over time and to provide additional flexibility in evaluating opportunities to reduce risk and volatility. Actuarial gains and losses associated with the active plan will continue to be amortized over the average remaining service life of the active participants (approximately 11 years beginning in 2017), while the actuarial gains and losses associated with the inactive plan will be amortized over the remaining life expectancy of the inactive participants (approximately 27 years beginning in 2017). As a result of these changes, benefit plan pre-tax expense is expected to decrease by approximately $40 million in 2017, primarily impacting corporate unallocated. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. In 2016, the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plans purchased a group annuity contract whereby an unrelated insurance company assumed the obligation to pay and administer future annuity payments for certain retirees. In 2016, we made discretionary contributions of $452 million primarily to fund the transfer of the obligation. This transaction triggered a pre-tax settlement charge of $242 million ($162 million after-tax or $0.11 per share). See Items Affecting Comparability and Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. In 2014, we offered certain former employees who had vested benefits in our U.S. defined benefit pension plans the option of receiving a one-time lump sum payment equal to the present value of the participant pension benefit (payable in cash or rolled over into a qualified retirement plan or Individual Retirement Account (IRA)). In 2014, we made a discretionary contribution of $388 million to fund substantially all of these payments. As a result, we recorded a pre-tax pension lump sum settlement charge in corporate unallocated expenses of $141 million ( $88 million after-tax or $0.06 per share). See Items Affecting Comparability and Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. Our Assumptions The determination of pension and retiree medical expenses and obligations requires the use of assumptions to estimate the amount of benefits that employees earn while working, as well as the present value of those benefits. Annual pension and retiree medical expense amounts are principally based on four components: (1) the value of benefits earned by employees for working during the year (service cost), (2) the increase in the projected benefit obligation due to the passage of time (interest cost), and (3) other gains and losses as discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements, reduced by (4) the expected return on assets for our funded plans. Significant assumptions used to measure our annual pension and retiree medical expenses include: certain employee-related demographic factors, such as turnover, retirement age and mortality; the expected return on assets in our funded plans; for pension expense, the rate of salary increases for plans where benefits are based on earnings; for retiree medical expense, health care cost trend rates; and for pension and retiree medical expense, the spot rates along the yield curve used to determine the present value of liabilities and, beginning in 2016, to determine service and interest costs. 51 Table of Contents Certain assumptions reflect our historical experience and management best judgment regarding future expectations. Due to the significant management judgment involved, our assumptions could have a material impact on the measurement of our pension and retiree medical expenses and obligations. At each measurement date, the discount rates are based on interest rates for high-quality, long-term corporate debt securities with maturities comparable to those of our liabilities. Our U.S. obligation and pension and retiree medical expense is based on the discount rates determined using the Mercer Above Mean Curve. This curve includes bonds that closely match the timing and amount of our expected benefit payments and reflects the portfolio of investments we would consider to settle our liabilities. Effective as of the beginning of 2016, we changed the method we use to estimate the service and interest cost components of net periodic benefit cost for our U.S. and the majority of our significant international pension and retiree medical plans. Historically, we estimated the service and interest cost components using a single weighted-average discount rate derived from the yield curve used to measure the projected benefit obligation (or accumulated post-retirement benefit obligation for the retiree medical plans) at the beginning of the period. We have now elected to use a full yield curve approach in the estimation of these components of benefit cost by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve used in the determination of the benefit obligation to the relevant projected cash flows. We have made this change to improve the correlation between projected benefit cash flows and the corresponding yield curve spot rates, which we believe will result in a more precise measurement of service and interest costs. This change does not affect the measurement of our benefit obligation. We have accounted for this change in estimate on a prospective basis as of the beginning of 2016. The pre-tax reduction in net periodic benefit cost associated with this change was $125 million ($81 million after-tax or $0.06 per share) for the full year 2016. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for information about the expected rate of return on plan assets and our plans investment strategy. Although we review our expected long-term rates of return on an annual basis, our asset returns in a given year do not significantly influence our evaluation of long-term rates of return. The health care trend rate used to determine our retiree medical plan liability and expense is reviewed annually. Our review is based on our claims experience, information provided by our health plans and actuaries, and our knowledge of the health care industry. Our review of the trend rate considers factors such as demographics, plan design, new medical technologies and changes in medical carriers. Weighted-average assumptions for pension and retiree medical expense are as follows: 2017 2016 2015 Pension Service cost discount rate (a) 4.3 % 4.5 % n/a Interest cost discount rate (a) 3.5 % 3.8 % n/a Expense discount rate (a) n/a n/a 4.1 % Expected rate of return on plan assets 7.2 % 7.2 % 7.3 % Expected rate of salary increases 3.2 % 3.2 % 3.5 % Retiree medical Service cost discount rate (a) 4.0 % 4.3 % n/a Interest cost discount rate (a) 3.2 % 3.3 % n/a Expense discount rate (a) n/a n/a 3.8 % Expected rate of return on plan assets 7.5 % 7.5 % 7.5 % Current health care cost trend rate 5.9 % 6.0 % 6.2 % (a) In the first quarter of 2016, we changed the method we use to estimate the service and interest cost components of pension and retiree medical expense. 52 Table of Contents In general, lower discount rates increase the size of the projected benefit obligation and pension expense in the following year, while higher discount rates reduce the size of the projected benefit obligation and pension expense. Based on our assumptions, we expect our total pension and retiree medical expense to decrease in 2017 primarily driven by cost savings due to the recognition of prior experience gains on plan assets, the reorganization of the plans and the transfer of our obligation for certain retirees to an unrelated insurance company, partially offset by lower discount rates. Sensitivity of Assumptions A decrease in each of the collective discount rates or in the expected rate of return assumptions would increase expense for our benefit plans. Under the full-yield-curve approach adopted at the beginning of 2016, a 25-basis-point decrease in each of the above discount rates and expected rate of return assumptions would increase the 2017 pension and retiree medical expense as follows: Assumption Amount Discount rates used in the calculation of expense $37 Expected rate of return $36 See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information about the sensitivity of our retiree medical cost assumptions. Funding We make contributions to pension trusts that provide plan benefits for certain pension plans. These contributions are made in accordance with applicable tax regulations that provide for current tax deductions for our contributions and taxation to the employee only upon receipt of plan benefits. Generally, we do not fund our pension plans when our contributions would not be currently tax deductible. As our retiree medical plans are not subject to regulatory funding requirements, we generally fund these plans on a pay-as-you-go basis, although we periodically review available options to make additional contributions toward these benefits. Our pension and retiree medical contributions are subject to change as a result of many factors, such as changes in interest rates, deviations between actual and expected asset returns and changes in tax or other benefit laws. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for our past and expected contributions and estimated future benefit payments. 53 Table of Contents OUR FINANCIAL RESULTS Results of Operations Consolidated Review In the discussions of net revenue and operating profit below, effective net pricing reflects the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries and net pricing reflects the year-over-year combined impact of list price changes, weight changes per package, discounts and allowances. Additionally, acquisitions and divestitures, except as otherwise noted, reflect all mergers and acquisitions activity, including the impact of acquisitions, divestitures and changes in ownership or control in consolidated subsidiaries and nonconsolidated equity investees. The impact of the structural change related to the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan businesses is presented separately. Volume Our beverage volume in the NAB, Latin America, ESSA and AMENA segments reflects sales to authorized bottlers, independent distributors and retailers, as well as the sale of beverages bearing Company-owned or licensed trademarks that have been sold through our authorized independent bottlers. Bottler case sales (BCS) and concentrate shipments and equivalents (CSE) are not necessarily equal during any given period due to seasonality, timing of product launches, product mix, bottler inventory practices and other factors. While our beverage revenues are not entirely based on BCS volume, as there are independent bottlers in the supply chain, we believe that BCS is a valuable measure as it quantifies the sell-through of our beverage products at the consumer level. Sales of products from our unconsolidated joint ventures are reflected in our reported volume. NAB, Latin America, ESSA and AMENA, either independently or in conjunction with third parties, make, market, distribute and sell ready-to-drink tea products through a joint venture with Unilever (under the Lipton brand name), and NAB further, either independently or in conjunction with third parties, makes, markets, distributes and sells ready-to-drink coffee products through a joint venture with Starbucks. In addition, AMENA licenses the Tropicana brand for use in China on co-branded juice products in connection with a strategic alliance with Tingyi. Our food and snacks volume in the FLNA, QFNA, Latin America, ESSA and AMENA segments is reported on a system-wide basis, which includes our own sales and the sales by our noncontrolled affiliates of snacks bearing Company-owned or licensed trademarks. Servings Since our divisions each use different measures of physical unit volume (i.e., kilos, gallons, pounds and case sales), a common servings metric is necessary to reflect our consolidated physical unit volume. Our divisions physical volume measures are converted into servings based on U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines for single-serving sizes of our products. In 2016 and 2015 , total servings increased 3% and 1% compared to 2015 and 2014 , respectively. Excluding the impact of the 53 rd reporting week, total servings in 2016 increased 2% compared to 2015. Servings growth reflects adjustments to the prior year results for divestitures and other structural changes, including the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan businesses effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015. 54 Table of Contents Total Net Revenue and Operating Profit/(Loss) Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Total net revenue $ 62,799 $ 63,056 $ 66,683 % (5 )% Operating profit/(loss) FLNA $ 4,659 $ 4,304 $ 4,054 8 % 6 % QFNA 653 560 621 16 % (10 )% NAB 2,959 2,785 2,421 6 % 15 % Latin America 887 (206 ) 1,636 n/m (113 )% ESSA 1,108 1,081 1,389 2.5 % (22 )% AMENA 619 941 985 (34 )% (4.5 )% Corporate Unallocated (1,100 ) (1,112 ) (1,525 ) (1 )% (27 )% Total operating profit $ 9,785 $ 8,353 $ 9,581 17 % (13 )% Total operating profit margin 15.6 % 13.2 % 14.4 % 2.3 (1.2 ) n/m - Not meaningful due to the impact of impairment charges associated with a change in accounting for our Venezuela operations in 2015. 2016 Total operating profit increased 17% and operating margin increased 2.3 percentage points. Operating profit growth was driven by the benefit of actions associated with our productivity initiatives, which contributed more than $1 billion in cost reductions across a number of expense categories throughout all of our segments, effective net pricing and volume growth. Additionally, the impact of recording an impairment charge in the prior year and ceasing the operations of our MQD joint venture contributed 1 percentage point to operating profit growth. These impacts were partially offset by certain operating cost increases, higher advertising and marketing expenses, unfavorable foreign exchange and higher commodity costs, as well as the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan businesses, which reduced operating profit growth by 2 percentage points. Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) contributed 13 percentage points to operating profit growth and increased total operating profit margin by 1.5 percentage points, primarily reflecting a 17-percentage-point contribution from the prior-year Venezuela impairment charges. Higher commodity inflation reduced operating profit growth by 1 percentage point, primarily attributable to inflation in the Latin America, ESSA and AMENA segments, partially offset by deflation in the NAB, FLNA and QFNA segments. The impact of our 53 rd reporting week was fully offset by incremental investments we made in our business. Corporate unallocated expenses decreased 1%, driven by lower pension expense reflecting the change to the full yield curve approach, lower foreign exchange transaction losses and decreases in other corporate expenses, partially offset by increased contributions to The PepsiCo Foundation, Inc. to fund charitable and social programs and the net impact of items affecting comparability mentioned above included in corporate unallocated expenses. 2015 Total operating profit decreased 13% and operating margin decreased 1.2 percentage points. Operating profit performance was primarily driven by certain operating cost increases, unfavorable foreign exchange, higher commodity costs and increased advertising and marketing expenses. These impacts were partially offset by effective net pricing, the benefit of actions associated with our productivity initiatives, which contributed more than $1 billion in cost reductions across a number of expense categories throughout all of our segments, and volume growth. Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) negatively impacted operating profit performance by 9 percentage points and decreased total operating profit margin by 1.4 percentage points, primarily reflecting the Venezuela impairment charges. Higher commodity inflation negatively impacted operating profit performance by 5 percentage points, primarily attributable to inflation 55 Table of Contents in the Latin America and ESSA segments, partially offset by deflation in the NAB, FLNA, AMENA and QFNA segments. Additionally, impairment charges in the QFNA segment associated with our MQD joint venture and the fourth quarter impact of our Venezuelan businesses (as a result of the deconsolidation) each negatively impacted reported operating profit performance by 1 percentage point. Corporate unallocated expenses decreased 27%, primarily reflecting the impact of items affecting comparability mentioned above included in corporate unallocated expenses and decreased pension expense, partially offset by increased research and development costs and charges associated with productivity initiatives outside the scope of the 2014 and 2012 Productivity Plans. Other Consolidated Results Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Interest expense, net $ (1,232 ) $ (911 ) $ (824 ) $ (321 ) $ (87 ) Annual tax rate 25.4 % 26.1 % 25.1 % Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,329 $ 5,452 $ 6,513 16 % (16 )% Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted $ 4.36 $ 3.67 $ 4.27 19 % (14 )% Mark-to-market net (gains)/losses (0.08 ) 0.03 Restructuring and impairment charges 0.09 0.12 0.21 Charges related to the transaction with Tingyi 0.26 0.05 Charge related to debt redemption 0.11 Pension-related settlement charges/(benefits) 0.11 (0.03 ) 0.06 Venezuela impairment charges 0.91 Tax benefit (0.15 ) Venezuela remeasurement charge 0.07 Net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted, excluding above items (a) $ 4.85 $ 4.57 $ 4.63 (b) 6 % (1 )% Impact of foreign exchange translation 3 11 Growth in net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted, excluding above items, on a constant currency basis (a) 9 % 10 % (a) See Non-GAAP Measures. (b) Does not sum due to rounding. 2016 Net interest expense increased $321 million reflecting a charge of $233 million representing the premium paid in accordance with the make-whole redemption provisions to redeem all of our outstanding 7.900% senior notes due 2018 and 5.125% senior notes due 2019 for the principal amounts of $1.5 billion and $750 million, respectively. This increase also reflects higher average debt balances, partially offset by higher interest income due to higher average cash balances, as well as gains on the market value of investments used to economically hedge a portion of our deferred compensation costs. The reported tax rate decreased 0.7 percentage points due to the impact of the 2015 Venezuela impairment charges, which had no corresponding tax benefit, partially offset by the 2015 favorable resolution with the IRS of substantially all open matters related to the audits for taxable years 2010 and 2011, as well as the 2016 impairment charge recorded to reduce the value of our 5% indirect equity interest in TAB to its estimated fair value, which had no corresponding tax benefit. 56 Table of Contents Net income attributable to PepsiCo increased 16% and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share increased 19% . Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) positively contributed 12 percentage points to net income attributable to PepsiCo and 13 percentage points to net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share. 2015 Net interest expense increased $87 million , reflecting higher rates on our debt balances and lower gains on the market value of investments used to economically hedge a portion of our deferred compensation costs. The reported tax rate increased 1.0 percentage point reflecting the impact of the Venezuela impairment charges, which had no accompanying tax benefit, partially offset by the favorable resolution with the IRS of substantially all open matters related to the audits for taxable years 2010 and 2011. Net income attributable to PepsiCo decreased 16% and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share decreased 14% . Items affecting comparability (see Items Affecting Comparability ) negatively impacted net income attributable to PepsiCo by 12 percentage points and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share by 13 percentage points. Non-GAAP Measures Certain financial measures contained in this Form 10-K adjust for the impact of specified items and are not in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). We use non-GAAP financial measures internally to make operating and strategic decisions, including the preparation of our annual operating plan, evaluation of our overall business performance and as a factor in determining compensation for certain employees. We believe presenting non-GAAP financial measures in this Form 10-K provides additional information to facilitate comparison of our historical operating results and trends in our underlying operating results, and provides additional transparency on how we evaluate our business. We also believe presenting these measures in this Form 10-K allows investors to view our performance using the same measures that we use in evaluating our financial and business performance and trends. We consider quantitative and qualitative factors in assessing whether to adjust for the impact of items that may be significant or that could affect an understanding of our ongoing financial and business performance or trends. Examples of items for which we may make adjustments include: amounts related to mark-to-market gains or losses (non-cash); gains or losses associated with mergers, acquisitions, divestitures and other structural changes; charges related to restructuring programs; asset impairments (non-cash); amounts related to the resolution of tax positions; pension and retiree medical related items; debt redemptions; and remeasurements of net monetary assets. See below and Items Affecting Comparability for a description of adjustments to our U.S. GAAP financial measures in this Form 10-K. Non-GAAP information should be considered as supplemental in nature and is not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be the same as or comparable to similar non-GAAP measures presented by other companies. The following non-GAAP financial measures are contained in this 2016 Form 10-K: operating profit/loss, adjusted for items affecting comparability, and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted, adjusted for items affecting comparability, and the corresponding constant currency growth rates; organic revenue; free cash flow; and ROIC and net ROIC, excluding items affecting comparability. 57 Table of Contents Operating Profit/Loss, Adjusted for Items Affecting Comparability, and Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share Diluted, Adjusted for Items Affecting Comparability, and the corresponding Constant Currency Growth Rates Operating profit/loss, adjusted for items affecting comparability, and net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share diluted, adjusted for items affecting comparability, each excludes the net impact of mark-to-market gains and losses on centrally managed commodities that do not qualify for hedge accounting, restructuring and impairment charges related to our 2014 and 2012 Productivity Plans, charges related to the transaction with Tingyi, a charge related to debt redemption, pension-related settlements, Venezuela impairment charges, a tax benefit, and a Venezuela remeasurement charge (see Items Affecting Comparability for a detailed description of each of these items). We also evaluate performance on these measures on a constant currency basis, which measures our financial results assuming constant foreign currency exchange rates used for translation based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-year period. In order to compute our constant currency results, we multiply or divide, as appropriate, our current year U.S. dollar results by the current year average foreign exchange rates and then multiply or divide, as appropriate, those amounts by the prior-year average foreign exchange rates. We believe these measures provide useful information in evaluating the results of our business because they exclude items that we believe are not indicative of our ongoing performance. Organic Revenue We define organic revenue as net revenue adjusted for the impact of foreign exchange translation, as well as the impact from acquisitions, divestitures and other structural changes, including the Venezuela deconsolidation, for the comparable period. The Venezuela deconsolidation impact excludes the results of our Venezuelan businesses for the first three quarters of 2015 and the fourth quarter of 2014. In addition, our fiscal 2016 reported results include an extra week of results. Organic revenue excludes the impact of the 53 rd reporting week in the fourth quarter of 2016. We believe organic revenue provides useful information in evaluating the results of our business because it excludes items that we believe are not indicative of ongoing performance or that we believe impact comparability with the prior year. See Organic Revenue Growth in Results of Operations Division Review. Free Cash Flow We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities less capital spending, plus sales of property, plant and equipment. Since net capital spending is essential to our product innovation initiatives and maintaining our operational capabilities, we believe that it is a recurring and necessary use of cash. As such, we believe investors should also consider net capital spending when evaluating our cash from operating activities. Free cash flow is used by us primarily for financing activities, including debt repayments, dividends and share repurchases. Free cash flow is not a measure of cash available for discretionary expenditures since we have certain non-discretionary obligations such as debt service that are not deducted from this measure. See Free Cash Flow in Our Liquidity and Capital Resources. ROIC and Net ROIC, Excluding Items Affecting Comparability We define ROIC as net income attributable to PepsiCo plus interest expense after-tax divided by the sum of quarterly average debt obligations and quarterly average common shareholders equity. Although ROIC is a common financial metric, numerous methods exist for calculating ROIC. Accordingly, the method used by management to calculate ROIC may differ from the methods other companies use to calculate their ROIC. We believe this metric serves as a measure of how well we use our capital to generate returns. In addition, we use net ROIC, excluding items affecting comparability, to compare our performance over various reporting periods on a consistent basis because it removes from our operating results the impact of items that are not 58 Table of Contents indicative of our ongoing performance and reflects how management evaluates our operating results and trends. We define net ROIC, excluding items affecting comparability, as ROIC, adjusted for quarterly average cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, after-tax interest income and items affecting comparability. We believe the calculation of ROIC and net ROIC, excluding items affecting comparability, provides useful information to investors and is an additional relevant comparison of our performance to consider when evaluating our capital allocation efficiency. See Return on Invested Capital in Our Liquidity and Capital Resources. Items Affecting Comparability Our reported financial results in this Form 10-K are impacted by the following items in each of the following years: 2016 Cost of sales Gross profit Selling, general and administrative expenses Operating profit Interest expense Provision for income taxes (a) Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests Net income attributable to PepsiCo Reported, GAAP Measure $ 28,209 $ 34,590 $ 24,735 $ 9,785 $ 1,342 $ 2,174 $ 50 $ 6,329 Items Affecting Comparability Mark-to-market net impact 78 (78 ) 89 (167 ) (56 ) (111 ) Restructuring and impairment charges (160 ) 160 26 3 131 Charge related to the transaction with Tingyi (373 ) 373 373 Charge related to debt redemption (233 ) 77 156 Pension-related settlement charge (242 ) 242 80 162 Core, Non-GAAP Measure $ 28,287 $ 34,512 $ 24,049 $ 10,393 $ 1,109 $ 2,301 $ 53 $ 7,040 2015 Cost of sales Gross profit Selling, general and administrative expenses Venezuela impairment charges Operating profit Provision for income taxes (a) Net income attributable to PepsiCo Reported, GAAP Measure $ 28,731 $ 34,325 $ 24,538 $ 1,359 $ 8,353 $ 1,941 $ 5,452 Items Affecting Comparability Mark-to-market net impact (18 ) 18 29 (11 ) (3 ) (8 ) Restructuring and impairment charges (230 ) 230 46 184 Charge related to the transaction with Tingyi (73 ) 73 73 Pension-related settlement benefits 67 (67 ) (25 ) (42 ) Venezuela impairment charges (1,359 ) 1,359 1,359 Tax benefit 230 (230 ) Core, Non-GAAP Measure $ 28,713 $ 34,343 $ 24,331 $ $ 9,937 $ 2,189 $ 6,788 2014 Cost of sales Gross profit Selling, general and administrative expenses Operating profit Provision for income taxes (a) Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests Net income attributable to PepsiCo Reported, GAAP Measure $ 31,238 $ 35,445 $ 25,772 $ 9,581 $ 2,199 $ 45 $ 6,513 Items Affecting Comparability Mark-to-market net impact 33 (33 ) (101 ) 68 24 44 Restructuring and impairment charges (418 ) 418 99 3 316 Pension-related settlement charge (141 ) 141 53 88 Venezuela remeasurement charge (105 ) 105 105 Core, Non-GAAP Measure $ 31,271 $ 35,412 $ 25,007 $ 10,313 $ 2,375 $ 48 $ 7,066 (a) Provision for income taxes is the expected tax benefit/charge on the underlying item based on the tax laws and income tax rates applicable to the underlying item in its corresponding tax jurisdiction. 59 Table of Contents Mark-to-Market Net Impact We centrally manage commodity derivatives on behalf of our divisions. These commodity derivatives include agricultural products, energy and metals. Commodity derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment are marked to market each period with the resulting gains and losses recorded in corporate unallocated expenses as either cost of sales or selling, general and administrative expenses, depending on the underlying commodity. These gains and losses are subsequently reflected in division results when the divisions recognize the cost of the underlying commodity in operating profit. Therefore, the divisions realize the economic effects of the derivative without experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in corporate unallocated expenses. Restructuring and Impairment Charges In connection with our 2014 Productivity Plan, we expect to incur pre-tax charges of approximately $990 million , of which approximately $705 million represents cash expenditures, summarized by year as follows: Charges Cash Expenditures 2013 $ 53 $ 2014 357 175 (b) 2015 169 165 (b) 2016 160 95 2017 (expected) 122 143 2018 (expected) 129 127 $ 990 (a) $ 705 (a) This total pre-tax charge is expected to consist of approximately $495 million of severance and other employee-related costs, approximately $150 million for asset impairments (all non-cash) resulting from plant closures and related actions, and approximately $345 million for other costs associated with the implementation of our initiatives, including contract termination costs. This charge is expected to impact reportable segments and Corporate approximately as follows: FLNA 11%, QFNA 2%, NAB 30%, Latin America 20%, ESSA 25%, AMENA 5% and Corporate 7%. (b) In 2015 and 2014 , cash expenditures include $2 million and $10 million , respectively, reported on our cash flow statement in pension and retiree medical plan contributions. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for further information related to our 2014 and 2012 Productivity Plans. We regularly evaluate different productivity initiatives beyond the productivity plans and other initiatives discussed above and in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. Charges Related to the Transaction with Tingyi In 2016, we recorded a pre- and after-tax impairment charge of $373 million ($0.26 per share) in the AMENA segment to reduce the value of our 5% indirect equity interest in TAB to its estimated fair valu e. In 2015, we recorded a pre- and after-tax charge of $73 million ($0.05 per share) in the AMENA segment related to a write-off of the value of a call option to increase our holding in TAB to 20%. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for further information. Charge Related to Debt Redemption In 2016, we paid $2.5 billion to redeem all of our outstanding 7.900% senior notes due 2018 and 5.125% senior notes due 2019 for the principal amounts of $1.5 billion and $750 million, respectively, and terminated certain interest rate swaps. As a result, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $233 million ($156 million after-tax 60 Table of Contents or $0.11 per share) to interest expense, primarily representing the premium paid in accordance with the make-whole redemption provisions. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements. Pension-Related Settlements In 2016, we recorded a pre-tax pension settlement charge in corporate unallocated expenses of $242 million ($162 million after-tax or $0.11 per share) related to the purchase of a group annuity contract. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements. In 2015, we recorded pre-tax benefits of $67 million ($42 million after-tax or $0.03 per share) in the NAB segment associated with the settlement of pension-related liabilities from previous acquisitions. These benefits were recognized in selling, general and administrative expenses. In 2014, we recorded a pre-tax pension lump sum settlement charge in corporate unallocated expenses of $141 million ($88 million after-tax or $0.06 per share) related to payments for pension liabilities to certain former employees who had vested benefits. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statemen ts. Venezuela Impairment Charges In 2015, we recorded pre- and after-tax charges of $1.4 billion ($0.91 per share) in the Latin America segment related to the impairment of investments in our wholly-owned Venezuelan subsidiaries and beverage joint venture. For additional information on Venezuela, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements and Our Business Risks. Tax Benefit In 2015, we recognized a non-cash tax benefit of $ 230 million ($ 0.15 per share) associated with our agreement with the IRS resolving substantially all open matters related to the audits for taxable years 2010 through 2011, which reduced our reserve for uncertain tax positions for the tax years 2010 and 2011. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements. Venezuela Remeasurement Charge In 2014, we recorded a $ 105 million net charge related to our remeasurement of the bolivar for certain net monetary assets of our Venezuelan businesses. $ 126 million of this charge was recorded in corporate unallocated expenses, with the balance (equity income of $ 21 million ) recorded in our Latin America segment. In total, this net charge had an after-tax impact of $ 105 million or $ 0.07 per share. 61 Table of Contents Results of Operations Division Review The results and discussions below are based on how our Chief Executive Officer monitors the performance of our divisions. Accordingly, volume growth measures for 2016 and 2015 reflect adjustments to the 2015 and 2014 results, respectively, for divestitures and other structural changes, including the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan businesses effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015. See Non-GAAP Measures and Items Affecting Comparability for a discussion of items to consider when evaluating our results and related information regarding non-GAAP measures. FLNA QFNA NAB Latin America ESSA AMENA Total Net Revenue, 2016 $ 15,549 $ 2,564 $ 21,312 $ 6,820 $ 10,216 $ 6,338 $ 62,799 Net Revenue, 2015 $ 14,782 $ 2,543 $ 20,618 $ 8,228 $ 10,510 $ 6,375 $ 63,056 % Impact of: Volume (a) 2 % % 1 % 3 % 1.5 % 6 % 2 % Effective net pricing (b) 2 (1 ) 1 7 2.5 (1 ) 2 Foreign exchange translation (11 ) (7 ) (5 ) (3 ) Acquisitions and divestitures (1 ) Venezuela deconsolidation (c) (14 ) (2 ) 53 rd reporting week (d) 2 2 1.5 1 Reported growth (e) 5 % 1 % 3 % (17 )% (3 )% (1 )% % FLNA QFNA NAB Latin America ESSA AMENA Total Net Revenue, 2015 $ 14,782 $ 2,543 $ 20,618 $ 8,228 $ 10,510 $ 6,375 $ 63,056 Net Revenue, 2014 $ 14,502 $ 2,568 $ 20,171 $ 9,425 $ 13,399 $ 6,618 $ 66,683 % Impact of: Volume (a) 1 % 1 % 0.5 % 1 % (2 )% 4 % 0.5 % Effective net pricing (b) 2 3 19 4 0.5 5 Foreign exchange translation (1 ) (2 ) (1 ) (27 ) (24 ) (5 ) (10 ) Acquisitions and divestitures (3 ) Venezuela deconsolidation (c) (6 ) (1 ) Reported growth (e) 2 % (1 )% 2 % (13 )% (22 )% (4 )% (5 )% (a) Excludes the impact of acquisitions and divestitures. In certain instances, volume growth varies from the amounts disclosed in the following divisional discussions due to nonconsolidated joint venture volume, and, for our beverage businesses, temporary timing differences between BCS and CSE, as well as the mix of beverage volume sold by our Company-owned and franchised-owned bottlers. Our net revenue excludes nonconsolidated joint venture volume, and, for our beverage businesses, is based on CSE. (b) Includes the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries. (c) For 2016 and 2015 reported growth, represents the impact of the exclusion of the 2015 and fourth quarter 2014 results of our Venezuelan businesses, respectively, which were deconsolidated effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015. (d) Our fiscal 2016 results include a 53 rd reporting week which increased 2016 net revenue by $657 million, including $294 million in our FLNA segment, $43 million in our QFNA segment, $300 million in our NAB segment and $20 million in our ESSA segment. (e) Amounts may not sum due to rounding. 62 Table of Contents Organic Revenue Growth Organic revenue is a non-GAAP financial measure. For further information on organic revenue see Non-GAAP Measures. 2016 FLNA QFNA NAB Latin America ESSA AMENA Total Reported Growth 5 % 1 % 3 % (17 )% (3 )% (1 )% % % Impact of: Foreign exchange translation 11 7 5 3 Acquisitions and divestitures 1 Venezuela deconsolidation (a) 14 2 53 rd reporting week (b) (2 ) (2 ) (1.5 ) (1 ) Organic Growth (c) 3.5 % % 2 % 9 % 4 % 5 % 4 % 2015 FLNA QFNA NAB Latin America ESSA AMENA Total Reported Growth 2 % (1 )% 2 % (13 )% (22 )% (4 )% (5 )% % Impact of: Foreign exchange translation 1 2 1 27 24 5 10 Acquisitions and divestitures 3 Venezuela deconsolidation (a) 6 1 Organic Growth (c) 3 % 1 % 3 % 20 % 2 % 4 % 5 % (a) For 2016 and 2015 organic revenue growth, represents the impact of the exclusion of the 2015 and fourth quarter 2014 results of our Venezuelan businesses, respectively, which were deconsolidated effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015. (b) Our fiscal 2016 results include a 53 rd reporting week which increased 2016 net revenue by $657 million, including $294 million in our FLNA segment, $43 million in our QFNA segment, $300 million in our NAB segment and $20 million in our ESSA segment. (c) Amounts may not sum due to rounding. 63 Table of Contents Frito-Lay North America % Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Net revenue $ 15,549 $ 14,782 $ 14,502 5 2 Impact of foreign exchange translation 1 Impact of 53 rd reporting week (2 ) Organic revenue growth (a) 3.5 (b) 3 Operating profit $ 4,659 $ 4,304 $ 4,054 8 6 Restructuring and impairment charges 13 26 48 Operating profit excluding above item (a) $ 4,672 $ 4,330 $ 4,102 8 5.5 Impact of foreign exchange translation 1 Operating profit growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis (a) 8 7 (b) (a) See Non-GAAP Measures. (b) Does not sum due to rounding. 2016 Net revenue grew 5%, driven by volume growth and effective net pricing. The 53 rd reporting week contributed 2 percentage points to the net revenue growth. Volume grew 3%, reflecting high-single-digit growth in variety packs, and mid-single-digit growth in trademark Doritos and Cheetos. These gains were partially offset by a mid-single-digit decline in our Sabra joint venture products. The 53 rd reporting week contributed 2 percentage points to the volume growth. Operating profit grew 8%, primarily reflecting the net revenue growth and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, as well as lower commodity costs, which contributed 3 percentage points to operating profit growth, primarily fuel and cooking oil. These impacts were partially offset by certain operating cost increases, including strategic initiatives, and higher advertising and marketing expenses. The 53 rd reporting week contributed 2 percentage points to operating profit growth, partially offset by incremental investments in our business, which reduced operating profit growth by 1.5 percentage points. 2015 Net revenue grew 2% and volume grew 1%. The net revenue growth was driven by effective net pricing and the volume growth. The volume growth reflects mid-single-digit growth in variety packs and trademark Tostitos, double-digit growth in trademark Smartfood and low-single-digit growth in trademark Doritos. These increases were partially offset by a low-single-digit decline in trademark Lay s. Operating profit grew 6%, primarily reflecting the net revenue growth and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, as well as lower commodity costs, which contributed 5 percentage points to operating profit growth, primarily cooking oil and packaging. These impacts were partially offset by certain operating cost increases, including strategic initiatives, as well as higher advertising and marketing expenses. 64 Table of Contents Quaker Foods North America % Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Net revenue $ 2,564 $ 2,543 $ 2,568 1 (1 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation 2 Impact of 53 rd reporting week (2 ) Organic revenue growth (a) (b) 1 Operating profit $ 653 $ 560 $ 621 16 (10 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 1 3 14 Operating profit excluding above item (a) $ 654 $ 563 $ 635 16 (11 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation 1 Operating profit growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis (a) 16 (10 ) (a) See Non-GAAP Measures. (b) Does not sum due to rounding. 2016 Net revenue grew 1%, driven by the 53 rd reporting week which contributed 2 percentage points to the net revenue growth, partially offset by unfavorable net pricing and mix and unfavorable foreign exchange. Volume grew 2%, reflecting mid-single digit growth in Aunt Jemima syrup and mix and low-single-digit growth in ready-to-eat cereals, oatmeal, and bars. The 53 rd reporting week contributed 2 percentage points to the volume growth. Operating profit increased 16%, impacted by prior year impairment charges related to our dairy joint venture and ceasing its operations, which contributed 17 percentage points to operating profit growth. This increase also reflects planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, as well as lower commodity costs, which contributed 6 percentage points to operating profit growth. These impacts were partially offset by higher advertising and marketing expenses, certain operating cost increases and the unfavorable net pricing and mix. The 53 rd reporting week contributed 2 percentage points to operating profit growth, partially offset by incremental investments in our business, which reduced operating profit growth by 1.5 percentage points. 2015 Net revenue declined 1% and volume grew slightly. The net revenue decline reflects unfavorable foreign exchange, which negatively impacted net revenue performance by 2 percentage points, partially offset by the volume growth. The volume growth reflects mid-single digit growth in ready-to-eat cereals and Aunt Jemima syrup and mix, partially offset by a double-digit decline in MQD products and mid-single digit declines in both grits and bars. Operating profit decreased 10%, reflecting impairment charges, including a fourth quarter charge related to ceasing operations of our dairy joint venture and the recognition of a gain associated with the divestiture of a cereal business in 2014, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by 12 and 3 percentage points, respectively. In addition, operating profit performance was also negatively impacted by certain operating cost increases and higher advertising and marketing expenses. These impacts were partially offset by planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, favorable mix and the volume growth, as well as lower commodity costs, which positively contributed 3 percentage points to operating profit performance. 65 Table of Contents North America Beverages % Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Net revenue $ 21,312 $ 20,618 $ 20,171 3 2 Impact of foreign exchange translation 1 Impact of acquisitions and divestitures Impact of 53 rd reporting week (1.5 ) Organic revenue growth (a) 2 (b) 3 Operating profit $ 2,959 $ 2,785 $ 2,421 6 15 Restructuring and impairment charges 35 33 179 Pension-related settlement benefits (67 ) Operating profit excluding above items (a) $ 2,994 $ 2,751 $ 2,600 9 6 Impact of foreign exchange translation 1 Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis (a) 9 7 (a) See Non-GAAP Measures. (b) Does not sum due to rounding. 2016 Net revenue increased 3%, primarily reflecting effective net pricing and volume growth. The 53 rd reporting week contributed 1.5 percentage points to the net revenue growth. Volume increased 2%, driven by a 7% increase in non-carbonated beverage volume, partially offset by a 1% decline in CSD volume. The non-carbonated beverage volume increase primarily reflected a double-digit increase in our overall water portfolio, a mid-single-digit increase in Gatorade sports drinks, and a high-single-digit increase in Lipton ready-to-drink teas. The 53 rd reporting week contributed 1.5 percentage points to the volume growth. Operating profit increased 6%, primarily reflecting the net revenue growth and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, as well as lower commodity costs which contributed 6 percentage points to operating profit growth. These impacts were partially offset by certain operating cost increases and higher advertising and marketing expenses. The 53 rd reporting week contributed 1.5 percentage points to the operating profit growth. This was partially offset by incremental investments in our business which reduced operating profit growth by 1 percentage point. Items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ) reduced operating profit growth by 3 percentage points. 2015 Net revenue increased 2%, primarily reflecting effective net pricing and volume growth. Unfavorable foreign exchange reduced net revenue growth by 1 percentage point. Volume increased 1%, driven by a 6% increase in non-carbonated beverage volume, partially offset by a 2% decline in CSD volumes. The non-carbonated beverage volume increase primarily reflected a double-digit increase in our overall water portfolio, a mid-single-digit increase in Gatorade sports drinks, and a high-single-digit increase in Lipton ready-to-drink teas. Operating profit increased 15%, reflecting the net revenue growth and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, as well as lower commodity costs, which contributed 8 percentage points to operating profit growth. These impacts were partially offset by certain operating cost increases and higher 66 Table of Contents advertising and marketing expenses, as well as the recording of favorable settlements of promotional spending accruals in 2014, which reduced operating profit growth by 2 percentage points. Unfavorable foreign exchange reduced operating profit growth by 1 percentage point. Items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ) increased operating profit growth by 9 percentage points. Latin America % Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Net revenue $ 6,820 $ 8,228 $ 9,425 (17 ) (13 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation 11 27 Impact of acquisitions and divestitures 1 Impact of Venezuela deconsolidation 14 6 Organic revenue growth (a) 9 20 Operating profit/(loss) $ 887 $ (206 ) $ 1,636 n/m (113 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 27 36 28 Venezuela impairment charges 1,359 Venezuela remeasurement (21 ) Operating profit excluding above items (a) $ 914 $ 1,189 $ 1,643 (23 ) (28 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation 14 37 Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis (a) (9 ) 9 (a) See Non-GAAP Measures. n/m - Not meaningful due to the impact of impairment charges associated with a change in accounting for our Venezuela operations in 2015. 2016 Net revenue decreased 17%, reflecting the impact of the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan businesses, effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015, and unfavorable foreign exchange, which negatively impacted net revenue performance by 14 percentage points and 11 percentage points, respectively. These impacts were partially offset by effective net pricing and net volume growth. Snacks volume grew 3%, reflecting a mid-single-digit increase in Mexico. Additionally, Brazil experienced a slight increase. Beverage volume decreased 2%, reflecting a double-digit decline in Argentina and a low-single-digit decline in Mexico and Honduras, partially offset by a low-single-digit increase in Brazil and a mid-single-digit increase in Guatemala. Operating profit improvement primarily reflected the prior year Venezuela impairment charges, included in items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). This improvement also reflects the effective net pricing, planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories and the net volume growth. Additionally, the impact of prior-year charges associated with productivity initiatives outside the scope of the 2014 and 2012 Productivity Plans contributed 4 percentage points to operating profit growth. These impacts were partially offset by certain operating cost increases, as well as the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan businesses, which reduced operating profit growth by 19 percentage points. Additionally, higher commodity costs reduced operating profit growth by 22 percentage points, largely due to transaction-related foreign exchange on purchases of raw materials, driven by a strong U.S. dollar. Operating profit was also reduced by higher advertising and marketing expenses, as well as incremental investments in our business, 67 Table of Contents which reduced operating profit growth by 4 percentage points. Unfavorable foreign exchange translation reduced operating profit growth by 14 percentage points. 2015 Net revenue decreased 13%, primarily reflecting unfavorable foreign exchange, which negatively impacted net revenue performance by 27 percentage points, including 11 percentage points from Venezuela. In addition, the fourth quarter impact of the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan businesses negatively impacted net revenue performance by 6 percentage points. These impacts were partially offset by effective net pricing, including 14 percentage points of inflation-based pricing from Venezuela, and volume growth. Snacks volume grew 1%, reflecting a low-single-digit increase in Mexico, partially offset by a high-single-digit decrease in Brazil. Beverage volume increased slightly, reflecting a low-single-digit increase in Mexico, partially offset by a high-single-digit decrease in Brazil and a mid-single-digit decline in Argentina. The beverage volume growth included a one-half-percentage point positive contribution from certain of our bottler brands related to our joint venture in Chile. Operating profit decreased 113%, primarily reflecting the Venezuela impairment charges, included in items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). This decrease also reflects certain operating cost increases, including strategic initiatives, as well as higher commodity costs, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by 39 percentage points, including transaction-related foreign exchange on purchases of raw materials driven by a strong U.S. dollar. Additionally, charges associated with productivity initiatives outside the scope of the 2014 and 2012 Productivity Plans negatively impacted operating profit performance by 2 percentage points. These impacts were partially offset by the effective net pricing, planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories and the volume growth. Unfavorable foreign exchange negatively impacted operating profit performance by 37 percentage points, including a 23-percentage-point impact from Venezuela. The results of our Venezuelan businesses negatively impacted operating profit performance by 94 percentage points, primarily related to the impairment charges, and included 4 percentage points from the fourth quarter impact of the deconsolidation. For additional information on Venezuela, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements and Our Business Risks. 68 Table of Contents Europe Sub-Saharan Africa % Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Net revenue $ 10,216 $ 10,510 $ 13,399 (3 ) (22 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation 7 24 Impact of 53 rd reporting week Organic revenue growth (a) 4 2 Operating profit $ 1,108 $ 1,081 $ 1,389 2.5 (22 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 60 89 71 Operating profit excluding above item (a) $ 1,168 $ 1,170 $ 1,460 (20 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation 6 22 Operating profit growth excluding above item, on a constant currency basis (a) 6 2.5 (b) (a) See Non-GAAP Measures. (b) Does not sum due to rounding. 2016 Net revenue decreased 3%, primarily reflecting unfavorable foreign exchange, which negatively impacted net revenue performance by 7 percentage points. These impacts were partially offset by effective net pricing and volume growth. Snacks volume grew 3%, primarily reflecting mid-single-digit growth in South Africa and low-single-digit growth in the Netherlands, partially offset by a low-single-digit decline in Russia. Additionally, the United Kingdom, Turkey and Spain experienced low-single-digit growth. Beverage volume grew 2%, primarily reflecting double-digit growth in Nigeria and high-single-digit growth in the United Kingdom and Poland, partially offset by a mid-single-digit decline in Russia and a low-single-digit decline in Germany. Additionally, Turkey and France each experienced low-single-digit growth. Operating profit increased 2.5%, reflecting planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, the effective net pricing and the volume growth. These impacts were partially offset by higher commodity costs, which reduced operating profit growth by 19 percentage points, largely due to transaction-related foreign exchange on purchases of raw materials led by a strong U.S. dollar. Additionally, certain operating cost increases and higher advertising and marketing expenses reduced operating profit growth. The impact of unfavorable foreign exchange translation and incremental investments in our business also reduced operating profit growth by 6 percentage points and 2 percentage points, respectively. 2015 Net revenue decreased 22%, primarily reflecting unfavorable foreign exchange, which negatively impacted net revenue performance by 24 percentage points, including 13 percentage points from Russia, as well as net volume declines. These impacts were partially offset by effective net pricing. Snacks volume grew 1%, primarily reflecting mid-single-digit growth in Turkey and Spain, and low-single-digit growth in the United Kingdom, South Africa and the Netherlands, partially offset by a mid-single-digit decline in Russia. 69 Table of Contents Beverage volume declined 2%, primarily reflecting a double-digit decline in Russia, partially offset by mid-single-digit growth in Nigeria and low-single-digit growth in Turkey and the United Kingdom. Additionally, Germany experienced a slight decline. Operating profit decreased 22%, reflecting higher commodity costs, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by 24 percentage points, primarily from transaction-related foreign exchange on purchases of raw materials driven by a strong U.S. dollar. Additionally, operating profit performance was negatively impacted by certain operating cost increases, the net volume declines and higher advertising and marketing expenses, as well as the recognition of a 2014 gain associated with the sale of agricultural assets in Russia, which negatively impacted operating profit performance by 2 percentage points. These impacts were partially offset by the effective net pricing and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories, as well as lower charges in 2015 associated with productivity initiatives outside the scope of the 2014 and 2012 Productivity Plans, which positively impacted operating profit performance by 1.5 percentage points. In addition, the net impact of a 2014 impairment charge associated with a brand in Greece positively contributed 1 percentage point to operating profit performance. Unfavorable foreign exchange translation negatively impacted operating profit performance by 22 percentage points. Asia, Middle East and North Africa % Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Net revenue $ 6,338 $ 6,375 $ 6,618 (1 ) (4 ) Impact of foreign exchange translation 5 5 Impact of acquisitions and divestitures 3 Organic revenue growth (a) 5 (b) 4 Operating profit $ 619 $ 941 $ 985 (34 ) (4.5 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 14 30 37 Charges related to the transaction with Tingyi 373 73 Operating profit excluding above items (a) $ 1,006 $ 1,044 $ 1,022 (4 ) 2 Impact of foreign exchange translation 2 3 Operating profit growth excluding above items, on a constant currency basis (a) (1.5 ) (b) 5 (a) See Non-GAAP Measures. (b) Does not sum due to rounding. 2016 Net revenue declined 1%, reflecting unfavorable foreign exchange, which negatively impacted net revenue performance by 5 percentage points, as well as unfavorable net pricing. These impacts were partially offset by volume growth. Snacks volume grew 7%, reflecting double-digit growth in China and the Middle East and high-single-digit growth in Pakistan. Additionally, India experienced low-single-digit growth and Australia experienced mid-single-digit growth. Beverage volume grew 4%, driven by high-single-digit growth in Pakistan, double-digit growth in the Philippines and mid-single-digit growth in China. Additionally, the Middle East experienced low-single-digit growth and India experienced mid-single-digit growth. 70 Table of Contents Operating profit decreased 34%, primarily reflecting the items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Additionally, operating profit performance was negatively impacted by certain operating cost increases, including strategic initiatives, higher advertising and marketing expenses and the unfavorable net pricing, partially offset by the volume growth and planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories. The impact from a prior-year gain related to the refranchising of a portion of our beverage business in India negatively impacted operating profit performance by 4 percentage points. This impact was partially offset by a prior-year impairment charge associated with a joint venture in the Middle East which positively contributed 3 percentage points to operating profit performance. 2015 Net revenue declined 4%, reflecting the impact of refranchising a portion of our beverage businesses in India and the Middle East, which negatively impacted net revenue performance by 3 percentage points. These impacts were offset by volume growth and effective net pricing. Unfavorable foreign exchange negatively impacted net revenue performance by 5 percentage points. Snacks volume grew 4%, reflecting double-digit growth in China and Pakistan and mid-single-digit growth in the Middle East, partially offset by a high-single-digit decline in Thailand. Additionally, India volume was flat and Australia experienced low-single-digit growth. Beverage volume grew 1%, driven by double-digit growth in Pakistan and mid-single-digit growth in the Middle East and Philippines, partially offset by high-single-digit declines in China and India. Operating profit decreased 4.5%, primarily reflecting certain operating cost increases, including strategic initiatives, higher advertising and marketing expenses, and items affecting comparability in the above table (see Items Affecting Comparability ). Additionally, an impairment charge associated with a joint venture in the Middle East negatively impacted operating profit performance by 3 percentage points. These impacts were partially offset by the volume growth, planned cost reductions across a number of expense categories and the effective net pricing. In addition, lower commodity costs positively contributed 6 percentage points to operating profit performance. The net impact of the refranchising of a portion of our beverage businesses in India and the Middle East had a slight positive impact on operating profit performance. This impact included a 4-percentage-point gain from the India refranchising, partially offset by a 1.5-percentage-point impact from recognizing the 2014 gain from the Middle East refranchising. Unfavorable foreign exchange negatively impacted operating profit performance by 3 percentage points. 71 Table of Contents Our Liquidity and Capital Resources We believe that our cash generating capability and financial condition, together with our revolving credit facilities and other available methods of debt financing, such as commercial paper borrowings and long-term debt financing, will be adequate to meet our operating, investing and financing needs. Our primary sources of cash available to fund cash outflows, such as our anticipated share repurchases, dividend payments and scheduled debt maturities, include cash from operations and proceeds obtained from issuances of commercial paper and long-term debt. However, there can be no assurance that volatility in the global capital and credit markets will not impair our ability to access these markets on terms commercially acceptable to us, or at all. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for a description of our credit facilities. See also Our Business Risks and Unfavorable economic conditions may have an adverse impact on our business, financial condition or results of operations. in Item 1A. Risk Factors. As of December 31, 2016 , we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments in our consolidated subsidiaries of $15.2 billion outside the United States. As of December 31, 2016 , cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments in our consolidated subsidiaries subject to currency controls or currency exchange restrictions were not material. To the extent foreign earnings are repatriated, such amounts would be subject to income tax liabilities, both in the United States and in various applicable foreign jurisdictions. Furthermore, our cash provided from operating activities is somewhat impacted by seasonality. Working capital needs are impacted by weekly sales, which are generally highest in the third quarter due to seasonal and holiday-related sales patterns, and generally lowest in the first quarter. On a continuing basis, we consider various transactions to increase shareholder value and enhance our business results, including acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures, dividends, share repurchases, productivity and other efficiency initiatives, and other structural changes. These transactions may result in future cash proceeds or payments. The table below summarizes our cash activity: 2016 2015 2014 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 10,404 $ 10,580 $ 10,506 Net cash used for investing activities $ (7,148 ) $ (3,569 ) $ (4,937 ) Net cash used for financing activities $ (2,942 ) $ (3,828 ) $ (8,264 ) Operating Activities During 2016 , net cash provided by operating activities was $10.4 billion, compared to $10.6 billion in the prior year. The operating cash flow performance reflects discretionary pension contributions of $459 million. In addition, working capital (comprised of changes in accounts and notes receivable, inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, and accounts payable and other current liabilities, each adjusted for the effects of currency translation) reflects unfavorable comparisons to the prior year. These decreases were partially offset by lower net cash tax payments in the current year. During 2015 , net cash provided by operating activities was $10.6 billion, compared to $10.5 billion in the prior year. The operating cash flow performance in part reflects lapping the impact of prior-year discretionary pension and retiree medical contributions, pertaining to the lump sum settlement payments, in the United States of $388 million ($261 million after-tax). In addition, working capital (comprised of changes in accounts and notes receivable, inventories, prepaid expenses and other current assets, and accounts payable and other current liabilities, each adjusted for the effects of currency translation and the Venezuela deconsolidation) reflects favorable comparisons to the prior year. These increases were partially offset by unfavorable operating profit performance. 72 Table of Contents Investing Activities During 2016 , net cash used for investing activities was $7.1 billion, primarily reflecting net purchases of debt securities with maturities greater than three months of $4.1 billion and net capital spending of $2.9 billion. During 2015 , net cash used for investing activities was $3.6 billion, primarily reflecting net capital spending of $2.7 billion, a reduction of cash of $568 million due to the deconsolidation of our Venezuelan subsidiaries and net purchases of debt securities with maturities greater than three months of $317 million. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of capital spending by division and for further discussion of Venezuela. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our investments in debt securities. We expect 2017 net capital spending to be approximately $3 billion , within our long-term capital spending target of less than or equal to 5% of net revenue. Financing Activities During 2016 , net cash used for financing activities was $2.9 billion, primarily reflecting the return of operating cash flow to our shareholders through dividend payments and share repurchases of $7.2 billion and debt redemptions of $2.5 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from long-term debt of $4.7 billion, net proceeds from short-term borrowings of $1.5 billion, and proceeds from exercises of stock options of $0.5 billion. During 2015 , net cash used for financing activities was $3.8 billion, primarily reflecting the return of operating cash flow to our shareholders through dividend payments and share repurchases of $9.0 billion, partially offset by net proceeds from long-term debt of $4.6 billion and proceeds from exercises of stock options of $0.5 billion. We annually review our capital structure with our Board of Directors, including our dividend policy and share repurchase activity. On February 11, 2015, we announced a share repurchase program providing for the repurchase of up to $12.0 billion of PepsiCo common stock commencing from July 1, 2015 and expiring on June 30, 2018. In addition, on February 15, 2017, we announced a 7.0% increase in our annualized dividend to $3.22 per share from $3.01 per share, effective with the dividend that is expected to be paid in June 2017. We expect to return a total of approximately $6.5 billion to shareholders in 2017 through share repurchases of approximately $2.0 billion and dividends of approximately $4.5 billion. Free Cash Flow Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure. For further information on free cash flow see Non-GAAP Measures. The table below reconciles net cash provided by operating activities, as reflected in our cash flow statement, to our free cash flow. % Change 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 10,404 $ 10,580 $ 10,506 (2 ) 1 Capital spending (3,040 ) (2,758 ) (2,859 ) Sales of property, plant and equipment 99 86 115 Free cash flow (a) $ 7,463 $ 7,908 $ 7,762 (6 ) 2 (a) See Non-GAAP Measures. In addition, when evaluating free cash flow, we also consider the following items impacting comparability: net cash received related to interest rate swaps of $5 million in 2016; net cash tax benefit related to debt redemption charge of $83 million in 2016; $459 million and $407 million in discretionary pension contributions and associated net cash tax benefits of $151 million and $133 million in 2016 and 2014, respectively; $88 million in pension-related settlements in 2015, and associated net cash tax benefits of $31 million; $125 million, $214 million and $276 million of payments related to restructuring charges and associated net cash tax benefits of $22 million, $51 million and $61 million in 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively; and $8 million in net capital investments related to our restructuring plans in 2014. 73 Table of Contents We use free cash flow primarily for financing activities, including debt repayments, dividends and share repurchases. We expect to continue to return free cash flow to our shareholders through dividends and share repurchases while maintaining Tier 1 commercial paper access, which we believe will ensure appropriate financial flexibility and ready access to global capital and credit markets at favorable interest rates. However, see Our borrowing costs and access to capital and credit markets may be adversely affected by a downgrade or potential downgrade of our credit ratings. in Item 1A. Risk Factors and Our Business Risks for certain factors that may impact our credit ratings or our operating cash flows. Any downgrade of our credit ratings by a credit rating agency, especially any downgrade to below investment grade, whether or not as a result of our actions or factors which are beyond our control, could increase our future borrowing costs and impair our ability to access capital and credit markets on terms commercially acceptable to us, or at all. In addition, any downgrade of our current short-term credit ratings could impair our ability to access the commercial paper market with the same flexibility that we have experienced historically, and therefore require us to rely more heavily on more expensive types of debt financing. See Our borrowing costs and access to capital and credit markets may be adversely affected by a downgrade or potential downgrade of our credit ratings. in Item 1A. Risk Factors, Our Business Risks and Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements. Credit Facilities and Long-Term Contractual Commitments See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for a description of our credit facilities. The following table summarizes our long-term contractual commitments by period: Payments Due by Period (a) Total 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 and beyond Long-term debt obligations (b) $ 29,908 $ $ 5,361 $ 6,115 $ 18,432 Interest on debt obligations (c) 12,676 992 1,787 1,556 8,341 Operating leases (d) 1,780 423 663 344 350 Purchasing commitments (e) 3,314 1,090 1,490 568 166 Marketing commitments (e) 1,949 432 760 591 166 $ 49,627 $ 2,937 $ 10,061 $ 9,174 $ 27,455 (a) Based on year-end foreign exchange rates. Reserves for uncertain tax positions are excluded from the table above as we are unable to reasonably predict the ultimate amount or timing of any such settlements. (b) Excludes $4,401 million related to current maturities of debt, $145 million related to the fair value adjustments for debt acquired in acquisitions and interest rate swaps and payments of $142 million related to unamortized net discount. (c) Interest payments on floating-rate debt are estimated using interest rates effective as of December 31, 2016 . (d) See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on operating leases. (e) Primarily reflects non-cancelable commitments as of December 31, 2016 . Long-term contractual commitments, except for our long-term debt obligations, are generally not recorded on our balance sheet. Operating leases primarily represent building leases. Non-cancelable purchasing commitments are primarily for oranges, orange juice and certain other commodities. Non-cancelable marketing commitments are primarily for sports marketing. Bottler funding to independent bottlers is not reflected in our long-term contractual commitments as it is negotiated on an annual basis. Accrued liabilities for pension and retiree medical plans are not reflected in our long-term contractual commitments. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our pension and retiree medical obligations. Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangements We do not have guarantees or other off-balance-sheet financing arrangements, including variable interest entities, that we believe could have a material impact on our financial condition or liquidity. 74 Table of Contents We coordinate, on an aggregate basis, the contract negotiations of raw material requirements, including sweeteners, aluminum cans and plastic bottles and closures for us and certain of our independent bottlers. Once we have negotiated the contracts, the bottlers order and take delivery directly from the supplier and pay the suppliers directly. Consequently, these transactions are not reflected in our consolidated financial statements. As the contracting party, we could be liable to these suppliers in the event of any nonpayment by our bottlers, but we consider this exposure to be remote. Return on Invested Capital ROIC is a non-GAAP financial measure. For further information on ROIC, see Non-GAAP Measures. 2016 2015 Net income attributable to PepsiCo (a) $ 6,329 $ 5,452 Interest expense 1,342 970 Tax on interest expense (483 ) (349 ) $ 7,188 $ 6,073 Average debt obligations (b) $ 35,308 $ 31,169 Average common shareholders equity (c) 11,943 15,147 Average invested capital $ 47,251 $ 46,316 Return on invested capital (a) 15.2 % 13.1 % (a) Reflects the impact of the Venezuela impairment charges of $1.4 billion in 2015. (b) Average debt obligations includes a quarterly average of short-term and long-term debt obligations. (c) Average common shareholders equity includes a quarterly average of common stock, capital in excess of par value, retained earnings, accumulated other comprehensive loss and repurchased common stock. The table below reconciles ROIC as calculated above to net ROIC, excluding items affecting comparability. 2016 2015 ROIC 15.2 % 13.1 % Impact of: Average cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments 6.0 4.1 Interest income (0.2 ) (0.1 ) Tax on interest income 0.1 Commodity mark-to-market net impact (0.2 ) Restructuring and impairment charges 0.1 0.2 Charges related to the transaction with Tingyi 0.6 0.1 Pension-related settlement charge/(benefits) 0.3 (0.1 ) Venezuela impairment charges (0.5 ) 2.7 Tax benefits 0.1 (0.4 ) Net ROIC, excluding items affecting comparability 21.5 % 19.6 % 75 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Income PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 (in millions except per share amounts) 2016 2015 2014 Net Revenue $ 62,799 $ 63,056 $ 66,683 Cost of sales 28,209 28,731 31,238 Gross profit 34,590 34,325 35,445 Selling, general and administrative expenses 24,735 24,538 25,772 Venezuela impairment charges 1,359 Amortization of intangible assets 70 75 92 Operating Profit 9,785 8,353 9,581 Interest expense (1,342 ) (970 ) (909 ) Interest income and other 110 59 85 Income before income taxes 8,553 7,442 8,757 Provision for income taxes 2,174 1,941 2,199 Net income 6,379 5,501 6,558 Less: Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 50 49 45 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,329 $ 5,452 $ 6,513 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share Basic $ 4.39 $ 3.71 $ 4.31 Diluted $ 4.36 $ 3.67 $ 4.27 Weighted-average common shares outstanding Basic 1,439 1,469 1,509 Diluted 1,452 1,485 1,527 Cash dividends declared per common share $ 2.96 $ 2.7625 $ 2.5325 See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. 76 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 (in millions) 2016 Pre-tax amounts Tax amounts After-tax amounts Net income $ 6,379 Other comprehensive loss Currency translation adjustment $ (309 ) $ 7 (302 ) Cash flow hedges: Reclassification of net losses to net income 150 (63 ) 87 Net derivative losses (74 ) 33 (41 ) Pension and retiree medical: Reclassification of net losses to net income 407 (144 ) 263 Remeasurement of net liabilities and translation (750 ) 171 (579 ) Unrealized losses on securities (43 ) 19 (24 ) Total other comprehensive loss $ (619 ) $ 23 (596 ) Comprehensive income 5,783 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests (54 ) Comprehensive Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 5,729 2015 Pre-tax amounts Tax amounts After-tax amounts Net income $ 5,501 Other comprehensive loss Currency translation: Currency translation adjustment $ (2,938 ) $ (2,938 ) Reclassification associated with Venezuelan entities 111 111 Cash flow hedges: Reclassification of net losses to net income 97 (47 ) 50 Net derivative losses (95 ) 48 (47 ) Pension and retiree medical: Reclassification of net losses to net income 246 (74 ) 172 Reclassification associated with Venezuelan entities 20 (4 ) 16 Remeasurement of net liabilities and translation (88 ) 71 (17 ) Unrealized gains on securities 3 (2 ) 1 Total other comprehensive loss $ (2,644 ) $ (8 ) (2,652 ) Comprehensive income 2,849 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests (47 ) Comprehensive Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 2,802 2014 Pre-tax amounts Tax amounts After-tax amounts Net income $ 6,558 Other comprehensive loss Currency translation adjustment $ (5,010 ) $ (5,010 ) Cash flow hedges: Reclassification of net losses to net income 249 (95 ) 154 Net derivative losses (88 ) 44 (44 ) Pension and retiree medical: Reclassification of net losses to net income 369 (122 ) 247 Remeasurement of net liabilities and translation (1,323 ) 437 (886 ) Unrealized losses on securities (11 ) 5 (6 ) Other 1 1 Total other comprehensive loss $ (5,813 ) $ 269 (5,544 ) Comprehensive income 1,014 Comprehensive income attributable to noncontrolling interests (43 ) Comprehensive Income Attributable to PepsiCo $ 971 See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. 77 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 (in millions) 2016 2015 2014 Operating Activities Net income $ 6,379 $ 5,501 $ 6,558 Depreciation and amortization 2,368 2,416 2,625 Share-based compensation expense 284 295 297 Restructuring and impairment charges 160 230 418 Cash payments for restructuring charges (125 ) (208 ) (266 ) Charges related to the transaction with Tingyi 373 73 Venezuela impairment charges 1,359 Venezuela remeasurement charge 105 Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements (139 ) (133 ) (114 ) Pension and retiree medical plan expenses 501 467 667 Pension and retiree medical plan contributions (695 ) (205 ) (655 ) Deferred income taxes and other tax charges and credits 452 78 (19 ) Change in assets and liabilities: Accounts and notes receivable (349 ) (461 ) (343 ) Inventories (75 ) (244 ) (111 ) Prepaid expenses and other current assets 10 (50 ) 80 Accounts payable and other current liabilities 997 1,692 1,162 Income taxes payable 329 55 371 Other, net (66 ) (285 ) (269 ) Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities 10,404 10,580 10,506 Investing Activities Capital spending (3,040 ) (2,758 ) (2,859 ) Sales of property, plant and equipment 99 86 115 Acquisitions and investments in noncontrolled affiliates (212 ) (86 ) (88 ) Reduction of cash due to Venezuela deconsolidation (568 ) Divestitures 85 76 203 Short-term investments, by original maturity: More than three months - purchases (12,504 ) (4,428 ) (6,305 ) More than three months - maturities 8,399 4,111 3,891 Three months or less, net 16 3 116 Other investing, net 9 (5 ) (10 ) Net Cash Used for Investing Activities (7,148 ) (3,569 ) (4,937 ) Financing Activities Proceeds from issuances of long-term debt 7,818 8,702 3,855 Payments of long-term debt (3,105 ) (4,095 ) (2,189 ) Debt redemptions (2,504 ) Short-term borrowings, by original maturity: More than three months - proceeds 59 15 50 More than three months - payments (27 ) (43 ) (10 ) Three months or less, net 1,505 53 (2,037 ) Cash dividends paid (4,227 ) (4,040 ) (3,730 ) Share repurchases - common (3,000 ) (5,000 ) (5,012 ) Share repurchases - preferred (7 ) (5 ) (10 ) Proceeds from exercises of stock options 465 504 755 Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements 139 133 114 Other financing (58 ) (52 ) (50 ) Net Cash Used for Financing Activities (2,942 ) (3,828 ) (8,264 ) Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (252 ) (221 ) (546 ) Net Increase/(Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents 62 2,962 (3,241 ) Cash and Cash Equivalents, Beginning of Year 9,096 6,134 9,375 Cash and Cash Equivalents, End of Year $ 9,158 $ 9,096 $ 6,134 See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. 78 Table of Contents Consolidated Balance Sheet PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 (in millions except per share amounts) 2016 2015 ASSETS Current Assets Cash and cash equivalents $ 9,158 $ 9,096 Short-term investments 6,967 2,913 Accounts and notes receivable, net 6,694 6,437 Inventories 2,723 2,720 Prepaid expenses and other current assets 1,547 1,865 Total Current Assets 27,089 23,031 Property, Plant and Equipment, net 16,591 16,317 Amortizable Intangible Assets, net 1,237 1,270 Goodwill 14,430 14,177 Other nonamortizable intangible assets 12,196 11,811 Nonamortizable Intangible Assets 26,626 25,988 Investments in Noncontrolled Affiliates 1,950 2,311 Other Assets 636 750 Total Assets $ 74,129 $ 69,667 LIABILITIES AND EQUITY Current Liabilities Short-term debt obligations $ 6,892 $ 4,071 Accounts payable and other current liabilities 14,243 13,507 Total Current Liabilities 21,135 17,578 Long-Term Debt Obligations 30,053 29,213 Other Liabilities 6,669 5,887 Deferred Income Taxes 5,073 4,959 Total Liabilities 62,930 57,637 Commitments and contingencies Preferred Stock, no par value 41 41 Repurchased Preferred Stock (192 ) (186 ) PepsiCo Common Shareholders Equity Common stock, par value 1 2 / 3 per share (authorized 3,600 shares, issued, net of repurchased common stock at par value: 1,428 and 1,448 shares, respectively) 24 24 Capital in excess of par value 4,091 4,076 Retained earnings 52,518 50,472 Accumulated other comprehensive loss (13,919 ) (13,319 ) Repurchased common stock, in excess of par value (438 and 418 shares, respectively) (31,468 ) (29,185 ) Total PepsiCo Common Shareholders Equity 11,246 12,068 Noncontrolling interests 104 107 Total Equity 11,199 12,030 Total Liabilities and Equity $ 74,129 $ 69,667 See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. 79 Table of Contents Consolidated Statement of Equity PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries Fiscal years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 (in millions) 2016 2015 2014 Shares Amount Shares Amount Shares Amount Preferred Stock 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 0.8 $ 41 Repurchased Preferred Stock Balance, beginning of year (0.7 ) (186 ) (0.7 ) (181 ) (0.6 ) (171 ) Redemptions (6 ) (5 ) (0.1 ) (10 ) Balance, end of year (0.7 ) (192 ) (0.7 ) (186 ) (0.7 ) (181 ) Common Stock Balance, beginning of year 1,448 24 1,488 25 1,529 25 Repurchased common stock (20 ) (40 ) (1 ) (41 ) Balance, end of year 1,428 24 1,448 24 1,488 25 Capital in Excess of Par Value Balance, beginning of year 4,076 4,115 4,095 Share-based compensation expense 289 299 294 Stock option exercises, RSUs, PSUs and PEPunits converted (a) (138 ) (182 ) (200 ) Withholding tax on RSUs, PSUs and PEPunits converted (130 ) (151 ) (91 ) Other (6 ) (5 ) 17 Balance, end of year 4,091 4,076 4,115 Retained Earnings Balance, beginning of year 50,472 49,092 46,420 Net income attributable to PepsiCo 6,329 5,452 6,513 Cash dividends declared - common (4,282 ) (4,071 ) (3,840 ) Cash dividends declared - preferred (1 ) (1 ) (1 ) Balance, end of year 52,518 50,472 49,092 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Balance, beginning of year (13,319 ) (10,669 ) (5,127 ) Other comprehensive loss attributable to PepsiCo (600 ) (2,650 ) (5,542 ) Balance, end of year (13,919 ) (13,319 ) (10,669 ) Repurchased Common Stock Balance, beginning of year (418 ) (29,185 ) (378 ) (24,985 ) (337 ) (21,004 ) Share repurchases (29 ) (3,000 ) (52 ) (4,999 ) (57 ) (5,012 ) Stock option exercises, RSUs, PSUs and PEPunits converted 9 712 12 794 15 1,030 Other 5 5 1 1 Balance, end of year (438 ) (31,468 ) (418 ) (29,185 ) (378 ) (24,985 ) Total PepsiCo Common Shareholders Equity 11,246 12,068 17,578 Noncontrolling Interests Balance, beginning of year 107 110 110 Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests 50 49 45 Distributions to noncontrolling interests (55 ) (48 ) (41 ) Currency translation adjustment 4 (2 ) (2 ) Other, net (2 ) (2 ) (2 ) Balance, end of year 104 107 110 Total Equity $ 11,199 $ 12,030 $ 17,548 (a) Includes total tax benefits of $110 million in 2016 , $107 million in 2015 and $74 million in 2014 . See accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements. 80 Table of Contents Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements Note 1 Basis of Presentation and Our Divisions Basis of Presentation The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and include the consolidated accounts of PepsiCo, Inc. and the affiliates that we control. In addition, we include our share of the results of certain other affiliates using the equity method based on our economic ownership interest, our ability to exercise significant influence over the operating or financial decisions of these affiliates or our ability to direct their economic resources. We do not control these other affiliates, as our ownership in these other affiliates is generally 50% or less. Intercompany balances and transactions are eliminated. Raw materials, direct labor and plant overhead, as well as purchasing and receiving costs, costs directly related to production planning, inspection costs and raw materials handling facilities, are included in cost of sales. The costs of moving, storing and delivering finished product are included in selling, general and administrative expenses. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Estimates are used in determining, among other items, sales incentives accruals, tax reserves, share-based compensation, pension and retiree medical accruals, amounts and useful lives for intangible assets and future cash flows associated with impairment testing for perpetual brands, goodwill and other long-lived assets. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis using our historical experience, as well as other factors we believe appropriate under the circumstances, such as current economic conditions, and adjust or revise our estimates as circumstances change. As future events and their effect cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from these estimates. Effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015, we deconsolidated our Venezuelan subsidiaries from our consolidated financial statements and began accounting for our investments in our wholly-owned Venezuelan subsidiaries and joint venture using the cost method of accounting. See subsequent discussion of Venezuela. Our fiscal year ends on the last Saturday of each December, resulting in an additional week of results every five or six years. Our fiscal 2016 results include an extra week. While our North America results are reported on a weekly calendar basis, most of our international operations report on a monthly calendar basis. Certain operations in our ESSA segment report on a weekly calendar basis. The following chart details our quarterly reporting schedule for 2016, reflecting the extra week in the fourth quarter: Quarter United States and Canada International First Quarter 12 weeks January, February Second Quarter 12 weeks March, April and May Third Quarter 12 weeks June, July and August Fourth Quarter 17 weeks September, October, November and December See Our Divisions below, and for additional unaudited information on items affecting the comparability of our consolidated results, see further unaudited information in Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Unless otherwise noted, tabular dollars are in millions, except per share amounts. All per share amounts reflect common per share amounts, assume dilution unless noted, and are based on unrounded amounts. Reclassifications were made to prior years amounts to conform to the current year presentation, including 81 Table of Contents the presentation of certain functional support costs associated with the manufacturing and production of our products within cost of sales. These costs were previously included in selling, general and administrative expenses. For the years ended December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014, these reclassifications resulted in an increase in cost of sales of $347 million and $354 million , respectively, with a corresponding reduction to gross profit and selling, general and administrative expenses in the same years. These reclassifications reflect changes in how we are classifying costs of certain support functions as a result of ongoing productivity and efficiency initiatives. These reclassifications had no impact on our consolidated net revenue, operating profit, net interest expense, provision for income taxes, net income or EPS. Our Divisions Through our operations, authorized bottlers, contract manufacturers and other third parties, we make, market, distribute and sell a wide variety of convenient and enjoyable beverages, foods and snacks, serving customers and consumers in more than 200 countries and territories with our largest operations in North America, Mexico, Russia, the United Kingdom and Brazil. Division results are based on how our Chief Executive Officer assesses the performance of and allocates resources to our divisions and are considered our reportable segments. For additional unaudited information on our divisions, see Our Operations contained in Item 1. Business. The accounting policies for the divisions are the same as those described in Note 2, except for the following allocation methodologies: share-based compensation expense; pension and retiree medical expense; and derivatives. Share-Based Compensation Expense Our divisions are held accountable for share-based compensation expense and, therefore, this expense is allocated to our divisions as an incremental employee compensation cost. The allocation of share-based compensation expense in 2016 was approximately 14% to FLNA, 2% to QFNA, 22% to NAB, 7% to Latin America, 11% to ESSA, 10% to AMENA and 34% to corporate unallocated expenses. We had similar allocations of share-based compensation expense to our divisions in 2015 and 2014 . The expense allocated to our divisions excludes any impact of changes in our assumptions during the year which reflect market conditions over which division management has no control. Therefore, any variances between allocated expense and our actual expense are recognized in corporate unallocated expenses. Pension and Retiree Medical Expense Pension and retiree medical service costs measured at fixed discount rates, as well as amortization of costs related to certain pension plan amendments and gains and losses due to demographics (including mortality assumptions and salary experience) are reflected in division results for North American employees. Division results also include interest costs, measured at fixed discount rates, for retiree medical plans. Interest costs for the pension plans, pension asset returns and the impact of pension funding, and gains and losses other than those due to demographics, are all reflected in corporate unallocated expenses. In addition, for our North American plans, corporate unallocated expenses include the difference between the service costs measured at a fixed discount rate (included in division results as noted above) and the total service costs determined using the plans discount rates as disclosed in Note 7. Derivatives We centrally manage commodity derivatives on behalf of our divisions. These commodity derivatives include agricultural products, energy and metals . Commodity derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment are marked to market each period with the resulting gains and losses recorded in corporate unallocated expenses as either cost of sales or selling, general and administrative expenses, depending on 82 Table of Contents the underlying commodity. These gains and losses are subsequently reflected in division results when the divisions recognize the cost of the underlying commodity in operating profit. Therefore, the divisions realize the economic effects of the derivative without experiencing any resulting mark-to-market volatility, which remains in corporate unallocated expenses. These derivatives hedge underlying commodity price risk and were not entered into for trading or speculative purposes. Net revenue and operating profit/(loss) of each division are as follows: Net Revenue Operating Profit/(Loss) (a) 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014 FLNA $ 15,549 $ 14,782 $ 14,502 $ 4,659 $ 4,304 $ 4,054 QFNA 2,564 2,543 2,568 653 560 621 NAB 21,312 20,618 20,171 2,959 2,785 2,421 Latin America 6,820 8,228 9,425 887 (206 ) 1,636 ESSA 10,216 10,510 13,399 1,108 1,081 1,389 AMENA 6,338 6,375 6,618 619 941 985 Total division 62,799 63,056 66,683 10,885 9,465 11,106 Corporate Unallocated (1,100 ) (1,112 ) (1,525 ) $ 62,799 $ 63,056 $ 66,683 $ 9,785 $ 8,353 $ 9,581 (a) For further unaudited information on certain items that impacted our financial performance, see Item 6. Selected Financial Data. Corporate Unallocated Corporate unallocated includes costs of our corporate headquarters, centrally managed initiatives such as research and development projects, unallocated insurance and benefit programs, foreign exchange transaction gains and losses, commodity derivative gains and losses, our ongoing business transformation initiatives and certain other items. 83 Table of Contents Other Division Information Total assets and capital spending of each division are as follows: Total Assets Capital Spending 2016 2015 2016 2015 2014 FLNA $ 5,759 $ 5,375 $ 801 $ 608 $ 519 QFNA 826 872 41 40 58 NAB 28,452 28,128 769 695 708 Latin America 4,640 4,284 507 368 379 ESSA 12,406 12,225 439 404 502 AMENA 5,303 5,901 381 441 517 Total division 57,386 56,785 2,938 2,556 2,683 Corporate (a) 16,743 12,882 102 202 176 $ 74,129 $ 69,667 $ 3,040 $ 2,758 $ 2,859 (a) Corporate assets consist principally of certain cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, derivative instruments, property, plant and equipment, pension and tax assets. In 2016 , the change in total Corporate assets was primarily due to an increase in short-term investments. Amortization of intangible assets and depreciation and other amortization of each division are as follows: Amortization of Intangible Assets Depreciation and Other Amortization 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014 FLNA $ 7 $ 7 $ 7 $ 435 $ 427 $ 424 QFNA 50 51 51 NAB 37 38 43 809 813 837 Latin America 5 7 10 211 238 273 ESSA 18 20 28 321 353 471 AMENA 3 3 4 294 293 313 Total division 70 75 92 2,120 2,175 2,369 Corporate 178 166 164 $ 70 $ 75 $ 92 $ 2,298 $ 2,341 $ 2,533 84 Table of Contents Net revenue and long-lived assets by country are as follows: Net Revenue Long-Lived Assets (a) 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 United States $ 36,732 $ 35,266 $ 34,219 $ 28,382 $ 27,876 Mexico 3,431 3,687 4,113 998 994 Canada 2,692 2,677 3,022 2,499 2,386 Russia (b) 2,648 2,797 4,414 4,373 3,614 United Kingdom 1,737 1,966 2,174 852 1,107 Brazil 1,305 1,289 1,790 796 649 All other countries (c) 14,254 15,374 16,951 8,504 9,260 $ 62,799 $ 63,056 $ 66,683 $ 46,404 $ 45,886 (a) Long-lived assets represent property, plant and equipment, nonamortizable intangible assets, amortizable intangible assets and investments in noncontrolled affiliates. These assets are reported in the country where they are primarily used. (b) Change in long-lived assets in 2016 primarily reflects appreciation of the Russian ruble. Change in net revenue in 2015 primarily reflects the depreciation of the Russian ruble. (c) Included in long-lived assets in all other countries as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 are $166 million and $538 million , respectively, related to our 5% indirect equity interest in TAB. Venezuela Prior to the end of the third quarter of 2015, the financial position and results of operations of our Venezuelan snack and beverage businesses, which consist of our wholly-owned subsidiaries and our beverage joint venture with our franchise bottler in Venezuela, were included in our consolidated financial statements and reported under highly-inflationary accounting, with the functional currency of the U.S. dollar. Conditions in Venezuela, including restrictive exchange control regulations and reduced access to U.S. dollars through official currency exchange markets, have resulted in an other-than-temporary lack of exchangeability between the Venezuelan bolivar and the U.S. dollar. The exchange restrictions and other conditions have significantly impacted our ability to effectively manage our businesses in Venezuela, including limiting our ability to import certain raw materials and to settle U.S. dollar-denominated obligations, and have restricted our ability to realize the earnings generated out of our Venezuelan businesses. We expect these conditions will continue for the foreseeable future. As a result of these factors, we concluded that, effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015, we did not meet the accounting criteria for control over our wholly-owned Venezuelan subsidiaries, and we no longer had significant influence over our beverage joint venture with our franchise bottler in Venezuela. Therefore, effective at the end of the third quarter of 2015, we deconsolidated our Venezuelan subsidiaries and began accounting for our investments in our Venezuelan subsidiaries and joint venture using the cost method of accounting. We recorded pre- and after-tax charges of $1.4 billion in our income statement to reduce the 85 Table of Contents value of the cost method investments to their estimated fair values, resulting in a full impairment. The impairment charges primarily included approximately $1.2 billion related to our investments in previously consolidated Venezuelan subsidiaries and our joint venture and $111 million related to the reclassification of cumulative translation losses. The estimated fair value of the investments in our Venezuelan entities was derived using discounted cash flow analyses, including U.S. dollar exchange and discount rate assumptions that reflected the inflation and economic uncertainty in Venezuela, and are considered non-recurring Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy. The factors that led to the above-mentioned conclusions at the end of the third quarter of 2015 continued to exist through the end of 2016. As of the end of 2016, consistent with the end of the third quarter of 2015, we did not consolidate the assets and liabilities of our Venezuelan subsidiaries in our balance sheet. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2015, our financial results have not included the results of our Venezuelan businesses. We do not have any guarantees related to our Venezuelan entities, and our ongoing contractual commitments to our Venezuelan businesses are not material. We will recognize income from dividends and sales of inventory to our Venezuelan entities, which have not been and are not expected to be material, to the extent cash in U.S. dollars is received. We did not receive any cash in U.S. dollars from our Venezuelan entities during the fourth quarter of 2015 or fiscal year 2016. We will continue to monitor the conditions in Venezuela and their impact on our accounting and disclosures. For further unaudited information, see Our Business Risks and Our Liquidity and Capital Resources in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Note 2 Our Significant Accounting Policies Revenue Recognition We recognize revenue upon shipment or delivery to our customers based on written sales terms that do not allow for a right of return. However, our policy for DSD and certain chilled products is to remove and replace damaged and out-of-date products from store shelves to ensure that consumers receive the product quality and freshness they expect. Similarly, our policy for certain warehouse-distributed products is to replace damaged and out-of-date products. Based on our experience with this practice, we have reserved for anticipated damaged and out-of-date products. For additional unaudited information on our revenue recognition and related policies, including our policy on bad debts, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. We are exposed to concentration of credit risk from our major customers, including Wal-Mart. In 2016 , sales to Wal-Mart (including Sam s) represented approximately 13% of our total net revenue, including concentrate sales to our independent bottlers, which are used in finished goods sold by them to Wal-Mart. We have not experienced credit issues with these customers. Total Marketplace Spending We offer sales incentives and discounts through various programs to customers and consumers. Total marketplace spending includes sales incentives, discounts, advertising and other marketing activities. Sales incentives and discounts are primarily accounted for as a reduction of revenue and include payments to customers for performing merchandising activities on our behalf, such as payments for in-store displays, payments to gain distribution of new products, payments for shelf space and discounts to promote lower retail prices. It also includes support provided to our independent bottlers through funding of advertising and other marketing activities. While most of these incentive arrangements have terms of no more than one year, certain arrangements, such as fountain pouring rights, may extend beyond one year. Costs incurred to obtain these arrangements are recognized over the shorter of the economic or contractual life, primarily as a reduction of revenue, and the remaining balances of $291 million as of December 31, 2016 and $ 321 million as of December 26, 2015 are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets on our balance sheet. For additional unaudited information on our sales incentives, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 86 Table of Contents Advertising and other marketing activities, reported as selling, general and administrative expenses, totaled $4.2 billion in 2016 and $3.9 billion in both 2015 and 2014 , including advertising expenses of $2.5 billion in 2016 , $2.4 billion in 2015 and $2.3 billion in 2014 . Deferred advertising costs are not expensed until the year first used and consist of: media and personal service prepayments; promotional materials in inventory; and production costs of future media advertising. Deferred advertising costs of $32 million and $40 million as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 , respectively, are classified as prepaid expenses and other current assets on our balance sheet. Distribution Costs Distribution costs, including the costs of shipping and handling activities, are reported as selling, general and administrative expenses. Shipping and handling expenses were $9.7 billion in 2016 , $9.4 billion in 2015 and $9.7 billion in 2014 . Cash Equivalents Cash equivalents are highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. Software Costs We capitalize certain computer software and software development costs incurred in connection with developing or obtaining computer software for internal use when both the preliminary project stage is completed and it is probable that the software will be used as intended. Capitalized software costs include only (i) external direct costs of materials and services utilized in developing or obtaining computer software, (ii) compensation and related benefits for employees who are directly associated with the software projects and (iii) interest costs incurred while developing internal-use computer software. Capitalized software costs are included in property, plant and equipment on our balance sheet and amortized on a straight-line basis when placed into service over the estimated useful lives of the software, which approximate five to 10 years. Software amortization totaled $214 million in 2016 , $202 million in 2015 and $208 million in 2014 . Net capitalized software and development costs were $791 million and $863 million as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 , respectively. Commitments and Contingencies We are subject to various claims and contingencies related to lawsuits, certain taxes and environmental matters, as well as commitments under contractual and other commercial obligations. We recognize liabilities for contingencies and commitments when a loss is probable and estimable. For additional unaudited information on our commitments, see Our Liquidity and Capital Resources in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Research and Development We engage in a variety of research and development activities and continue to invest to accelerate growth and to drive innovation globally. Consumer research is excluded from research and development costs and included in other marketing costs. Research and development costs were $760 million , $754 million and $ 718 million in 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , respectively, and are reported within selling, general and administrative expenses. See Research and Development in Item 1. Business for additional unaudited information about our research and development activities. 87 Table of Contents Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets Indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill are not amortized and are assessed for impairment at least annually, using either a qualitative or quantitative approach. We perform this annual assessment during our third quarter. Where we use the qualitative assessment, first we determine if, based on qualitative factors, it is more likely than not that an impairment exists. Factors considered include macroeconomic, industry and competitive conditions, legal and regulatory environment, historical financial performance and significant changes in the brand or reporting unit. If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that an impairment exists, then a quantitative assessment is performed. In the quantitative assessment of indefinite-lived intangible assets, if the carrying amount of the indefinite-lived intangible asset exceeds its estimated fair value, as determined by its discounted cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. Quantitative assessment of goodwill is performed using a two-step impairment test at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit can be a division or business within a division. The first step compares the carrying value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, with its estimated fair value, as determined by its discounted cash flows. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, we complete the second step to determine the amount of goodwill impairment loss that we should record, if any. In the second step, we determine an implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill by allocating the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to all of the assets and liabilities other than goodwill (including any unrecognized intangible assets). The amount of impairment loss is equal to the excess of the carrying value of the goodwill over the implied fair value of that goodwill. The quantitative assessment, described above requires an analysis of several estimates including future cash flows or income consistent with management strategic business plans, annual sales growth rates, perpetuity growth assumptions and the selection of assumptions underlying a discount rate (weighted average cost of capital) based on market data available at the time. Significant management judgment is necessary to estimate the impact of competitive operating, macroeconomic and other factors to estimate future levels of sales, operating profit or cash flows. All assumptions used in our impairment evaluations for nonamortizable intangible assets, such as forecasted growth rates and weighted-average cost of capital, are based on the best available market information and are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. Amortizable intangible assets are only evaluated for impairment upon a significant change in the operating or macroeconomic environment. If an evaluation of the undiscounted future cash flows indicates impairment, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value, which is based on its discounted future cash flows. See also Note 4, and for additional unaudited information on goodwill and other intangible assets, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 88 Table of Contents Other Significant Accounting Policies Our other significant accounting policies are disclosed as follows: Basis of Presentation Note 1 - Basis of Presentation for a description of our policies regarding use of estimates, basis of presentation and consolidation. Property, Plant and Equipment Note 4. Income Taxes Note 5, and for additional unaudited information see, Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Share-Based Compensation Note 6. Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans Note 7, and for additional unaudited information, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Financial Instruments Note 9, and for additional unaudited information, see Our Business Risks in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Inventories Note 13. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the average; first-in, first-out (FIFO) or last-in, first-out (LIFO) methods. Translation of Financial Statements of Foreign Subsidiaries Financial statements of foreign subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars using period-end exchange rates for assets and liabilities and weighted-average exchange rates for revenues and expenses. Adjustments resulting from translating net assets are reported as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive loss within common shareholders equity as currency translation adjustment. Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements - Adopted In 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued guidance to clarify how certain cash receipts and payments should be presented in the cash flow statement. The guidance is effective in 2018 with early adoption permitted. We early adopted the provisions of this guidance retrospectively during our fourth quarter of 2016, including in connection with the debt redemption discussed in Note 8; the adoption did not have a material impact on our financial statements. In 2015, the FASB issued guidance that changes the subsequent measurement for certain inventory methods from the lower of cost or market to the lower of cost and net realizable value. We adopted the provisions of this guidance during our fourth quarter of 2016; the adoption did not have a material impact on our financial statements. Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements - Not Yet Adopted In 2016, the FASB issued guidance to clarify how restricted cash should be presented in the cash flow statement. The guidance is effective in 2018 with early adoption permitted. The guidance is not expected to have a material impact on our financial statements. We are currently evaluating the timing of adoption of this guidance. In 2016, the FASB issued guidance that changes the impairment model for most financial assets and certain other instruments. For trade and other receivables, held-to-maturity debt securities, loans and other instruments, entities will be required to use a new forward-looking expected loss model that will replace today incurred loss model and generally will result in earlier recognition of allowances for losses. For available-for-sale debt securities with unrealized losses, entities will measure credit losses in a manner similar to current practice, except that the losses will be recognized as an allowance. The guidance is effective in 2020 with early adoption permitted in 2019. We are currently evaluating the impact of this guidance on our financial statements and the timing of adoption. 89 Table of Contents In 2016, the FASB issued guidance that changes the accounting for certain aspects of share-based payments to employees. The guidance requires the recognition in the income statement of the income tax effects of vested or settled awards on a prospective basis. Additionally, within the cash flow statement, the guidance requires the excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements to be presented within operating activities and withholding tax payments upon vesting of restricted stock units (RSUs), performance stock units (PSUs) and PepsiCo equity performance units (PEPunits) to be presented within financing activities. We will apply the change in the presentation on the cash flow statement retrospectively. The guidance also allows for the employer to repurchase more of an employee shares for tax withholding purposes and not classify the award as a liability that requires valuation on a mark-to-market basis. In addition, the guidance allows for a policy election to account for forfeitures as they occur. We will continue to apply our policy of estimating forfeiture rates. We will adopt this guidance beginning in the first quarter of 2017 and the impact on our financial statements will be dependent on the timing of award vesting or exercises, our tax rate and the intrinsic value when awards vest or are exercised. For the years 2016 and 2015, our excess tax benefits recognized were $110 million and $107 million , respectively. If we had applied this standard in 2016 and 2015, the impact would have been a $0.07 increase to EPS in both years. For the years 2016 and 2015, the impact to our operating cash flow was an increase of $269 million and $284 million , respectively. In 2016, the FASB issued guidance that eliminates the requirement that an investor retrospectively apply equity method accounting for an investment originally accounted for by another method. The guidance requires that an equity method investor add the cost of acquiring the additional interest in the investee to the current basis of the investor previously held interest and adopt the equity method of accounting as of the date the ability to exercise significant influence is achieved. The guidance is effective and we will adopt prospectively beginning in the first quarter of 2017. In 2016, the FASB issued guidance that requires lessees to recognize most leases on their balance sheets, but record expenses on their income statements in a manner similar to current accounting. For lessors, the guidance modifies the classification criteria and the accounting for sales-type and direct financing leases. The guidance is effective in 2019 with early adoption permitted. We expect this adoption will result in an increase in the assets and liabilities on our balance sheet. We commenced our assessment of the impact of the guidance on our current lease portfolio from both a lessor and lessee perspective. See Note 13 for our minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating leases. In 2016, the FASB issued guidance that requires companies to measure investments in certain equity securities at fair value and recognize any changes in fair value in net income. The guidance is effective in 2018 and early adoption is not permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact of this guidance on our financial statements, including the impact on certain of our investments in noncontrolled affiliates and our available-for-sale securities. See Note 9 for further information on our available-for-sale securities. In 2015, the FASB issued guidance that requires companies to classify all deferred tax assets and liabilities as noncurrent on the balance sheet. The guidance is effective and we will adopt retrospectively beginning in the first quarter of 2017. The impact of the guidance to our 2016 balance sheet is a reclassification of $639 million of assets from current to non-current on our balance sheet. See Note 5 for further information on deferred taxes. In 2014, the FASB issued guidance on revenue recognition, with final amendments issued in 2016. The guidance provides for a five-step model to determine the revenue recognized for the transfer of goods or services to customers that reflects the expected entitled consideration in exchange for those goods or services. It also provides clarification for principal versus agent considerations and identifying performance obligations. In addition, the FASB introduced practical expedients related to disclosures of remaining performance obligations, as well as other amendments to guidance on collectability, non-cash consideration and the presentation of sales and other similar taxes. Financial statement disclosures required under the guidance will enable users to understand the nature, amount, timing, judgments and uncertainty of revenue 90 Table of Contents and cash flows relating to customer contracts. The two permitted transition methods under the guidance are the full retrospective approach or a cumulative effect adjustment to the opening retained earnings in the year of adoption (cumulative effect approach). The guidance is effective in 2018, with early adoption permitted. We are utilizing a comprehensive approach to assess the impact of the guidance on our contract portfolio by reviewing our current accounting policies and practices to identify potential differences that would result from applying the new requirements to our revenue contracts, including evaluation of our performance obligations, principal versus agent and variable consideration. We continue to make significant progress on our contract reviews and are also in the process of evaluating the impact, if any, on changes to our business processes, systems and controls to support recognition and disclosure under the new guidance and, based on the foregoing, we do not currently expect this guidance to have a material impact on our financial statements. We are continuing with our implementation plan and currently expect to adopt the new guidance beginning in 2018 using the cumulative effect approach. Note 3 Restructuring and Impairment Charges A summary of our restructuring and impairment charges and other productivity initiatives is as follows: 2016 2015 2014 2014 Productivity Plan $ 160 $ 169 $ 357 2012 Productivity Plan 61 61 Total restructuring and impairment charges 160 230 418 Other productivity initiatives 12 90 67 Total restructuring and impairment charges and other productivity initiatives $ 172 $ 320 $ 485 2014 Multi-Year Productivity Plan The 2014 Productivity Plan, publicly announced on February 13, 2014, includes the next generation of productivity initiatives that we believe will strengthen our food, snack and beverage businesses by: accelerating our investment in manufacturing automation; further optimizing our global manufacturing footprint, including closing certain manufacturing facilities; re-engineering our go-to-market systems in developed markets; expanding shared services; and implementing simplified organization structures to drive efficiency. The 2014 Productivity Plan is in addition to the 2012 Productivity Plan and is expected to continue the benefits of that plan. In 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , we incurred restructuring charges of $160 million ($ 131 million after-tax or $0.09 per share), $169 million ( $134 million after-tax or $0.09 per share) and $357 million ( $262 million after-tax or $0.17 per share), respectively, in conjunction with our 2014 Productivity Plan. All of these charges were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses and primarily relate to severance and other employee-related costs, asset impairments (all non-cash), and other costs associated with the implementation of our initiatives, including contract termination costs. Substantially all of the restructuring accrual at December 31, 2016 is expected to be paid by the end of 2017 . 91 Table of Contents A summary of our 2014 Productivity Plan charges is as follows: 2016 2015 2014 Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total FLNA (a) $ 10 $ $ 3 $ 13 $ 18 $ (1 ) $ 9 $ 26 $ 25 $ 10 $ 11 $ 46 QFNA 1 1 3 3 12 2 14 NAB 18 8 9 35 10 4 17 31 60 56 56 172 Latin America (a) 29 (2 ) 27 2 10 16 28 15 3 10 28 ESSA 21 22 17 60 26 11 25 62 24 4 14 42 AMENA 4 6 4 14 2 8 10 14 8 22 Corporate (a) 6 4 10 1 8 9 (2 ) 35 33 $ 88 $ 36 $ 36 $ 160 $ 59 $ 24 $ 86 $ 169 $ 148 $ 73 $ 136 $ 357 (a) Income amounts represent adjustments of previously recorded amounts. Since the inception of the 2014 Productivity Plan, we incurred restructuring charges of $739 million : 2014 Productivity Plan Costs to Date Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total FLNA $ 64 $ 9 $ 23 $ 96 QFNA 15 6 21 NAB 97 68 82 247 Latin America 52 13 24 89 ESSA 81 37 56 174 AMENA 21 6 20 47 Corporate 17 48 65 $ 347 $ 133 $ 259 $ 739 A summary of our 2014 Productivity Plan activity is as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total Liability as of December 28, 2013 $ 30 $ $ 1 $ 31 2014 restructuring charges 148 73 136 357 Cash payments (56 ) (109 ) (165 ) Non-cash charges and translation (33 ) (73 ) (4 ) (110 ) Liability as of December 27, 2014 89 24 113 2015 restructuring charges 59 24 86 169 Cash payments (76 ) (87 ) (163 ) Non-cash charges and translation (11 ) (24 ) (3 ) (38 ) Liability as of December 26, 2015 61 20 81 2016 restructuring charges 88 36 36 160 Cash payments (46 ) (49 ) (95 ) Non-cash charges and translation (15 ) (36 ) 1 (50 ) Liability as of December 31, 2016 $ 88 $ $ 8 $ 96 92 Table of Contents 2012 Multi-Year Productivity Plan The 2012 Productivity Plan, publicly announced on February 9, 2012, included actions in every aspect of our business that we believe would strengthen our complementary food, snack and beverage businesses by: leveraging new technologies and processes across PepsiCo operations, go-to-market and information systems; heightening the focus on best practice sharing across the globe; consolidating manufacturing, warehouse and sales facilities; and implementing simplified organization structures, with wider spans of control and fewer layers of management. The 2012 Productivity Plan has enhanced PepsiCo cost-competitiveness and provided a source of funding for future brand-building and innovation initiatives. In 2015 and 2014 , we incurred restructuring charges of $61 million ( $50 million after-tax or $0.03 per share) and $61 million ( $54 million after-tax or $0.04 per share), respectively, in conjunction with our 2012 Productivity Plan. All of these charges were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses and primarily related to severance and other employee-related costs, asset impairments (all non-cash), and contract termination costs. The 2012 Productivity Plan was completed in 2016 and all cash payments were paid by the end of 2016. A summary of our 2012 Productivity Plan charges is as follows: 2015 2014 Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total FLNA (a) $ $ $ $ $ (1 ) $ $ 3 $ 2 QFNA NAB (a) 2 2 (3 ) 1 9 7 Latin America (a) 6 1 1 8 19 (19 ) ESSA 15 12 27 6 5 18 29 AMENA 15 3 2 20 12 3 15 Corporate (a) 3 1 4 (2 ) 10 8 $ 39 $ 4 $ 18 $ 61 $ 31 $ 6 $ 24 $ 61 (a) Income amounts represent adjustments of previously recorded amounts. Since the inception of the 2012 Productivity Plan, we incurred restructuring charges of $894 million : 2012 Productivity Plan Costs to Date Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total FLNA $ 91 $ 8 $ 25 $ 124 QFNA 18 10 28 NAB 107 44 48 199 Latin America 98 11 18 127 ESSA 136 23 66 225 AMENA 75 5 17 97 Corporate 35 59 94 $ 560 $ 91 $ 243 $ 894 93 Table of Contents A summary of our 2012 Productivity Plan activity is as follows: Severance and Other Employee Costs Asset Impairments Other Costs Total Liability as of December 28, 2013 $ 68 $ $ 17 $ 85 2014 restructuring charges 31 6 24 61 Cash payments (65 ) (36 ) (101 ) Non-cash charges and translation (6 ) (6 ) (12 ) Liability as of December 27, 2014 28 5 33 2015 restructuring charges 39 4 18 61 Cash payments (24 ) (21 ) (45 ) Non-cash charges and translation (8 ) (4 ) 1 (11 ) Liability as of December 26, 2015 35 3 38 Cash payments (28 ) (2 ) (30 ) Non-cash charges and translation (7 ) (1 ) (8 ) Liability as of December 31, 2016 $ $ $ $ Other Productivity Initiatives There were no material charges related to other productivity and efficiency initiatives outside the scope of the 2014 and 2012 Productivity Plans in 2016. In 2015 , we incurred charges of $90 million ( $66 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) related to other productivity and efficiency initiatives, including $48 million in Latin America, $5 million in ESSA, $20 million in AMENA and $17 million in Corporate. In 2014, we incurred charges of $67 million ( $54 million after-tax or $0.04 per share) related to other productivity and efficiency initiatives, including $11 million in Latin America, $26 million in ESSA and $30 million in AMENA. Non-cash charges in 2015 and 2014 were $10 million and $13 million , respectively. These amounts were recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses and primarily reflect severance and other employee-related costs and asset impairments (all non-cash). These initiatives were not included in items affecting comparability. Cash payments in 2016, 2015 and 2014 were $43 million , $57 million and $3 million , respectively. Substantially all of the accrual of $29 million at December 31, 2016 is expected to be paid by the end of 2017. We regularly evaluate different productivity initiatives beyond the productivity plans and other initiatives discussed above. See additional unaudited information in Items Affecting Comparability and Results of Operations Division Review in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 94 Table of Contents Note 4 Property, Plant and Equipment and Intangible Assets A summary of our property, plant and equipment is as follows: Average Useful Life (Years) 2016 2015 2014 Property, plant and equipment, net Land $ 1,153 $ 1,184 Buildings and improvements 15 - 44 8,306 8,061 Machinery and equipment, including fleet and software 5 - 15 25,277 24,764 Construction in progress 2,082 1,738 36,818 35,747 Accumulated depreciation (20,227 ) (19,430 ) $ 16,591 $ 16,317 Depreciation expense $ 2,217 $ 2,248 $ 2,441 Property, plant and equipment is recorded at historical cost. Depreciation and amortization are recognized on a straight-line basis over an asset estimated useful life. Land is not depreciated and construction in progress is not depreciated until ready for service. A summary of our amortizable intangible assets is as follows: 2016 2015 2014 Amortizable intangible assets, net Average Useful Life (Years) Gross Accumulated Amortization Net Gross Accumulated Amortization Net Acquired franchise rights 56 60 $ 827 $ (108 ) $ 719 $ 820 $ (92 ) $ 728 Reacquired franchise rights 5 14 106 (102 ) 4 105 (99 ) 6 Brands 20 40 1,277 (977 ) 300 1,298 (987 ) 311 Other identifiable intangibles 10 24 522 (308 ) 214 526 (301 ) 225 $ 2,732 $ (1,495 ) $ 1,237 $ 2,749 $ (1,479 ) $ 1,270 Amortization expense $ 70 $ 75 $ 92 Amortization of intangible assets for each of the next five years, based on existing intangible assets as of December 31, 2016 and using average 2016 foreign exchange rates, is expected to be as follows: 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Five-year projected amortization $ 62 $ 60 $ 57 $ 57 $ 55 Depreciable and amortizable assets are only evaluated for impairment upon a significant change in the operating or macroeconomic environment. In these circumstances, if an evaluation of the undiscounted cash flows indicates impairment, the asset is written down to its estimated fair value, which is based on discounted future cash flows. Useful lives are periodically evaluated to determine whether events or circumstances have occurred which indicate the need for revision. For additional unaudited information on our policies for amortizable brands, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 95 Table of Contents Nonamortizable Intangible Assets We did not recognize any impairment charges for goodwill in each of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 . We recognized no material impairment charges for nonamortizable intangible assets in each of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2016 , December 26, 2015 and December 27, 2014 . As of December 31, 2016 , the estimated fair values of our indefinite-lived reacquired and acquired franchise rights recorded at NAB exceeded their carrying values. However, there could be an impairment of the carrying value of NAB reacquired and acquired franchise rights if future revenues and their contribution to the operating results of NAB CSD business do not achieve our expected future cash flows or if macroeconomic conditions result in a future increase in the weighted-average cost of capital used to estimate fair value. We have also analyzed the impact of the macroeconomic conditions in Russia and Brazil on the estimated fair value of our indefinite-lived intangible assets in these countries and have concluded that there is no impairment as of December 31, 2016 . However, there could be an impairment of the carrying value of certain brands in these countries if there is a further deterioration in these conditions, if future revenues and their contributions to the operating results do not achieve our expected future cash flows or if macroeconomic conditions result in a future increase in the weighted-average cost of capital used to estimate fair value. For additional information on our policies for nonamortizable intangible assets, see Note 2. 96 Table of Contents The change in the book value of nonamortizable intangible assets is as follows: Balance, Beginning 2015 Translation and Other Balance, End of 2015 Translation and Other Balance, End of 2016 FLNA Goodwill $ 291 $ (24 ) $ 267 $ 3 $ 270 Brands 27 (5 ) 22 1 23 318 (29 ) 289 4 293 QFNA Goodwill 175 175 175 NAB Goodwill (a) 9,846 (92 ) 9,754 89 9,843 Reacquired franchise rights 7,193 (151 ) 7,042 22 7,064 Acquired franchise rights 1,538 (31 ) 1,507 5 1,512 Brands (a) 108 108 206 314 18,685 (274 ) 18,411 322 18,733 Latin America Goodwill 644 (123 ) 521 32 553 Brands (b) 223 (86 ) 137 13 150 867 (209 ) 658 45 703 ESSA (c) Goodwill 3,539 (497 ) 3,042 135 3,177 Reacquired franchise rights 571 (83 ) 488 488 Acquired franchise rights 199 (9 ) 190 (6 ) 184 Brands 2,663 (451 ) 2,212 146 2,358 6,972 (1,040 ) 5,932 275 6,207 AMENA Goodwill 470 (52 ) 418 (6 ) 412 Brands 117 (12 ) 105 (2 ) 103 587 (64 ) 523 (8 ) 515 Total goodwill 14,965 (788 ) 14,177 253 14,430 Total reacquired franchise rights 7,764 (234 ) 7,530 22 7,552 Total acquired franchise rights 1,737 (40 ) 1,697 (1 ) 1,696 Total brands 3,138 (554 ) 2,584 364 2,948 $ 27,604 $ (1,616 ) $ 25,988 $ 638 $ 26,626 (a) The change in 2016 is primarily related to our acquisition of KeVita, Inc. (b) The change in 2015 includes a reduction of $41 million of nonamortizable brands arising from the Venezuela deconsolidation. (c) The change in 2016 and 2015 primarily reflects the currency fluctuation of the Russian ruble. 97 Table of Contents Note 5 Income Taxes The components of income before income taxes are as follows: 2016 2015 2014 United States $ 2,630 $ 2,879 $ 2,557 Foreign 5,923 4,563 6,200 $ 8,553 $ 7,442 $ 8,757 The provision for income taxes consisted of the following: 2016 2015 2014 Current: U.S. Federal $ 1,219 $ 1,143 $ 1,364 Foreign 824 773 851 State 77 65 210 2,120 1,981 2,425 Deferred: U.S. Federal 109 (14 ) (33 ) Foreign (33 ) (32 ) (60 ) State (22 ) 6 (133 ) 54 (40 ) (226 ) $ 2,174 $ 1,941 $ 2,199 A reconciliation of the U.S. Federal statutory tax rate to our annual tax rate is as follows: 2016 2015 2014 U.S. Federal statutory tax rate 35.0 % 35.0 % 35.0 % State income tax, net of U.S. Federal tax benefit 0.4 0.6 0.6 Lower taxes on foreign results (8.0 ) (10.5 ) (8.6 ) Impact of Venezuela impairment charges 6.4 Tax settlements (3.1 ) Other, net (2.0 ) (2.3 ) (1.9 ) Annual tax rate 25.4 % 26.1 % 25.1 % 98 Table of Contents Deferred tax liabilities and assets are comprised of the following: Deferred tax liabilities 2016 2015 Debt guarantee of wholly-owned subsidiary $ 839 $ 842 Property, plant and equipment 1,967 2,023 Intangible assets other than nondeductible goodwill 4,124 3,920 Other 245 299 Gross deferred tax liabilities 7,175 7,084 Deferred tax assets Net carryforwards 1,255 1,279 Share-based compensation 219 240 Retiree medical benefits 316 343 Other employee-related benefits 614 547 Pension benefits 419 424 Deductible state tax and interest benefits 189 186 Other 839 933 Gross deferred tax assets 3,851 3,952 Valuation allowances (1,110 ) (1,136 ) Deferred tax assets, net 2,741 2,816 Net deferred tax liabilities $ 4,434 $ 4,268 Deferred taxes are included within the following balance sheet accounts: 2016 2015 Assets: Prepaid expenses and other current assets $ 639 $ 691 Liabilities: Deferred income taxes $ 5,073 $ 4,959 A summary of our valuation allowance activity is as follows: 2016 2015 2014 Balance, beginning of year $ 1,136 $ 1,230 $ 1,360 Provision/(Benefit) 13 (26 ) (25 ) Other deductions (39 ) (68 ) (105 ) Balance, end of year $ 1,110 $ 1,136 $ 1,230 For additional unaudited information on our income tax policies, including our reserves for income taxes, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 99 Table of Contents Reserves A number of years may elapse before a particular matter, for which we have established a reserve, is audited and finally resolved. The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. Our major taxing jurisdictions and the related open tax audits are as follows: Jurisdiction Years Open to Audit Years Currently Under Audit United States 2010, 2012-2015 2012-2013 Mexico 2011-2015 2014 United Kingdom 2014-2015 None Canada (Domestic) 2011-2015 2011-2014 Canada (International) 2009-2015 2010-2014 Russia 2012-2015 2013-2015 While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome or the timing of resolution of any particular tax matter, we believe that our reserves reflect the probable outcome of known tax contingencies. We adjust these reserves, as well as the related interest, in light of changing facts and circumstances. Settlement of any particular issue would usually require the use of cash. Favorable resolution would be recognized as a reduction to our annual tax rate in the year of resolution. For further unaudited information on the impact of the resolution of open tax issues, see Other Consolidated Results in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. In 2015, we reached an agreement with the IRS resolving substantially all open matters related to the audits of taxable years 2010 and 2011 (two immaterial matters were still open as of December 31, 2016). The agreement resulted in a 2015 non-cash tax benefit totaling $230 million . As of December 31, 2016 , the total gross amount of reserves for income taxes, reported in other liabilities, was $1,885 million . We accrue interest related to reserves for income taxes in our provision for income taxes and any associated penalties are recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses. The gross amount of interest accrued, reported in other liabilities, was $193 million as of December 31, 2016 , of which $61 million of expense was recognized in 2016 . The gross amount of interest accrued, reported in other liabilities, was $144 million as of December 26, 2015 , of which $14 million of expense was recognized in 2015 . A rollforward of our reserves for all federal, state and foreign tax jurisdictions, is as follows: 2016 2015 Balance, beginning of year $ 1,547 $ 1,587 Additions for tax positions related to the current year 349 248 Additions for tax positions from prior years 139 122 Reductions for tax positions from prior years (70 ) (261 ) Settlement payments (26 ) (78 ) Statutes of limitations expiration (27 ) (34 ) Translation and other (27 ) (37 ) Balance, end of year $ 1,885 $ 1,547 100 Table of Contents Carryforwards and Allowances Operating loss carryforwards totaling $11.3 billion at year-end 2016 are being carried forward in a number of foreign and state jurisdictions where we are permitted to use tax operating losses from prior periods to reduce future taxable income. These operating losses will expire as follows: $0.1 billion in 2017 , $9.9 billion between 2018 and 2036 and $1.3 billion may be carried forward indefinitely. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Undistributed International Earnings As of December 31, 2016 , we had approximately $44.9 billion of undistributed international earnings. We intend to continue to reinvest earnings outside the United States for the foreseeable future and, therefore, have not recognized any U.S. tax expense on these earnings. It is not practicable for us to determine the amount of unrecognized U.S. tax expense on these reinvested international earnings. Note 6 Share-Based Compensation Our share-based compensation program is designed to attract and retain employees while also aligning employees interests with the interests of our shareholders. PepsiCo has granted stock options, RSUs, PSUs, PEPunits and long-term cash awards to employees under the shareholder-approved PepsiCo, Inc. Long-Term Incentive Plan (LTIP) (previously named the 2007 Long-Term Incentive Plan). A stock option permits the holder to purchase shares of PepsiCo common stock at a specified price. Each RSU represents our obligation to deliver to the holder one share of PepsiCo common stock when the award vests at the end of the service period. PSUs are awards pursuant to which a number of shares are delivered to the holder upon vesting at the end of the service period based on PepsiCo performance against specified targets. During the vesting period, RSUs and PSUs accrue dividend equivalents that pay out in cash (without interest) if and when the applicable RSU or PSU vests and becomes payable. PEPunits provide an opportunity to earn shares of PepsiCo common stock with a value that adjusts based upon changes in PepsiCo absolute stock price as well as PepsiCo Total Shareholder Return relative to the S&P 500 over a three -year performance period. Beginning in 2016, certain executive officers and other senior executives were granted long-term cash awards for which final payout is based on PepsiCo Total Shareholder Return relative to a specific set of peer companies and achievement of a specified performance target over a three-year performance period. The Company may use authorized and unissued shares to meet share requirements resulting from the exercise of stock options and the vesting of RSUs, PSUs and PEPunits. As of December 31, 2016 , 82 million shares were available for future share-based compensation grants under the LTIP. The following table summarizes our total share-based compensation expense: 2016 2015 2014 Share-based compensation expense - equity awards $ 284 $ 295 $ 297 Share-based compensation expense - liability awards 5 Restructuring and impairment charges/(credits) 5 4 (3 ) Total $ 294 $ 299 $ 294 Income tax benefits recognized in earnings related to share-based compensation $ 91 $ 77 $ 75 As of December 31, 2016 , there was $321 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested share-based compensation grants. This unrecognized compensation cost is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of two years. 101 Table of Contents Method of Accounting and Our Assumptions We account for our employee stock options under the fair value method of accounting using a Black-Scholes valuation model to measure stock option expense at the date of grant. The fair value of RSUs is measured at the market price of the Company stock on the date of grant. The fair value of PSUs is measured at the market price of the Company stock on the date of grant with the exception of market-based awards, for which we use the Monte-Carlo simulation model to determine the fair value. The Monte-Carlo simulation model uses the same input assumptions as the Black-Scholes model; however, it also further incorporates into the fair-value determination the possibility that the market condition may not be satisfied. Compensation costs related to these awards are recognized regardless of whether the market condition is satisfied, provided that the requisite service has been provided. Long-term cash awards that qualify as liability awards under share-based compensation guidance are valued through the end of the performance period on a mark-to-market basis using the Monte Carlo simulation model until actual performance is determined. All stock option grants have an exercise price equal to the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant and generally have a 10 -year term. We do not backdate, reprice or grant share-based compensation awards retroactively. Repricing of awards would require shareholder approval under the LTIP. The fair value of share-based award grants is amortized to expense over the vesting period, primarily three years. Awards to employees eligible for retirement prior to the award becoming fully vested are amortized to expense over the period through the date that the employee first becomes eligible to retire and is no longer required to provide service to earn the award. Executives who are awarded long-term incentives based on their performance may generally elect to receive their grant in the form of stock options or RSUs, or a combination thereof. Executives who elect stock options receive four stock options for every one RSU that would have otherwise been granted. Certain executive officers and other senior executives do not have a choice and, through 2015, were granted a combination of 60% PEPunits measuring both absolute and relative stock price performance and 40% long-term cash based on achievement of specific performance operating metrics. Beginning in 2016, certain executive officers and other senior executives were granted 66% performance stock units and 34% long-term cash, each of which are subject to pre-established performance targets. Certain executives are granted performance-based stock units which require the achievement of specified financial and/or operational performance metrics. The number of shares may be increased to the maximum or reduced to the minimum threshold based on the results of these performance metrics in accordance with the terms established at the time of the award. Our weighted-average Black-Scholes fair value assumptions are as follows: 2016 2015 2014 Expected life 6 years 7 years 6 years Risk-free interest rate 1.4 % 1.8 % 1.9 % Expected volatility 12 % 15 % 16 % Expected dividend yield 2.7 % 2.7 % 2.9 % The expected life is the period over which our employee groups are expected to hold their options. It is based on our historical experience with similar grants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the expected U.S. Treasury rate over the expected life. Volatility reflects movements in our stock price over the most recent historical period equivalent to the expected life. Dividend yield is estimated over the expected life based on our stated dividend policy and forecasts of net income, share repurchases and stock price. In addition, we use historical data to estimate forfeiture rates and record share-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. 102 Table of Contents A summary of our share-based compensation activity for the year ended December 31, 2016 is as follows: Our Stock Option Activity Options (a) Weighted-Average Exercise Price Weighted-Average Contractual Life Remaining (years) Aggregate Intrinsic Value (b) Outstanding at December 26, 2015 31,472 $ 66.98 Granted 1,743 $ 100.10 Exercised (7,303 ) $ 63.49 Forfeited/expired (722 ) $ 81.06 Outstanding at December 31, 2016 25,190 $ 69.88 4.19 $ 876,000 Exercisable at December 31, 2016 19,315 $ 63.35 3.02 $ 797,246 Expected to vest as of December 31, 2016 5,390 $ 90.74 7.96 $ 75,439 (a) Options are in thousands and include options previously granted under The Pepsi Bottling Group, Inc. (PBG) plan. No additional options or shares were granted under the PBG plan after 2009. (b) In thousands. Our RSU and PSU Activity RSUs/PSUs (a) Weighted-Average Grant-Date Fair Value Weighted-Average Contractual Life Remaining (years) Aggregate Intrinsic Value (a) Outstanding at December 26, 2015 9,108 $ 84.03 Granted (b) 3,054 $ 99.06 Converted (3,372 ) $ 77.33 Forfeited (659 ) $ 90.10 Actual performance change (c) 106 $ 80.09 Outstanding at December 31, 2016 (d) 8,237 $ 91.81 1.29 $ 861,817 Expected to vest as of December 31, 2016 7,577 $ 91.42 1.21 $ 792,739 (a) In thousands. (b) Grant activity for all PSUs are disclosed at target. (c) Reflects the net number of PSUs above and below target levels based on actual performance measured at the end of the performance period. (d) The outstanding PSUs for which the performance period has not ended as of December 31, 2016 , at the threshold, target and maximum award levels were zero , 0.7 million and 1.1 million , respectively. 103 Table of Contents Our PEPunit Activity PEPunits (a) Weighted-Average Grant-Date Fair Value Weighted-Average Contractual Life Remaining (years) Aggregate Intrinsic Value (a) Outstanding at December 26, 2015 821 $ 62.77 Converted (390 ) $ 68.48 Forfeited (19 ) $ 63.64 Actual performance change (b) 121 $ 68.48 Outstanding at December 31, 2016 (c) 533 $ 59.86 0.66 $ 55,737 Expected to vest as of December 31, 2016 514 $ 59.49 0.64 $ 53,742 (a) In thousands. (b) Reflects the net number of PEPunits above and below target levels based on actual performance measured at the end of the performance period. (c) The outstanding PEPunits for which the performance period has not ended as of December 31, 2016 , at the threshold, target and maximum award levels were zero , 0.5 million and 0.9 million , respectively. Our Long-term Cash Award Activity Long-term Cash Award (a) Balance Sheet Date Fair Value (a) Contractual Life Remaining (years) Outstanding at December 26, 2015 $ Granted (b) 16,932 Forfeited (1,262 ) Outstanding at December 31, 2016 (c) $ 15,670 $ 14,865 2.16 Expected to vest as of December 31, 2016 $ 14,175 $ 13,448 2.16 (a) In thousands. (b) Grant activity for all long-term cash awards are disclosed at target. (c) The outstanding long-term cash awards for which the performance period has not ended as of December 31, 2016, at the threshold, target and maximum award levels were zero , $15.7 million and $31.3 million, respectively. 104 Table of Contents Other Share-Based Compensation Data 2016 2015 2014 Stock Options Total number of options granted (a) 1,743 1,884 3,416 Weighted-average grant-date fair value of options granted $ 6.94 $ 10.80 $ 8.79 Total intrinsic value of options exercised (a) $ 290,131 $ 366,188 $ 423,251 Total grant-date fair value of options vested (a) $ 18,840 $ 21,837 $ 42,353 RSUs/PSUs Total number of RSUs/PSUs granted (a) 3,054 2,759 4,379 Weighted-average grant-date fair value of RSUs/PSUs granted $ 99.06 $ 99.17 $ 80.39 Total intrinsic value of RSUs/PSUs converted (a) $ 359,401 $ 375,510 $ 319,820 Total grant-date fair value of RSUs/PSUs vested (a) $ 257,648 $ 257,831 $ 241,836 PEPunits Total number of PEPunits granted (a) 300 387 Weighted-average grant-date fair value of PEPunits granted $ $ 68.94 $ 50.95 Total intrinsic value of PEPunits converted (a) $ 38,558 $ 37,705 $ Total grant-date fair value of PEPunits vested (a) $ 16,572 $ 22,286 $ 5,072 (a) In thousands. As of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 , there were approximately 254,000 and 293,000 outstanding awards, respectively, consisting primarily of phantom stock units that were granted under the PepsiCo Director Deferral Program and will be settled in shares of PepsiCo common stock pursuant to the LTIP at the end of the applicable deferral period, not included in the tables above. Note 7 Pension, Retiree Medical and Savings Plans In 2016, the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plans purchased a group annuity contract whereby an unrelated insurance company assumed the obligation to pay and administer future annuity payments for certain retirees. In 2016, we made discretionary contributions of $452 million primarily to fund the transfer of the obligation. This transaction triggered a pre-tax settlement charge of $242 million ($ 162 million after-tax or $0.11 per share). See additional unaudited information in Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Effective as of the beginning of 2016, we prospectively changed the method we use to estimate the service and interest cost components of net periodic benefit cost. The pre-tax reduction in net periodic benefit cost associated with this change in 2016 was $ 125 million ($ 81 million after-tax or $0.06 per share). See Pension and Retiree Medical Plans in Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further unaudited information on this change in accounting estimate. In 2014, we offered certain former employees who had vested benefits in our U.S. defined benefit pension plans the option of receiving a one-time lump sum payment equal to the present value of the participant pension benefit (payable in cash or rolled over into a qualified retirement plan or IRA). In 2014, we made a discretionary contribution of $388 million to fund substantially all of these payments. We recorded a pre-tax settlement charge of $141 million ( $88 million after-tax or $0.06 per share) in 2014 as a result of this transaction. See additional unaudited information in Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 105 Table of Contents Gains and losses resulting from actual experience differing from our assumptions, including the difference between the actual return on plan assets and the expected return on plan assets, and from changes in our assumptions are determined at each measurement date. These differences are recognized as a component of net gain or loss in accumulated other comprehensive loss. If this net accumulated gain or loss exceeds 10% of the greater of the market-related value of plan assets or plan liabilities, a portion of the net gain or loss is included in expense for the following year based upon the average remaining service period of active plan participants, which in 2016 was approximately 11 years for pension expense and approximately 7 years for retiree medical expense. The cost or benefit of plan changes that increase or decrease benefits for prior employee service (prior service (credit)/cost) is included in earnings on a straight-line basis over the average remaining service period of active plan participants. In 2016, we approved an amendment to reorganize the U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plans that resulted in the combination of two plans effective December 31, 2016, and the spinoff of a portion of the combined plan into a pre-existing plan effective January 1, 2017. The benefits offered to the plans participants were unchanged. The result of the reorganization was the creation of the PepsiCo Employees Retirement Plan A, or active plan, and the PepsiCo Employees Retirement Plan I, or inactive plan. The reorganization was made to facilitate a targeted investment strategy over time and to provide additional flexibility in evaluating opportunities to reduce risk and volatility. Actuarial gains and losses associated with the active plan will continue to be amortized over the average remaining service life of the active participants (approximately 11 years beginning in 2017), while the actuarial gains and losses associated with the inactive plan will be amortized over the remaining life expectancy of the inactive participants (approximately 27 years beginning in 2017). As a result of these changes, benefit plan pre-tax expense is expected to decrease by approximately $40 million in 2017, primarily impacting corporate unallocated. 106 Table of Contents Selected financial information for our pension and retiree medical plans is as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 Change in projected benefit liability Liability at beginning of year $ 13,033 $ 13,409 $ 2,872 $ 3,247 $ 1,300 $ 1,439 Service cost 393 435 80 99 31 35 Interest cost 484 546 94 115 41 52 Plan amendments 18 16 1 (15 ) Participant contributions 2 2 Experience loss/(gain) 614 (583 ) 560 (221 ) (51 ) (115 ) Benefit payments (347 ) (808 ) (83 ) (89 ) (100 ) (102 ) Settlement/curtailment (1,014 ) (19 ) (19 ) Special termination benefits 11 18 1 1 1 1 Foreign currency adjustment (383 ) (264 ) 1 (10 ) Liability at end of year $ 13,192 $ 13,033 $ 3,124 $ 2,872 $ 1,208 $ 1,300 Change in fair value of plan assets Fair value at beginning of year $ 11,397 $ 12,224 $ 2,823 $ 3,002 $ 354 $ 415 Actual return on plan assets 880 (85 ) 409 77 30 (2 ) Employer contributions/funding 541 66 118 96 36 43 Participant contributions 2 2 Benefit payments (347 ) (808 ) (83 ) (89 ) (100 ) (102 ) Settlement (1,013 ) (22 ) (16 ) Foreign currency adjustment (353 ) (249 ) Fair value at end of year $ 11,458 $ 11,397 $ 2,894 $ 2,823 $ 320 $ 354 Funded status $ (1,734 ) $ (1,636 ) $ (230 ) $ (49 ) $ (888 ) $ (946 ) 107 Table of Contents Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 Amounts recognized Other assets $ $ $ 51 $ 56 $ $ Other current liabilities (42 ) (47 ) (1 ) (1 ) (54 ) (63 ) Other liabilities (1,692 ) (1,589 ) (280 ) (104 ) (834 ) (883 ) Net amount recognized $ (1,734 ) $ (1,636 ) $ (230 ) $ (49 ) $ (888 ) $ (946 ) Amounts included in accumulated other comprehensive loss (pre-tax) Net loss/(gain) $ 3,220 $ 3,065 $ 884 $ 733 $ (193 ) $ (138 ) Prior service cost/(credit) 20 1 (5 ) (7 ) (91 ) (127 ) Total $ 3,240 $ 3,066 $ 879 $ 726 $ (284 ) $ (265 ) Components of the increase/(decrease) in net loss/(gain) included in accumulated other comprehensive loss Change in discount rate $ 296 $ (593 ) $ 554 $ (150 ) $ 21 $ (42 ) Employee-related assumption changes 5 (35 ) 8 6 (50 ) (37 ) Liability-related experience different from assumptions 318 51 (2 ) (77 ) (22 ) (36 ) Actual asset return different from expected return (46 ) 935 (246 ) 97 (6 ) 29 Amortization and settlement of (losses)/gains (413 ) (205 ) (46 ) (77 ) 1 (2 ) Other, including foreign currency adjustments (5 ) (6 ) (117 ) (69 ) 1 (1 ) Total $ 155 $ 147 $ 151 $ (270 ) $ (55 ) $ (89 ) Accumulated benefit obligation at end of year $ 12,211 $ 12,077 $ 2,642 $ 2,453 The amounts we report as pension and retiree medical cost consist of the following components: Service cost is the value of benefits earned by employees for working during the year. Interest cost is the accrued interest on the projected benefit obligation due to the passage of time. Expected return on plan assets is the long-term return we expect to earn on plan investments for our funded plans that will be used to settle future benefit obligations. Amortization of prior service (credit)/cost represents the recognition in the income statement of benefit changes resulting from plan amendments. Amortization of net loss/(gain) represents the recognition in the income statement of changes in the amounts of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation based on changes in assumptions and actual experience. Settlement/curtailment loss/(gain) represents the result of actions that effectively eliminate all or a portion of related projected benefit obligations. Settlements are triggered when payouts to settle the projected benefit obligation of a plan due to lump sums or other events exceed the annual service and interest cost. Settlements are recognized when actions are irrevocable and we are relieved of the primary responsibility and risk for projected benefit obligations. Curtailments are due to events such as plant closures or the sale of a business resulting in a reduction of future service or benefits. Curtailment losses are recognized when an event is probable and estimable, while curtailment gains are recognized when an event has occurred (when the related employees terminate or an amendment is adopted). Special termination benefits are the additional benefits offered to employees upon departure due to actions such as restructuring. 108 Table of Contents The components of benefit expense are as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014 Components of benefit expense Service cost $ 393 $ 435 $ 393 $ 80 $ 99 $ 98 $ 31 $ 35 $ 36 Interest cost 484 546 580 94 115 131 41 52 58 Expected return on plan assets (834 ) (850 ) (784 ) (163 ) (174 ) (176 ) (24 ) (27 ) (27 ) Amortization of prior service (credit)/cost (1 ) (3 ) 21 (38 ) (39 ) (28 ) Amortization of net loss/(gain) 168 205 175 40 71 53 (1 ) 2 (4 ) 210 333 385 51 111 106 9 23 35 Settlement/curtailment loss/(gain) (a) 245 141 9 3 7 (14 ) Special termination benefits 11 18 24 1 1 1 1 3 Total $ 466 $ 351 $ 550 $ 61 $ 115 $ 113 $ (4 ) $ 24 $ 38 (a) U.S. includes a settlement charge of $ 242 million related to the group annuity contract purchase in 2016 and a pension lump sum settlement charge of $141 million in 2014. See additional unaudited information in Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. The estimated amounts to be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive loss into pre-tax expense in 2017 for our pension and retiree medical plans are as follows: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International Net loss/(gain) $ 122 $ 51 $ (12 ) Prior service cost/(credit) 1 (25 ) Total $ 123 $ 51 $ (37 ) The following table provides the weighted-average assumptions used to determine projected benefit liability and benefit expense for our pension and retiree medical plans: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014 Weighted-average assumptions Liability discount rate 4.4 % 4.5 % 4.2 % 3.1 % 4.0 % 3.8 % 4.0 % 4.2 % 3.8 % Expense discount rate (a) n/a 4.2 % 5.0 % n/a 3.8 % 4.7 % n/a 3.8 % 4.3 % Service cost discount rate (a) 4.6 % n/a n/a 4.1 % n/a n/a 4.3 % n/a n/a Interest cost discount rate (a) 3.8 % n/a n/a 3.5 % n/a n/a 3.3 % n/a n/a Expected return on plan assets 7.5 % 7.5 % 7.5 % 6.2 % 6.5 % 6.6 % 7.5 % 7.5 % 7.5 % Liability rate of salary increases 3.1 % 3.1 % 3.5 % 3.6 % 3.6 % 3.6 % Expense rate of salary increases 3.1 % 3.5 % 3.7 % 3.6 % 3.6 % 3.9 % (a) Effective as of the beginning of 2016, we prospectively changed the method we use to estimate the service and interest cost components of pension and retiree medical expense. See additional unaudited information in Pension and Retiree Medical Plans in Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 109 Table of Contents The following table provides selected information about plans with accumulated benefit obligation and total projected benefit liability in excess of plan assets: Pension Retiree Medical U.S. International 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 Selected information for plans with accumulated benefit obligation in excess of plan assets (a) Liability for service to date $ (12,211 ) $ (6,536 ) $ (134 ) $ (155 ) Fair value of plan assets $ 11,458 $ 5,698 $ 110 $ 112 Selected information for plans with projected benefit liability in excess of plan assets Benefit liability $ (13,192 ) $ (13,033 ) $ (2,773 ) $ (511 ) $ (1,208 ) $ (1,300 ) Fair value of plan assets $ 11,458 $ 11,397 $ 2,492 $ 406 $ 320 $ 354 (a) The increase in U.S. pension plans in 2016 is due to the combination of two U.S. qualified defined benefit plans as part of our plan reorganization, resulting in the accumulated benefit obligation of the combined plan exceeding the fair value of plan assets. Of the total projected pension benefit liability at year-end 2016 , $790 million relates to plans that we do not fund because the funding of such plans does not receive favorable tax treatment. Future Benefit Payments and Funding Our estimated future benefit payments are as follows: 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 - 26 Pension $ 725 $ 780 $ 825 $ 870 $ 925 $ 5,270 Retiree medical (a) $ 120 $ 120 $ 115 $ 110 $ 110 $ 485 (a) Expected future benefit payments for our retiree medical plans do not reflect any estimated subsidies expected to be received under the 2003 Medicare Act. Subsidies are expected to be approximately $2 -$ 3 million for each of the years from 2017 through 2021 and approximately $7 million in total for 2022 through 2026. These future benefit payments to beneficiaries include payments from both funded and unfunded plans. In 2017 , we expect to make pension and retiree medical contributions of approximately $184 million , with approximately $54 million for retiree medical benefits. Plan Assets Our pension plan investment strategy includes the use of actively managed accounts and is reviewed periodically in conjunction with plan liabilities, an evaluation of market conditions, tolerance for risk and cash requirements for benefit payments. This strategy is also applicable to funds held for the retiree medical plans. Our investment objective includes ensuring that funds are available to meet the plans benefit obligations when they become due. Our overall investment policy is to prudently invest plan assets in a well-diversified portfolio of equity and high-quality debt securities and real estate to achieve our long-term return expectations. Our investment policy also permits the use of derivative instruments, such as futures and forward contracts, to reduce interest rate and foreign currency risks. Futures contracts represent commitments to purchase or sell securities at a future date and at a specified price. Forward contracts consist of currency forwards. 110 Table of Contents For 2017 and 2016 , our expected long-term rate of return on U.S. plan assets is 7.5% . Our target investment allocations for U.S. plan assets are as follows: 2017 2016 Fixed income 40 % 40 % U.S. equity 33 % 33 % International equity 22 % 22 % Real estate 5 % 5 % Actual investment allocations may vary from our target investment allocations due to prevailing market conditions. We regularly review our actual investment allocations and periodically rebalance our investments. The expected return on plan assets is based on our investment strategy and our expectations for long-term rates of return by asset class, taking into account volatility and correlation among asset classes and our historical experience. We also review current levels of interest rates and inflation to assess the reasonableness of the long-term rates. We evaluate our expected return assumptions annually to ensure that they are reasonable. To calculate the expected return on plan assets, our market-related value of assets for fixed income is the actual fair value. For all other asset categories, such as equity securities, we use a method that recognizes investment gains or losses (the difference between the expected and actual return based on the market-related value of assets) over a five -year period. This has the effect of reducing year-to-year volatility. Contributions to our pension and retiree medical plans were as follows: Pension Retiree Medical 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014 Discretionary (a) $ 459 $ $ 407 $ $ $ Non-discretionary 200 162 184 36 43 64 Total $ 659 $ 162 $ 591 $ 36 $ 43 $ 64 (a) Includes $ 452 million in 2016 relating to the funding of the group annuity contract purchase from an unrelated insurance company and $388 million in 2014 pertaining to pension lump sum payments. 111 Table of Contents Plan assets measured at fair value as of fiscal year-end 2016 and 2015 are categorized consistently by level in both years, and are as follows: 2016 2015 Total Quoted Prices in Active Markets for Identical Assets (Level 1) Significant Other Observable Inputs (Level 2) Significant Unobservable Inputs (Level 3) Total U.S. plan assets (a) Equity securities, including preferred stock (b) $ 6,489 $ 6,480 $ 9 $ $ 6,109 Government securities (c) 1,173 1,173 1,181 Corporate bonds (c) 3,012 3,012 3,191 Mortgage-backed securities (c) 187 187 207 Contracts with insurance companies (d) 7 7 7 Cash and cash equivalents 196 196 267 Sub-total U.S. plan assets 11,064 $ 6,676 $ 4,381 $ 7 10,962 Real estate commingled funds measured at net asset value (f) 651 735 Dividends and interest receivable, net of payables 63 54 Total U.S. plan assets $ 11,778 $ 11,751 International plan assets Equity securities (b) $ 1,556 $ 1,528 $ 28 $ $ 1,492 Government securities (c) 432 432 433 Corporate bonds (c) 453 453 439 Fixed income commingled funds (e) 316 316 308 Contracts with insurance companies (d) 35 35 32 Cash and cash equivalents 12 12 12 Sub-total international plan assets 2,804 $ 1,856 $ 913 $ 35 2,716 Real estate commingled funds measured at net asset value (f) 84 100 Dividends and interest receivable 6 7 Total international plan assets $ 2,894 $ 2,823 (a) 2016 and 2015 amounts include $320 million and $ 354 million , respectively, of retiree medical plan assets that are restricted for purposes of providing health benefits for U.S. retirees and their beneficiaries. (b) The equity securities portfolio was invested in U.S. and International common stock and commingled funds, and the preferred stock portfolio in the U.S. was invested in domestic and international corporate preferred stock investments. The common stock is based on quoted prices in active markets. The U.S. commingled funds are based on fair values of the investments owned by these funds that are benchmarked against various U.S. large, mid-cap and small company indices, and includes one large-cap fund that represents 19% and 18% of total U.S. plan assets for 2016 and 2015 , respectively. The international commingled funds are based on the fair values of the investments owned by these funds that track various non-U.S. equity indices. The preferred stock investments are based on quoted bid prices for comparable securities in the marketplace and broker/dealer quotes in active markets. (c) These investments are based on quoted bid prices for comparable securities in the marketplace and broker/dealer quotes in active markets. Corporate bonds of U.S.-based companies represent 22% and 23% of total U.S. plan assets for 2016 and 2015 , respectively. (d) Based on the fair value of the contracts as determined by the insurance companies using inputs that are not observable. The changes in Level 3 amounts were not significant in the years ended December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015. (e) Based on the fair value of the investments owned by these funds that track various government and corporate bond indices. (f) The real estate commingled funds include investments in limited partnerships. These funds are based on the net asset value of the appraised value of investments owned by these funds as determined by independent third parties using inputs that are not observable. The majority of the funds are redeemable quarterly subject to availability of cash and have notice periods ranging from 45 to 90 days. 112 Table of Contents Retiree Medical Cost Trend Rates 2017 2016 Average increase assumed 6 % 6 % Ultimate projected increase 5 % 5 % Year of ultimate projected increase 2039 2039 These assumed health care cost trend rates have an impact on the retiree medical plan expense and liability, however the cap on our share of retiree medical costs limits the impact. A 1-percentage-point change in the assumed health care trend rate would have the following effects: 1% Increase 1% Decrease 2016 service and interest cost components $ 3 $ (3 ) 2016 benefit liability $ 39 $ (34 ) Savings Plan Certain U.S. employees are eligible to participate in 401(k) savings plans, which are voluntary defined contribution plans. The plans are designed to help employees accumulate additional savings for retirement, and we make Company matching contributions for certain employees on a portion of eligible pay based on years of service. Certain U.S. salaried employees, who are not eligible to participate in a defined benefit pension plan, are also eligible to receive an employer contribution to the 401(k) savings plan based on age and years of service regardless of employee contribution. In 2016 , 2015 and 2014 , our total Company contributions were $164 million , $148 million and $130 million , respectively. For additional unaudited information on our pension and retiree medical plans and related accounting policies and assumptions, see Our Critical Accounting Policies in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 113 Table of Contents Note 8 Debt Obligations The following table summarizes the Company debt obligations: 2016 (a) 2015 (a) Short-term debt obligations (b) Current maturities of long-term debt $ 4,401 $ 3,109 Commercial paper (0.6% and 0.3%) 2,257 770 Other borrowings (4.4% and 10.0%) 234 192 $ 6,892 $ 4,071 Long-term debt obligations (b) Notes due 2016 (2.6%) $ $ 3,087 Notes due 2017 (1.4% and 1.2%) 4,398 4,392 Notes due 2018 (2.3% and 3.6%) 2,561 4,122 Notes due 2019 (1.7% and 3.7%) 2,837 1,627 Notes due 2020 (2.6% and 2.4%) 3,816 3,830 Notes due 2021 (2.4% and 3.0%) 2,249 1,290 Notes due 2022-2046 (3.7% and 3.9%) 18,558 13,938 Other, due 2017-2026 (1.4% and 4.3%) 35 36 34,454 32,322 Less: current maturities of long-term debt obligations (4,401 ) (3,109 ) Total $ 30,053 $ 29,213 (a) Amounts are shown net of unamortized net discounts of $142 million and $162 million for 2016 and 2015, respectively. (b) The interest rates presented reflect weighted-average rates at year-end. Certain of our fixed rate indebtedness have been swapped to floating rates through the use of interest rate derivative instruments. See Note 9 for additional information regarding our interest rate derivative instruments. In 2016 , we issued the following senior notes: Interest Rate Maturity Date Amount (a) Floating rate February 2019 $ 400 1.500 % February 2019 $ 600 2.850 % February 2026 $ 750 4.450 % April 2046 $ 750 0.875 % July 2028 750 (b) Floating rate October 2019 $ 250 Floating rate October 2021 $ 250 1.350 % October 2019 $ 750 1.700 % October 2021 $ 750 2.375 % October 2026 $ 1,000 3.450 % October 2046 $ 1,500 (a) Represents gross proceeds from issuances of long-term debt excluding debt issuance costs, discounts and premiums. (b) These notes were designated as a net investment hedge to partially offset the effects of foreign currency on our investments in certain of our foreign subsidiaries. The net proceeds from the issuances of the above notes were used for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of commercial paper, and the redemption of certain long-term debt obligations. In 2016, we paid $2.5 billion to redeem all of our outstanding 7.900% senior notes due 2018 and 5.125% senior notes due 2019 for the principal amounts of $1.5 billion and $750 million , respectively, and terminated certain interest rate swaps. As a result, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $233 million ( $156 million after-tax 114 Table of Contents or $0.11 per share) to interest expense, primarily representing the premium paid in accordance with the make-whole redemption provisions. See further unaudited information in Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. In 2016 , we entered into a new five-year unsecured revolving credit agreement (Five-Year Credit Agreement) which expires on June 6, 2021. The Five-Year Credit Agreement enables us and our borrowing subsidiaries to borrow up to $3.7225 billion , subject to customary terms and conditions. We may request that commitments under this agreement be increased up to $4.5 billion . Additionally, we may, once a year, request renewal of the agreement for an additional one-year period. Also in 2016 , we entered into a new 364-day unsecured revolving credit agreement (364-Day Credit Agreement) which expires on June 5, 2017. The 364-Day Credit Agreement enables us and our borrowing subsidiaries to borrow up to $3.7225 billion , subject to customary terms and conditions. We may request that commitments under this agreement be increased up to $4.5 billion . We may request renewal of this facility for an additional 364-day period or convert any amounts outstanding into a term loan for a period of up to one year, which would mature no later than the anniversary of the then effective termination date. The Five-Year Credit Agreement and the 364-Day Credit Agreement together replaced our $3.7225 billion five-year credit agreement dated as of June 8, 2015 and our $3.7225 billion 364-day credit agreement dated as of June 8, 2015. Funds borrowed under the Five-Year Credit Agreement and the 364-Day Credit Agreement may be used for general corporate purposes. Subject to certain conditions, we may borrow, prepay and reborrow amounts under these agreements. As of December 31, 2016 , there were no outstanding borrowings under the Five-Year Credit Agreement or the 364-Day Credit Agreement. In addition, as of December 31, 2016 , our international debt of $235 million was related to borrowings from external parties including various lines of credit. These lines of credit are subject to normal banking terms and conditions and are fully committed at least to the extent of our borrowings. See Our Liquidity and Capital Resources in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further unaudited information on our borrowings and long-term contractual commitments. Note 9 Financial Instruments Derivatives and Hedging We are exposed to market risks arising from adverse changes in: commodity prices, affecting the cost of our raw materials and energy; foreign exchange rates and currency restrictions; and interest rates. In the normal course of business, we manage commodity price, foreign exchange and interest rate risks through a variety of strategies, including productivity initiatives, global purchasing programs and hedging. Ongoing productivity initiatives involve the identification and effective implementation of meaningful cost-saving opportunities or efficiencies, including the use of derivatives. Our global purchasing programs include fixed-price contracts and purchase orders and pricing agreements. Our hedging strategies include the use of derivatives and, in the case of our net investment hedges, debt instruments. Certain derivatives are designated as either cash flow or fair value hedges and qualify for hedge accounting treatment, while others do not qualify and are marked to market through earnings. Cash flows from derivatives used to manage commodity price, foreign exchange or interest rate risks are classified as operating activities in the cash flow statement. We classify both the earnings and cash flow impact from these derivatives consistent with the underlying hedged item. See Our Business Risks in Management 115 Table of Contents Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for further unaudited information on our business risks. For cash flow hedges, the effective portion of changes in fair value is deferred in accumulated other comprehensive loss within common shareholders equity until the underlying hedged item is recognized in net income. For fair value hedges, changes in fair value are recognized immediately in earnings, consistent with the underlying hedged item. For net investment hedges, the effective portion of the gains and losses on the debt instruments arising from the effects of foreign exchange are recorded in the currency translation adjustment component of accumulated other comprehensive loss, consistent with the underlying hedged item. Hedging transactions are limited to an underlying exposure. As a result, any change in the value of our hedging instruments would be substantially offset by an opposite change in the value of the underlying hedged items. We do not use derivative instruments for trading or speculative purposes. We perform assessments of our counterparty credit risk regularly, including reviewing netting agreements, if any, and a review of credit ratings, credit default swap rates and potential nonperformance of the counterparty. Based on our most recent assessment of our counterparty credit risk, we consider this risk to be low. In addition, we enter into derivative contracts with a variety of financial institutions that we believe are creditworthy in order to reduce our concentration of credit risk. Commodity Prices We are subject to commodity price risk because our ability to recover increased costs through higher pricing may be limited in the competitive environment in which we operate. This risk is managed through the use of fixed-price contracts and purchase orders, pricing agreements and derivative instruments, which include swaps and futures. In addition, risk to our supply of certain raw materials is mitigated through purchases from multiple geographies and suppliers. We use derivatives, with terms of no more than three years, to economically hedge price fluctuations related to a portion of our anticipated commodity purchases, primarily for agricultural products, energy and metals. Ineffectiveness for those derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting treatment was not material for all periods presented. Derivatives used to hedge commodity price risk that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment are marked to market each period with the resulting gains and losses recorded in corporate unallocated expenses as either cost of sales or selling, general and administrative expenses, depending on the underlying commodity. These gains and losses are subsequently reflected in division results when the divisions recognize the cost of the underlying commodity in operating profit. Our commodity derivatives had a total notional value of $0.8 billion as of December 31, 2016 and $1.0 billion as of December 26, 2015 . Foreign Exchange Our operations outside of the United States generated 42% of our net revenue in 2016 , with Mexico, Canada, Russia, the United Kingdom and Brazil comprising approximately 19% of our net revenue in 2016 . As a result, we are exposed to foreign exchange risks in the international markets in which our products are made, manufactured, distributed or sold. Additionally, we are exposed to foreign exchange risk from net investments in foreign subsidiaries, foreign currency purchases and foreign currency assets and liabilities created in the normal course of business. We manage this risk through sourcing purchases from local suppliers, negotiating contracts in local currencies with foreign suppliers and through the use of derivatives, primarily forward contracts with terms of no more than two years. Exchange rate gains or losses related to foreign currency transactions are recognized as transaction gains or losses in our income statement as incurred. We also use net investment hedges to partially offset the effects of foreign currency on our investments in certain of our foreign subsidiaries. 116 Table of Contents Our foreign currency derivatives had a total notional value of $1.6 billion as of December 31, 2016 and $2.1 billion as of December 26, 2015 . The total notional amount of our debt instruments designated as net investment hedges was $0.8 billion as of December 31, 2016 . Ineffectiveness for derivatives and non-derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting treatment was not material for all periods presented. For foreign currency derivatives that do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment, all gains and losses were offset by changes in the underlying hedged items, resulting in no material net impact on earnings. Interest Rates We centrally manage our debt and investment portfolios considering investment opportunities and risks, tax consequences and overall financing strategies. We use various interest rate derivative instruments including, but not limited to, interest rate swaps, cross-currency interest rate swaps, Treasury locks and swap locks to manage our overall interest expense and foreign exchange risk. These instruments effectively change the interest rate and currency of specific debt issuances. Certain of our fixed rate indebtedness have been swapped to floating rates. The notional amount, interest payment and maturity date of the interest rate and cross-currency interest rate swaps match the principal, interest payment and maturity date of the related debt. Our Treasury locks and swap locks are entered into to protect against unfavorable interest rate changes relating to forecasted debt transactions. Our interest rate derivatives had a total notional value of $11.2 billion as of December 31, 2016 and $12.5 billion as of December 26, 2015 . Ineffectiveness for derivatives that qualify for cash flow hedge accounting treatment was not material for all periods presented. As of December 31, 2016 , approximately 38% of total debt, after the impact of the related interest rate derivative instruments, was subject to variable rates, compared to approximately 33% as of December 26, 2015 . Available-for-Sale Securities Investments in debt and marketable equity securities, other than investments accounted for under the equity method, are classified as available-for-sale. All highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less are classified as cash equivalents. Our investments in available-for-sale securities are reported at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses related to changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities are recognized in accumulated other comprehensive loss within common shareholders equity. Unrealized gains and losses on our investments in debt securities as of December 31, 2016 were not material. The pre-tax unrealized gains on our investments in marketable equity securities were $72 million and $115 million as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 , respectively. Changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities impact net income only when such securities are sold or an other-than-temporary impairment is recognized. We regularly review our investment portfolio to determine if any security is other-than-temporarily impaired. In making this judgment, we evaluate, among other things, the duration and extent to which the fair value of a security is less than its cost; the financial condition of the issuer and any changes thereto; and our intent to sell, or whether we will more likely than not be required to sell, the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. Our assessment of whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired could change in the future due to new developments or changes in assumptions related to any particular security. We recorded no other-than-temporary impairment charges on our available-for-sale securities for the years ended December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 . Tingyi-Asahi Beverages Holding Co. Ltd. During 2016, we concluded that the decline in estimated fair value of our 5% indirect equity interest in TAB was other than temporary based on significant negative economic trends in China and changes in assumptions associated with TAB future financial performance arising from the disclosure by TAB parent company, 117 Table of Contents Tingyi, regarding the operating results of its beverage business. As a result, we recorded a pre- and after-tax impairment charge of $373 million ( $0.26 per share) in 2016 in the AMENA segment. This charge was recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses in our income statement and reduced the value of our 5% indirect equity interest in TAB to its estimated fair value. The estimated fair value was derived using both an income and market approach, and is considered a non-recurring Level 3 measurement within the fair value hierarchy. The carrying value of the investment in TAB was $166 million as of December 31, 2016 . We continue to monitor the impact of economic and other developments on the remaining value of our investment in TAB. In connection with our transaction with Tingyi in 2012, we received a call option to increase our holding in TAB to 20% with an expiration date in 2015. Prior to its expiration, we concluded that the probability of exercising the option was remote and, accordingly, we recorded a pre- and after-tax charge of $73 million ( $0.05 per share) to write off the recorded value of this call option. See further unaudited information in Items Affecting Comparability in Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. 118 Table of Contents Fair Value Measurements The fair values of our financial assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 are categorized as follows: 2016 2015 Assets (a) Liabilities (a) Assets (a) Liabilities (a) Available-for-sale securities: Equity securities (b) $ 82 $ $ 127 $ Debt securities (c) 11,369 7,231 $ 11,451 $ $ 7,358 $ Short-term investments (d) $ 193 $ $ 193 $ Prepaid forward contracts (e) $ 25 $ $ 27 $ Deferred compensation (f) $ $ 472 $ $ 474 Derivatives designated as fair value hedging instruments: Interest rate (g) $ 66 $ 71 $ 129 $ 12 Derivatives designated as cash flow hedging instruments: Foreign exchange (h) $ 51 $ 8 $ 76 $ 6 Interest rate (h) 408 311 Commodity (i) 2 1 7 $ 53 $ 417 $ 76 $ 324 Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments: Foreign exchange (h) $ 2 $ 15 $ 8 $ 10 Interest rate (g) 44 56 Commodity (i) 61 26 12 141 $ 63 $ 41 $ 64 $ 207 Total derivatives at fair value (j) $ 182 $ 529 $ 269 $ 543 Total $ 11,851 $ 1,001 $ 7,847 $ 1,017 (a) Unless otherwise noted, financial assets are classified on our balance sheet within prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets. Financial liabilities are classified on our balance sheet within accounts payable and other current liabilities and other liabilities. Unless specifically indicated, all financial assets and liabilities are categorized as Level 2 assets or liabilities. (b) Based on the price of common stock. Categorized as a Level 1 asset. These equity securities are classified as investments in noncontrolled affiliates. (c) Based on quoted broker prices or other significant inputs derived from or corroborated by observable market data. As of December 31, 2016 , $4.6 billion and $6.8 billion of debt securities were classified as cash equivalents and short-term investments, respectively. As of December 26, 2015 , $4.5 billion and $2.7 billion of debt securities were classified as cash equivalents and short-term investments, respectively. All of our available-for-sale debt securities have maturities of one year or less. (d) Based on the price of index funds. Categorized as a Level 1 asset. These investments are classified as short-term investments and are used to manage a portion of market risk arising from our deferred compensation liability. (e) Based primarily on the price of our common stock. (f) Based on the fair value of investments corresponding to employees investment elections. (g) Based on LIBOR forward rates. As of December 26, 2015 , amounts related to non-designated instruments are presented on a net basis on our balance sheet. (h) Based on recently reported market transactions of spot and forward rates. (i) Based on recently reported market transactions, primarily swap arrangements. (j) Unless otherwise noted, derivative assets and liabilities are presented on a gross basis on our balance sheet. Amounts subject to enforceable master netting arrangements or similar agreements which are not offset on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 were not material. Collateral received against any of our asset positions was not material. 119 Table of Contents The carrying amounts of our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments approximate fair value due to their short-term maturity. The fair value of our debt obligations as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 was $38 billion and $35 billion , respectively, based upon prices of similar instruments in the marketplace, which are considered Level 2 inputs. Losses/(gains) on our hedging instruments are categorized as follows: Fair Value/Non- designated Hedges Cash Flow and Net Investment Hedges Losses/(Gains) Recognized in Income Statement (a) Losses/(Gains) Recognized in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Losses/(Gains) Reclassified from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss into Income Statement (b) 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 Foreign exchange $ 74 $ (14 ) $ (24 ) $ (112 ) $ (44 ) $ (97 ) Interest rate 105 17 97 195 187 174 Commodity (52 ) 218 1 12 7 20 Net investment (39 ) Total $ 127 $ 221 $ 35 $ 95 $ 150 $ 97 (a) Foreign exchange derivative losses/gains are primarily included in selling, general and administrative expenses. Interest rate derivative losses/gains are primarily from fair value hedges and are included in interest expense. These losses/gains are substantially offset by decreases/increases in the value of the underlying debt, which are also included in interest expense. Commodity derivative losses/gains are included in either cost of sales or selling, general and administrative expenses, depending on the underlying commodity. (b) Foreign exchange derivative losses/gains are primarily included in cost of sales. Interest rate derivative losses/gains are included in interest expense. Commodity derivative losses/gains are included in either cost of sales or selling, general and administrative expenses, depending on the underlying commodity. Based on current market conditions, we expect to reclassify net gains of $17 million related to our cash flow hedges from accumulated other comprehensive loss into net income during the next 12 months. Note 10 Net Income Attributable to PepsiCo per Common Share Basic net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share is net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders divided by the weighted average of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share is calculated using the weighted average of common shares outstanding adjusted to include the effect that would occur if in-the-money employee stock options were exercised and RSUs, PSUs, PEPunits and preferred shares were converted into common shares. 120 Table of Contents The computations of basic and diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share are as follows: 2016 2015 2014 Income Shares (a) Income Shares (a) Income Shares (a) Net income attributable to PepsiCo $ 6,329 $ 5,452 $ 6,513 Preferred shares: Dividends (1 ) (1 ) (1 ) Redemption premium (5 ) (5 ) (9 ) Net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders $ 6,323 1,439 $ 5,446 1,469 $ 6,503 1,509 Basic net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share $ 4.39 $ 3.71 $ 4.31 Net income available for PepsiCo common shareholders $ 6,323 1,439 $ 5,446 1,469 $ 6,503 1,509 Dilutive securities: Stock options, RSUs, PSUs, PEPunits and Other 1 12 15 17 ESOP convertible preferred stock 5 1 6 1 10 1 Diluted $ 6,329 1,452 $ 5,452 1,485 $ 6,513 1,527 Diluted net income attributable to PepsiCo per common share $ 4.36 $ 3.67 $ 4.27 (a) Weighted-average common shares outstanding (in millions). Out-of-the-money options excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per common share are as follows: 2016 2015 2014 Out-of-the-money options (a) 0.7 1.5 Average exercise price per option $ 99.98 $ 99.25 $ 82.25 (a) In millions. Note 11 Preferred Stock As of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 , there were 3 million shares of convertible preferred stock authorized. The preferred stock was issued for an ESOP established by Quaker and these shares are redeemable for common stock by the ESOP participants. Quaker made the final award to its ESOP in June 2001. The preferred stock accrues dividends at an annual rate of $5.46 per share. As of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015 , there were 803,953 preferred shares issued and 122,553 and 135,053 shares outstanding, respectively. The outstanding preferred shares had a fair value of $64 million as of December 31, 2016 and $67 million as of December 26, 2015 . Each share is convertible at the option of the holder into 4.9625 shares of common stock. The preferred shares may be called by us upon written notice for redemption under certain conditions, including, among other things, upon termination of the ESOP in accordance with the ESOP terms, at the greater of $78 per share plus accrued and unpaid dividends or the fair market value of the preferred stock. Activities of our preferred stock are included in the equity statement. 121 Table of Contents Note 12 Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Attributable to PepsiCo Comprehensive income is a measure of income which includes both net income and other comprehensive income or loss. Other comprehensive income or loss results from items deferred from recognition into our income statement. Accumulated other comprehensive income or loss is separately presented on our balance sheet as part of common shareholders equity. Other comprehensive loss attributable to PepsiCo was $600 million in 2016 , $2,650 million in 2015 and $5,542 million in 2014 . The accumulated balances for each component of other comprehensive loss attributable to PepsiCo are as follows: 2016 2015 2014 Currency translation adjustment, net of tax (a) $ (11,386 ) $ (11,080 ) $ (8,255 ) Cash flow hedges, net of tax 83 37 34 Unamortized pension and retiree medical, net of tax (b) (2,645 ) (2,329 ) (2,500 ) Unrealized gain on securities, net of tax 64 88 87 Other (35 ) (35 ) (35 ) Accumulated other comprehensive loss attributable to PepsiCo $ (13,919 ) $ (13,319 ) $ (10,669 ) (a) The change from 2014 to 2015 primarily reflects the depreciation of the Russian ruble, Brazilian real and the Canadian dollar. (b) Net of taxes of $1,280 million in 2016 , $1,253 million in 2015 and $1,260 million in 2014 . 122 Table of Contents The following table summarizes the reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive loss to the income statement: Amount Reclassified from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss Affected Line Item in the Income Statement 2016 2015 2014 Currency translation: Venezuelan entities $ $ 111 $ Venezuela impairment charges Cash flow hedges: Foreign exchange contracts $ 2 $ (3 ) $ Net revenue Foreign exchange contracts (46 ) (94 ) (16 ) Cost of sales Interest rate derivatives 187 174 233 Interest expense Commodity contracts 3 9 31 Cost of sales Commodity contracts 4 11 1 Selling, general and administrative expenses Net losses before tax 150 97 249 Tax amounts (63 ) (47 ) (95 ) Net losses after tax $ 87 $ 50 $ 154 Pension and retiree medical items: Amortization of net prior service credit (a) $ (39 ) $ (41 ) $ (6 ) Amortization of net losses (a) 209 281 226 Settlement/curtailment (a) 237 6 149 Net losses before tax 407 246 369 Tax amounts (144 ) (74 ) (122 ) Net losses after tax $ 263 $ 172 $ 247 Venezuelan entities $ $ 20 $ Venezuela impairment charges Tax amount (4 ) Net losses after tax $ $ 16 $ Total net losses reclassified for the year, net of tax $ 350 $ 349 $ 401 (a) These items are included in the components of net periodic benefit cost for pension and retiree medical plans (see Note 7 for additional details). 123 Table of Contents Note 13 Supplemental Financial Information Supplemental information for accounts and notes receivable and inventories is summarized as follows: 2016 2015 2014 Accounts and notes receivable Trade receivables $ 5,709 $ 5,497 Other receivables 1,119 1,070 6,828 6,567 Allowance, beginning of year 130 137 $ 145 Net amounts charged to expense 37 43 38 Deductions (a) (30 ) (27 ) (27 ) Other (b) (3 ) (23 ) (19 ) Allowance, end of year 134 130 $ 137 Net receivables $ 6,694 $ 6,437 Inventories (c) Raw materials and packaging $ 1,315 $ 1,312 Work-in-process 150 161 Finished goods 1,258 1,247 $ 2,723 $ 2,720 (a) Includes accounts written off. (b) Includes adjustments related primarily to currency translation and other adjustments. (c) Approximately 5% and 4% of the inventory cost in 2016 and 2015, respectively, were computed using the LIFO method. The differences between LIFO and FIFO methods of valuing these inventories were not material. Supplemental information for other assets and accounts payable and other current liabilities is summarized as follows: 2016 2015 Other assets Noncurrent notes and accounts receivable $ 105 $ 140 Deferred marketplace spending 140 159 Pension plans (a) 53 60 Other 338 391 $ 636 $ 750 Accounts payable and other current liabilities Accounts payable $ 6,158 $ 5,546 Accrued marketplace spending 2,444 2,319 Accrued compensation and benefits 1,770 1,759 Dividends payable 1,097 1,041 Other current liabilities 2,774 2,842 $ 14,243 $ 13,507 (a) See Note 7 for additional information regarding our pension plans. 124 Table of Contents The following table summarizes our minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating leases by period: Operating Lease Payments 2017 $ 423 2018 374 2019 289 2020 197 2021 147 2022 and beyond 350 Total minimum operating lease payments $ 1,780 The following table summarizes other supplemental information: 2016 2015 2014 Other supplemental information Rent expense $ 701 $ 696 $ 707 Interest paid (a) $ 1,102 $ 952 $ 925 Income taxes paid, net of refunds $ 1,393 $ 1,808 $ 1,847 (a) In 2016, interest paid excludes the premium paid in accordance with the make-whole provisions of the debt redemption discussed in Note 8. 125 Table of Contents Management Responsibility for Financial Reporting To Our Shareholders: At PepsiCo, our actions the actions of all our associates are governed by our Global Code of Conduct. This Code is clearly aligned with our stated values a commitment to deliver sustained growth through empowered people acting with responsibility and building trust. Both the Code and our core values enable us to operate with integrity both within the letter and the spirit of the law. Our Code of Conduct is reinforced consistently at all levels and in all countries. We have maintained strong governance policies and practices for many years. The management of PepsiCo is responsible for the objectivity and integrity of our consolidated financial statements. The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors has engaged independent registered public accounting firm, KPMG LLP, to audit our consolidated financial statements, and they have expressed an unqualified opinion. We are committed to providing timely, accurate and understandable information to investors. Our commitment encompasses the following: Maintaining strong controls over financial reporting. Our system of internal control is based on the control criteria framework of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission published in their report titled Internal Control Integrated Framework (2013). The system is designed to provide reasonable assurance that transactions are executed as authorized and accurately recorded; that assets are safeguarded; and that accounting records are sufficiently reliable to permit the preparation of financial statements that conform in all material respects with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. We maintain disclosure controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed in reports under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the specified time periods. We monitor these internal controls through self-assessments and an ongoing program of internal audits. Our internal controls are reinforced through our Global Code of Conduct, which sets forth our commitment to conduct business with integrity, and within both the letter and the spirit of the law. Exerting rigorous oversight of the business. We continuously review our business results and strategies. This encompasses financial discipline in our strategic and daily business decisions. Our Executive Committee is actively involved from understanding strategies and alternatives to reviewing key initiatives and financial performance. The intent is to ensure we remain objective in our assessments, constructively challenge our approach to potential business opportunities and issues, and monitor results and controls. Engaging strong and effective Corporate Governance from our Board of Directors. We have an active, capable and diligent Board that meets the required standards for independence, and we welcome the Board oversight as a representative of our shareholders. Our Audit Committee is comprised of independent directors with the financial literacy, knowledge and experience to provide appropriate oversight. We review our critical accounting policies, financial reporting and internal control matters with them and encourage their direct communication with KPMG LLP, with our Internal Auditor, and with our General Counsel. We also have a Compliance & Ethics Department, led by our Chief Compliance & Ethics Officer, who coordinates our compliance policies and practices. Providing investors with financial results that are complete, transparent and understandable. The consolidated financial statements and financial information included in this report are the responsibility of management. This includes preparing the financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require estimates based on management best judgment. 126 Table of Contents PepsiCo has a strong history of doing what right. We realize that great companies are built on trust, strong ethical standards and principles. Our financial results are delivered from that culture of accountability, and we take responsibility for the quality and accuracy of our financial reporting. February 15, 2017 /s/ MARIE T. GALLAGHER Marie T. Gallagher Senior Vice President and Controller (Principal Accounting Officer) /s/ HUGH F. JOHNSTON Hugh F. Johnston Vice Chairman, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer /s/ INDRA K. NOOYI Indra K. Nooyi Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Executive Officer 127 Table of Contents Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm The Board of Directors and Shareholders PepsiCo, Inc.: We have audited the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets of PepsiCo, Inc. and Subsidiaries ( PepsiCo, Inc. or the Company ) as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015, and the related Consolidated Statements of Income, Comprehensive Income, Cash Flows and Equity for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2016. We also have audited PepsiCo, Inc. internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission ( COSO ). PepsiCo, Inc. management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these consolidated financial statements and an opinion on the Company internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions. A company internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of PepsiCo, Inc. as of December 31, 2016 and December 26, 2015, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the fiscal years in the three-year period ended December 31, 2016, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Also in our opinion, PepsiCo, Inc. maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016, based on criteria established in Internal Control Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO. /s/ KPMG LLP New York, New York February 15, 2017 128 Table of Contents GLOSSARY Acquisitions and divestitures : all mergers and acquisitions activity, including the impact of acquisitions, divestitures and changes in ownership or control in consolidated subsidiaries and nonconsolidated equity investees. Bottler Case Sales (BCS) : measure of physical beverage volume shipped to retailers and independent distributors from both PepsiCo and our independent bottlers. Bottler funding : financial incentives we give to our independent bottlers to assist in the distribution and promotion of our beverage products. Concentrate Shipments and Equivalents (CSE) : measure of our physical beverage volume shipments to independent bottlers, retailers and independent distributors. Constant currency : financial results assuming constant foreign currency exchange rates used for translation based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-year period. In order to compute our constant currency results, we multiply or divide, as appropriate, our current year U.S. dollar results by the current year average foreign exchange rates and then multiply or divide, as appropriate, those amounts by the prior year average foreign exchange rates. Consumers : people who eat and drink our products. CSD : carbonated soft drinks. Customers : authorized independent bottlers, distributors and retailers. Derivatives : financial instruments, such as futures, swaps, Treasury locks, cross currency swaps and forward contracts that we use to manage our risk arising from changes in commodity prices, interest rates and foreign exchange rates. Direct-Store-Delivery (DSD) : delivery system used by us and our independent bottlers to deliver snacks and beverages directly to retail stores where our products are merchandised. Effective net pricing : reflects the year-over-year impact of discrete pricing actions, sales incentive activities and mix resulting from selling varying products in different package sizes and in different countries. Free cash flow : net cash provided by operating activities less capital spending plus sales of property, plant and equipment. Hedge accounting : treatment for qualifying hedges that allows fluctuations in a hedging instrument fair value to offset corresponding fluctuations in the hedged item in the same reporting period. Hedge accounting is allowed only in cases where the hedging relationship between the hedging instruments and hedged items is highly effective, and only prospectively from the date a hedging relationship is formally documented. Independent bottlers : customers to whom we have granted exclusive contracts to sell and manufacture certain beverage products bearing our trademarks within a specific geographical area. Mark-to-market net gain or loss : change in market value for commodity derivative contracts that we purchase to mitigate the volatility in costs of energy and raw materials that we consume. The market value is determined based on prices on national exchanges and recently reported transactions in the marketplace. 129 Table of Contents Organic : a measure that adjusts for impacts of acquisitions, divestitures and other structural changes, including the Venezuela deconsolidation which was effective as of the end of the third quarter of 2015, and foreign exchange translation. This measure also excludes the impact of the 53 rd reporting week in 2016. In excluding the impact of foreign exchange translation, we assume constant foreign exchange rates used for translation based on the rates in effect for the comparable prior-year period. See the definition of Constant currency for additional information. Servings : common metric reflecting our consolidated physical unit volume. Our divisions physical unit measures are converted into servings based on U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines for single-serving sizes of our products. Total marketplace spending : includes sales incentives and discounts offered through various programs to our customers, consumers or independent bottlers, as well as advertising and other marketing activities. Transaction gains and losses : the impact on our consolidated financial statements of exchange rate changes arising from specific transactions. Translation adjustment : the impact of converting our foreign affiliates financial statements into U.S. dollars for the purpose of consolidating our financial statements. 130 Table of Contents 
