CIK: 78239
Company Name: PHILLIPS VAN HEUSEN CORP DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2007-04-05


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations OVERVIEW The following discussion and analysis is intended to help you understand us, our operations and our financial performance. It should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes, which are included elsewhere in this report. We are one of the largest apparel companies in the world, with a heritage dating back over 125 years. Our brand portfolio consists of nationally recognized brand names, including Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, Arrow, Bass and Eagle, which are owned, and Geoffrey Beene, Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, Sean John, Chaps, MICHAEL Michael Kors and Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, which are licensed. We launched a new licensed line of dress shirts under the unlisted, A Kenneth Cole Production brand in the beginning of 2006 and a new licensed line of dress shirts under the JOE Joseph Abboud brand in the second quarter of 2006. In the fourth quarter of 2006, we acquired substantially all of the net assets of Superba, Inc., a manufacturer and distributor of neckwear, which enabled us to add the DKNY , Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Perry Ellis Portfolio, Ike Behar and Jones New York names, as well as various private label names, to our portfolio of licensed brands. 27 The positive trends and strong earnings growth we experienced in 2004 and 2005 continued in 2006. 2006 was a year in which we grew revenue, achieved double-digit growth in earnings per share and significantly improved our overall financial condition and liquidity. We believe our achievements in 2006 were largely attributable to our business strategy. Our historical strategy has been to manage and market a portfolio of nationally recognized brands across multiple product categories, through multiple channels of distribution and at multiple price points. This strategy was enhanced by our acquisition of Calvin Klein, in February 2003, which provided us with one of the most famous designer names in the world and an additional platform for growth in revenues and profitability. Through that transaction, and to a lesser extent, our acquisition of Arrow in December 2004, we were able to diversify our business model by providing growth opportunities from strong and highly profitable licensing streams which do not require capital investments. Our acquisition of Superba established neckwear business complements our heritage business in dress shirts and presents us with opportunities to grow and enha nce the performance of both businesses. We announced recently three initiatives that are intended to build upon our business strategy, each of which we believe provides us with the opportunity to fill product and brand portfolio needs. The first initiative is the launch of G.H. Bass Earth , an outdoor lifestyle sportswear brand that is targeted to mid-tier and specialty stores and will feature packaging and products that use recycled materials. This extension of our Bass brand will be shipping for the Spring 2007 season. The second initiative is our assumption of the wholesale IZOD women sportswear collection. IZOD women sportswear was previously a licensed business and we have decided with the licensee to take over the development and sale of the line for Fall 2007. Our third initiative, announced in early 2007, is a licensing arrangement with The Timberland Company to design, source and market men and women casual sportswea r under the Timberland brand in North America. We will assume the management of the men apparel line, which is currently produced by The Timberland Company, for the Fall 2008 season and will launch a women line for the Spring 2009 season. Timberland is an authentic outdoor traditional brand targeted to the department and specialty store channels of distribution that we believe has a unique positioning that will complement our existing portfolio of sportswear brands and enable us to reach a broader spectrum of consumers. The continued strength of our Calvin Klein businesses was a significant contributor to our 2006 success through both the growth of existing businesses and entry into new businesses, both directly by us and through licensees in the U.S. and overseas. Additionally, the performance of our heritage businesses fueled revenue and earnings improvements in 2006. Our wholesale dress shirt and sportswear businesses benefited from strong product sell-throughs, which led to increased gross margins, and strong comparative store sales increases in our outlet retail businesses further drove earnings improvements. We generated approximately $100 million of cash flow in 2006, which is after our cash outlay of over $110 million in connection with the acquisition of Superba. In May 2006, our Series B preferred stockholders voluntarily converted all of their remaining outstanding preferred stock into 11.6 million shares of our common stock. This transaction further strengthened our balance sheet, eliminated the most expensive component of our capital structure and enhanced the liquidity of our common stock. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Operations Overview We generate net sales from (i) the wholesale distribution of men dress shirts, sportswear and, beginning in January 2007, neckwear; and (ii) the sale, through approximately 700 company-operated retail stores, of apparel, footwear and accessories under the brand names Van Heusen , IZOD , Geoffrey Beene , Bass and Calvin Klein . Our stores principally operate in an outlet format. We also operate a Calvin Klein Collection store located in New York City, in which we principally sell men and women high-end collection apparel and accessories, soft home furnishings and tableware. We generate royalty, advertising and other revenues from fees for licensing the use of our trademarks. Calvin Klein royalty, advertising and other revenues, which comprised 86% of total royalty, advertising and other revenues in 2006, are derived under licenses and other arrangements for a broad array of products, including jeans, underwear, fragrances, eyewear, watches and home furnishings. In December 2004, we acquired the companies that own and license Arrow , which has generated additional royalty, advertising and other revenues. Gross profit on total revenues is total revenues less cost of goods sold. We include as cost of goods sold, costs associated with the production and procurement of product, including inbound freight costs, purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, internal transfer costs and other product procurement related charges. Since there is no cost of goods sold associated with royalty, advertising and other revenues, 100% of such revenues are included in gross profit. Due to the above factors, our gross profit may not be comparable to that of other entities. 28 Selling, general and administrative expenses include all other expenses, excluding interest and income taxes. Salaries and related fringe benefits is the largest component of selling, general and administrative expenses, comprising 49% of such expenses in 2006. Rent and occupancy for offices, warehouses and retail stores is the next largest expense, comprising 19% of selling, general and administrative expenses in 2006. The following table summarizes our results of operations in 2006, 2005 and 2004: 2006 2005 2004 (in millions, except per share amounts and percentages) Net sales $1,849.2 $1,697.3 $1,460.2 Royalty revenues 182.3 158.8 136.2 Advertising and other revenues 59.1 52.8 45.0 Total revenues 2,090.6 1,908.8 1,641.4 Gross profit 1,029.9 891.1 751.0 % of total revenues 49.3% 46.7% 45.8% Selling, general and administrative expenses 796.6 684.2 621.9 % of total revenues 38.1% 35.8% 37.9% Gain on sale of investments 32.0 - 0.7 Income before interest and taxes 265.3 206.8 129.9 Interest expense 34.3 34.4 44.6 Interest income 17.4 5.8 1.8 Income before taxes 248.4 178.3 87.0 Income tax expense 93.2 66.6 28.4 Net income $ 155.2 $ 111.7 $ 58.6 Diluted net income per common share $ 2.64 $ 1.85 $ 1.14 Net Sales Our net sales in 2006 increased to $1,849.2 million from $1,697.3 million in 2005 and $1,460.2 million in 2004. Our 2006 net sales increase of $151.9 million over 2005 net sales was due principally to the net effect of the items described below. Net sales increases in 2006 included: The addition of $111.6 million of net sales attributable to growth in our retail segments, driven by an 8% increase in comparative store sales and the opening of Calvin Klein outlet retail stores in premium outlet malls. The calculation of the comparative store sales percentage is based on comparable weeks, and therefore, excludes an extra week in 2006. Included in our net sales increase was approximately $10 million in additional revenues from an extra week, as the 2006 fiscal year included 53 weeks of operations. The addition of $63.5 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment, driven by increases across all of our wholesale sportswear divisions, particularly Calvin Klein men better sportswear. Net sales decreases in 2006 included: A $23.2 million sales decrease in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment, resulting principally from door closings associated with the 2005 acquisition by Federated of May. 29 Our 2005 net sales increase of $237.1 million over 2004 net sales was due principally to the net effect of the items described below. Net sales increases in 2005 included: The addition of $100.5 million of net sales attributable to our Calvin Klein men better sportswear line, which was launched for the Fall 2004 season, as well as the continued opening of Calvin Klein outlet retail stores in premium outlet malls. The addition of $79.2 million of net sales attributable to growth in our IZOD , Arrow and Van Heusen wholesale sportswear businesses. The addition of $75.7 million of net sales attributable to growth in our wholesale dress shirt business, particularly from the BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, Sean John and Chaps lines, which were launched in the second half of 2004, and the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection line, which was launched in the first quarter of 2005, as well as growth in our core brands, Van Heusen, Arrow, Geoffrey Beene, IZOD, Eagle and Calvin Klein . The addition of net sales attributable to a 6% sales increase in comparative store sales in our Van Heusen, IZOD, Geoffrey Beene and Bass outlet retail stores, offset, in part, by a reduction in the overall number of stores in these divisions. Net sales decreases in 2005 included: A $15.5 million net sales decline due to the elimination of our private label wholesale sportswear business and the discontinuation in 2004 of our sales of a licensed line of DKNY dress shirts. Our net sales in 2007 are expected to increase approximately 15% due principally to growth in our existing businesses, as well as additional sales from our recently-formed Neckwear Group and IZOD women sportswear, which we will assume for Fall 2007 and the introduction of a wholesale line of sportswear under the G.H. Bass Earth brand, which will launch for Spring 2007. Royalty, Advertising and Other Revenues Royalty, advertising and other revenue increases over the prior year were $29.9 million and $30.4 million in 2006 and 2005, respectively. These increases were primarily attributable to increases of $28.9 million and $19.2 million in 2006 and 2005, respectively, in our Calvin Klein Licensing segment due to new licensees and growth exhibited by existing licensees. Approximately 85% of the growth in Calvin Klein royalty, advertising and other revenues in 2006 was attributable to growth from existing licenses, with the remaining 15% stemming from new licenses. In particular, our existing licenses for underwear and fragrances generated significant increases, with the growth in the fragrance business being driven by the success of women euphoria and the recent launch of men euphoria . Royalty, advertising and other revenues for our other segments increased an aggregate of $1.0 million and $11.2 million in 2006 and 2005, respectively. The $11.2 million increase in 2005 was due principally to the royalties generated by the Arrow brand license agreements acquired as part of our acquisition of Arrow in December 2004. We currently expect that royalty, advertising and other revenues will increase approximately 10% in our Calvin Klein Licensing segment in 2007, both as a result of growth in the businesses of existing licensees, as well as royalties generated from new license agreements. Royalty, advertising and other revenues in our other segments are expected to decrease an aggregate of 3% in 2007 as a result of the loss of royalties associated with Arrow neckwear, which had been licensed to Superba and the loss of royalties associated with IZOD neckwear and IZOD women sportswear, which had been licensed but will now be produced by us as a result of the termination or expiration of those licenses. Arrow and IZOD neckwear will be marketed by our recently-formed Neckwear Group and IZOD women sportswear will be marketed by our Sportswear Group. Royalty, advertising and other revenues are expected to inc rease 8% in total for 2007. 30 Gross Profit on Total Revenues The following table shows our revenue mix between net sales and royalty, advertising and other revenues, as well as our gross profit as a percentage of total revenues for 2006, 2005 and 2004: 2006 2005 2004 Net sales 88.4% 88.9% 89.0% Royalty, advertising and other revenues 11.6% 11.1% 11.0% Gross profit as a % of total revenues 49.3% 46.7% 45.8% The 260 basis point improvement in the 2006 gross profit on total revenues percentage compared with 2005 was due principally to strong product sell-throughs, which yielded more full-price selling. Also contributing to the increase was a change in revenue mix, as (i) net sales attributable to our outlet retail businesses, which have higher gross margins than our wholesale businesses, increased as a percentage of our total net sales; and (ii) royalty, advertising and other revenues increased as a percentage of total revenues. Royalty, advertising and other revenues do not carry a cost of sales, and as such, the gross profit percentage of such revenues is 100%. The 90 basis point improvement in the 2005 gross profit on total revenues percentage compared with 2004 was due principally to overall lower product costs and the elimination of Arrow royalty costs in connection with our acquisition of Arrow in December 2004. We currently expect that the gross profit on total revenues percentage will decrease approximately 90 basis points in 2007. This anticipated decrease is due principally to faster anticipated growth in our wholesale businesses, which typically carry a lower gross margin percentage than our retail and licensing businesses. The growth in our wholesale businesses is attributable, in part, to the addition of revenues associated with the neckwear business we acquired from Superba, our assumption of the IZOD women wholesale sportswear business and the launch of the G.H. Bass Earth wholesale sportswear business. Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) Expenses Our SG&A expenses were as follows: 2006 2005 2004 (in millions, except percentages) SG&A expenses $796.6 $684.2 $621.9 % of total revenues 38.1% 35.8% 37.9% SG&A expenses in 2006 were $796.6 million, or 38.1% of total revenues, and $684.2 million, or 35.8% of total revenues, in 2005. The $112.4 million increase in SG&A expenses in 2006 included: (i) increased advertising expenditures of $26.8 million to support our Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD and Arrow brands; (ii) $11.3 million in costs associated with the closing of our manufacturing facility in Ozark, Alabama in May 2006; (iii) $10.5 million in severance and other separation costs associated with the February 2006 departure of Mark Weber, our former Chief Executive Officer; and (iv) $6.9 million of noncash stock option expense resulting from the requirement to expense stock options beginning in 2006. Please see Note 11, Stock-Based Compensation, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion of our stock-based compensation expense and rel ated information. Also contributing to the increase were: (i) increased operating expenses in our Retail Apparel and Related Products, Retail Footwear and Related Products, and Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segments to support the sales growth previously mentioned, including from operating additional Calvin Klein outlet retail stores; and (ii) increased corporate and other expenses, including medical expenses due to increased claims in the current year. Partially offsetting these items were expense savings in 2006 of approximately $9.0 million due to the closure at the end of 2005 of our Calvin Klein Collection stores in Dallas and Paris. Our 2005 SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenues decreased 210 basis points to 35.8% in 2005 from 37.9% in 2004. The $62.4 million increase in 2005 SG&A expenses versus the prior year was due principally to the following: (i) additional expenses associated with operating our Calvin Klein businesses, including our Calvin Klein men better sportswear line, which was launched in the second quarter of 2004, and additional Calvin Klein outlet retail stores; (ii) additional operating expenses, including increased advertising expenses, in our wholesale dress shirt and sportswear businesses to support the sales growth mentioned previously; and (iii) an increase in corporate and other expenses, including incentive compensation costs. Offsetting these increases, in part, was the absence of expenses incurred in 2004 associated with exiting our wholesale footwear business and other related costs, as the Bass wholesale footwear business was transferred to a third party under a license agreement as of the first day of 2004. 31 Our 2007 SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenues is currently expected to decrease approximately 90 basis points, due primarily to leveraging the revenue increases mentioned previously, especially in our wholesale businesses, which typically have lower expense rates than our retail businesses, partially offset by start-up expenses associated with our men Timberland sportswear line, which we will assume for Fall 2008 and our Calvin Klein better specialty retail stores, which we will begin to open in the fourth quarter of 2007. Gain on Sale of Investments In the first quarter of 2006, we sold minority interests held by one of our subsidiaries in certain entities that operate the licenses and related wholesale and retail businesses of Calvin Klein jeans and accessories in Europe and Asia and the ck Calvin Klein bridge line of sportswear and accessories in Europe. The sale resulted in a pre-tax gain of $32.0 million, which is net of related fees, amounts held in escrow and the carrying value of the investment. Our share of proceeds being held in escrow totaled approximately $5.6 million as of February 4, 2007, and represents security for indemnification of certain losses incurred by the purchaser, as well as other adjustments to the purchase price. We will be entitled to receive distributions of a portion of any amounts remaining in escrow in installments during 2007 and 2008. We will record the release of any escrow amounts as additional gains if and when such amounts are r eleased to us. We did not sell any investments in 2005. We sold an investment in marketable securities in 2004 for a pre-tax gain of $0.7 million. Interest Expense and Interest Income Interest expense was $34.3 million in 2006 and $34.4 million in 2005. The 2006 interest income increase to $17.4 million compared with $5.8 million in 2005 was due to an increase in our average cash position throughout the year and an increase in investment rates of return over the prior year. Interest expense in 2005 decreased to $34.4 million compared with $44.6 million in 2004. Interest expense in 2004 included a prepayment penalty of $7.3 million and the write-off of debt issuance costs of $2.1 million in connection with the purchase and redemption of our 9 1/2% senior subordinated notes due 2008 in February 2004. These notes were purchased and redeemed with the net proceeds of the issuance on February 18, 2004 of 7 1/4% senior unsecured notes. 2005 interest expense was relatively flat compared with 2004, excluding the effect of these items. The 2005 interest income increase to $5.8 million compared with $1.8 million in 2004 was due to an increase in our average cash position during 2005 and an increase in investment rates of return over the prior year. Interest expense is expected to be relatively flat in 2007 as compared with 2006, while interest income is expected to increase approximately $2.0 million as a result of the estimated increase in our average cash position during the year. Income Taxes Income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income was as follows: 2006 2005 2004 37.5% 37.3% 32.6% The increased percentage for 2005 compared with 2004 related principally to a $3.0 million reduction in the valuation allowance for state net operating loss carryforwards recorded in 2004. The effect of the valuation allowance reduction on our income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income in 2004 was approximately 3.5%. We periodically undergo examinations of our income tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. We have reserves for exposures we believe could result from these examinations. Any favorable or unfavorable result as compared with our reserves will affect our tax rate in the year it arises. We currently anticipate that our 2007 tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income will be between 37.0% and 37.5%, excluding any such examination adjustments or other discrete items. 32 Net Income per Common Share Our calculation of net income per common share in 2005 was impacted by the voluntary conversion of a portion of our Series B convertible preferred stock by the holders of such stock into shares of our common stock. Such shares of common stock were subsequently sold in a registered offering by the holders in July 2005. We made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $1.75 for each share of common stock sold, or an aggregate of $12.9 million, and incurred certain costs, totaling $1.3 million in connection with these transactions. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it was estimated that we would have had the right to convert the Series B convertible preferred stock, net of the net present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the Series B convertible preferred stock was convertible. The portion of the Series B convertible preferred stock that was converted was considered separately from the portion of the Series B convertible preferred stock that was not converted for purposes of our net income per common share calculation in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Further, the aggregate $14.2 million inducement payment and offering costs was treated similar to a preferred stock dividend and attributed to the portion of the Series B convertible preferred stock that was converted. Our calculation of net income per common share in 2006 was impacted by the voluntary conversion in May 2006 of all of the remaining outstanding shares of the Series B convertible preferred stock by the holders of such stock into shares of common stock. The holders sold the majority of such shares in a registered common stock offering. We made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $0.88 for each share of common stock received upon conversion, or an aggregate of $10.2 million, and incurred certain costs, totaling $0.7 million in connection with these transactions. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it was estimated that we would have had the right to convert the Series B convertible preferred stock, net of the net present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the Series B convertible preferred stock was convertible. The aggregate $10.9 million inducement payment and offering costs was treated similar to a preferred stock dividend and attributed to the Series B convertible preferred stock for purposes of our net income per common share calculation in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Note 15, Net Income per Common Share, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further explanation and the calculations of basic and diluted net income per common share. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Generally, our principal source of cash is from operations, and our principal uses of cash are for capital expenditures, contingent purchase price payments and dividends. Operations Cash provided by operating activities in 2006 was $254.5 million, which significantly exceeded our net income of $155.2 million, principally as a result of depreciation and amortization, noncash stock option expense, deferred taxes and a decrease in working capital. The decrease in working capital was due in part to faster collections on accounts receivable and an increase in accrued expenses, particularly advertising expenses. We expect our cash provided by operating activities in 2007 to again exceed net income, due to depreciation and amortization, deferred taxes and noncash stock option expense. This will be offset, in part, by increases in working capital to support the anticipated sales growth mentioned previously. Capital Expenditures Our capital expenditures in 2006 were $46.2 million. We currently expect capital expenditures in 2007 to be approximately $100 million. The planned increase in capital expenditures for 2007 is due principally to: (i) additional office space, warehouse and distribution facility expansion and information technology spending to allow our infrastructure to support the sales growth and new businesses mentioned previously; and (ii) the build out of Calvin Klein better specialty retail stores. Contingent Purchase Price Payments In connection with our acquisition of Calvin Klein in 2003, we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein contingent purchase price payments through 2017 based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands. Such contingent purchase price payments are recorded as additions to goodwill and totaled $30.8 million in 2006. We currently expect that such payments will be $32 million to $34 million in 2007, and will continue to increase moderately thereafter. 33 In connection with our acquisition of Superba in January 2007, we are obligated to pay Superba contingent purchase price payments if the earnings of the acquired business exceed certain targets in 2007, 2008 and 2009. The maximum payout that Superba can receive is $15 million, $25 million and $30 million with respect to earnings in 2007, 2008 and 2009, respectively. Any such contingent purchase price payments would be payable 90 days after fiscal year end. Dividends The holders of our Series B convertible preferred stock voluntarily converted a portion of such stock into shares of our common stock during 2005. The shares of common stock issued upon conversion were then sold in a registered offering by the holders. We made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $1.75 for each share of common stock sold, or an aggregate of $12.9 million, and incurred certain costs, totaling $1.3 million, in connection with these transactions. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it is estimated that we would have the right to convert the Series B convertible preferred stock, net of the present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the Series B convertible preferred stock was convertible. The aggregate $14.2 million inducement payment and offering costs was treated similar to a preferred stock dividend under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The remaining holders of our Series B convertible preferred stock voluntarily converted all of the remaining outstanding shares of Series B convertible preferred stock into 11.6 million shares of our common stock during 2006. We made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $0.88 for each share of common stock received upon conversion, or an aggregate of $10.2 million in connection with the conversion, and incurred certain costs, totaling $0.7 million, in connection with the registered common stock offering of a majority of the shares of common stock received upon conversion. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the preferred dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the holders through the earliest date on which it was estimated that we would have had the right to convert the Series B convertible preferred stock, net of the net present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the Series B convertible preferred stock was convertible. The aggregate $10.9 million inducement payment and offering costs was treated similar to a preferred stock dividend under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Our common stock currently pays an annual dividend of $0.15 per share. We project that cash dividends on our common stock in 2007 will be $8.4 million to $8.5 million based on our current dividend rate, the number of shares of our common stock outstanding at February 4, 2007 and our estimates of stock option exercises in 2007. Cash Flow Summary Our net cash flow in 2006 was $98.7 million. Cash flow in 2006 was impacted by various other factors in addition to those mentioned previously. The exercise of stock options provided $17.6 million of cash for the full year in 2006. We currently estimate that the cash generated from the exercise of stock options in 2007 will be similar to the amount in 2006. In 2006, we incurred the following cash expenditures: $113.3 million in connection with our acquisition of Superba in January 2007; $10.0 million for severance and other termination benefits in connection with the departure of Mark Weber, our former Chief Executive Officer, in February 2006; and $8.3 million for severance, employee termination benefits and facility closing costs in connection with the closing of our manufacturing facility in Ozark, Alabama. Offsetting these cash expenditures in 2006 were cash receipts of $32.8 million, net of amounts held in escrow and certain associated fees, generated by the sale by one of our subsidiaries of its minority interests in certain entities. We currently expect to generate $85.0 million to $90.0 million of cash flow in 2007. There can be no assurance that this estimate will prove to be accurate. Unforeseen events, including changes in our net income, working capital requirements or other items, including acquisitions, could occur, which could cause our cash flow to vary significantly from this estimate. 34 Financing Arrangements Our capital structure as of February 4, 2007 was as follows: (in millions) Long-term debt $399.5 Stockholders equity $942.2 We believe our capital structure provides a secure base to support our current operations and our planned growth in the future. There are no maturities of our long-term debt until 2011. For near-term liquidity, in addition to our cash balance, we have a $325.0 million secured revolving credit facility that provides for revolving credit borrowings, as well as the issuance of letters of credit. We may, at our option, borrow and repay amounts up to a maximum of $325.0 million for revolving credit borrowings and the issuance of letters of credit, with a sublimit of $30.0 million for standby letters of credit and with no sublimit on trade letters of credit. Based on our working capital projections, we believe that our borrowing capacity under this facility provides us with adequate liquidity for our peak seasonal needs for the foreseeable future. During 2006, we had no revolving credit borrowings under the facility, and the maximum amount of letters of credit outstanding was $189.2 million. We had $120.3 million of outstanding letters of credit under this facility as of February 4, 2007. We currently do not expect to have any revolving credit borrowings under the facility in 2007. Our secured revolving credit facility requires us to maintain certain financial covenants, including a minimum level of availability under the secured revolving credit facility. If such minimum level is not maintained, we are then required to maintain a minimum ratio of (i) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and rent (EBITDAR) less capital expenditures paid in cash; cash dividends and cash distributions; Federal, state, local and foreign income taxes paid in cash and management fees paid during the period to (ii) fixed charge expense for the period, which consists of principal payments of debt, cash interest expense and rent expense (as such terms are defined in the secured revolving credit facility). Our secured revolving credit facility also contains covenants that, subject to specified exceptions, may restrict or limit our ability to: sell or dispose of assets, including equity interests; make loans, advances or guarantees; make investments; declare and pay dividends; engage in transactions with affiliates; incur additional debt, prepay or modify existing debt; incur liens; engage in businesses that are not in a related line of business; and merge with or acquire other companies, liquidate or dissolve. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under our secured revolving credit facility, the lenders may cease making loans, terminate the secured revolving credit facility and declare all amounts outstanding to be immediately due and payable. The secured revolving credit facility specifies a number of events of default (many of which are subject to applicable grace periods), including, among others, the failure to make timely principal and interest payments or to satisfy the covenants, including the financial covenants described above. In addition, we are subject to similar covenants and restrictions in connection with our long-term debt agreements. As of February 4, 2007, we were in compliance with all financial and non-financial covenants. 35 During 2006, Standard & Poor maintained our corporate credit rating at BB+, with a stable outlook. During the year, Moody raised our long term corporate credit rating to Ba2 from Ba3, with a stable outlook. Our credit ratings of BB+ from Standard & Poor and Ba2 from Moody contribute to our ability to successfully access capital markets. Given our capital structure and our projections for future profitability and cash flow, we believe we could obtain additional financing, if necessary, for refinancing our long-term debt, or, if opportunities present themselves, future acquisitions. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes, as of February 4, 2007, our contractual cash obligations by future period: Payments Due by Period Description Total Obligations 2007 2008-2009 2010-2011 Thereafter (in millions) Long-term debt $ 400.0 $ - $ - $150.0 $250.0 Interest payments on long-term debt 250.1 30.8 61.6 51.2 106.5 Operating leases(1) 499.4 87.7 143.1 82.9 185.7 Inventory purchase commitments 396.3 396.3 - - - Minimum contractual royalty payments(2) 43.8 17.3 23.4 3.0 0.1 Supplemental defined benefit plan(3) 30.2 1.1 2.8 3.3 23.0 Severance payments 8.1 5.0 2.9 0.2 - Total contractual cash obligations $1,627.9 $538.2 $233.8 $290.6 $565.3 (1) Includes store operating leases, which generally provide for payment of direct operating costs in addition to rent. These obligation amounts include future minimum lease payments and exclude such direct operating costs. (2) We currently anticipate that future payments required under our license agreements on an aggregate basis will exceed significantly the contractual minimums shown in the table. (3) We have an unfunded supplemental defined benefit plan covering 23 executives under which the participants will receive a predetermined amount during the 10 years following the attainment of age 65. Not included in the above table are contingent purchase price payments we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein through 2017 based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands. Such payments were $30.8 million in 2006. Also not included in the above table are contingent purchase price payments we may be obligated to pay Superba from 2007 through 2009 based on the earnings of the acquired Superba business, with a maximum payout of $15 million, $25 million and $30 million for 2007, 2008 and 2009, respectively. Not included in the above table are contributions to our defined benefit qualified pension plans, or payments to employees and retirees in connection with our supplemental pension plan and postretirement health plan. Contractual cash obligations for these plans cannot be determined due to the number of assumptions required to estimate our future benefit obligations, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. The liabilities associated with these plans are presented in Note 8, Retirement and Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect, or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect, on our financial position, changes in financial position, revenues, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. 36 MARKET RISK INTEREST AND EXCHANGE RATE SENSITIVITY Financial instruments held by us include cash equivalents and long-term debt. Interest rates on our long-term debt are fixed. Therefore, a change in rates generally would not have an effect on our interest expense. Note 7, Long-Term Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report outlines the principal amounts, interest rates, fair values and other terms required to evaluate the expected sensitivity of interest rate changes on the fair value of our fixed rate long-term debt. Cash equivalents held by us are affected by short-term interest rates. Therefore, a change in short-term interest rates would have an impact on our interest income. Given our balance of cash and cash equivalents as of February 4, 2007, the effect of a 50 basis point change in short-term interest rates on our interest income would be approximately $1.8 million annually. Principally all of our revenues and expenses are currently denominated in United States dollars. However, certain of our operations and license agreements expose us to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the rate of exchange of the United States dollar against the Euro, the Yen and the Canadian dollar. Our principal exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our licensing businesses. Many of our license agreements require the licensee to report sales to us in the licensee local currency, but to pay us in United States dollars based on the exchange rate as of the last day of the contractual selling period. Thus, while we are not exposed to exchange rate gains and losses between the end of the selling period and the date we collect payment, we are exposed to exchange rate changes during and up to the last day of the selling period. During times of a strengthening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenues will be negatively impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenues will be favorably impacted. A secondary exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our foreign wholesale operations. During 2006, we expanded our wholesale operations to include sales to department and specialty stores throughout Canada and parts of Europe. Sales for these foreign operations are both generated and collected in foreign currency, which exposes us to foreign exchange gains and losses between the date of the sale and the date we collect payment. As with our licensing business, the results of these operations will be negatively impacted during times of a strengthening United States dollar and favorably impacted during times of a weakening United States dollar. Not all foreign license agreements expose us to foreign exchange risk. Many of our foreign license agreements specify that contractual minimums be paid in United States dollars. Thus, for these foreign license agreements where the licensee sales do not exceed contractual minimums, the licensee assumes the risk of changes in exchange rates and we do not. Also somewhat mitigating our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro is our Calvin Klein administrative office in Milan, Italy. During times of a strengthening United States dollar against the Euro, our Milan expenses will be favorably impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar against the Euro, our Milan expenses will be negatively impacted. Due to the overall immateriality of our foreign operations, changes in the exchange rate for the United States dollar have not had a material effect on our consolidated results of operations or financial position. SEASONALITY Our business generally follows a seasonal pattern. Our wholesale businesses tend to generate higher levels of sales and income in the first and third quarters, as the selling of Spring and Fall merchandise to our customers occurs at higher levels as these selling seasons begin. Our retail businesses tend to generate higher levels of sales and income in the third and fourth quarters, due to the back to school and holiday selling seasons. Royalty, advertising and other revenues tend to be earned somewhat evenly throughout the year, although the third quarter has the highest level of royalty revenue due to higher sales by licensees in advance of the holiday season. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS The Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes - an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 ( FIN 48 ) in June 2006. FIN 48 requires that the financial statement effects of a tax position be recognized when it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits, that the position will be sustained upon examination. A tax position that meets the more likely than not recognition threshold shall initially and subsequently be measured as the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority that has full knowledge of all relevant information. We must adopt the provisions of FIN 48 as of the beginning of our 2007 fiscal year, with any cumulative effect of the change in accounting principle being recorded to the opening balance of r etained earnings. We are in the process of evaluating the effect of adopting FIN 48. Based 37 on our preliminary analysis, we currently do not expect the adoption of FIN 48 to have a material impact on our financial statements. The FASB issued FASB Statement No. 157, Fair Value Measurements in September 2006. This statement clarifies the definition of fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosures about the use of fair value measurements. We must adopt FASB Statement No. 157 for any fair value measurements that occur as of the beginning of our 2007 fiscal year. We currently do not expect the adoption of FASB Statement No. 157 to have any impact on our consolidated results of operations and financial position. The FASB issued FASB Statement No. 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans - an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R) in September 2006. This statement requires a company to: (i) recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of a defined benefit pension or other postretirement plan as an asset or a liability in its statement of financial position; (ii) recognize gains and losses that have not yet been recognized through net periodic benefit cost in comprehensive income, net of income tax effects; and (iii) measure the funded status of defined benefits and other postretirement plans as of the date of a Company fiscal year end. We adopted the provisions of FASB Statement No. 158 as of the end of our 2006 fiscal year, except for the requirement to measure the funded status of retirement benefit plans as of our fiscal year end, which is effective for our 2008 fiscal year. The adoption of FASB Statement No. 158 did not have any impact on our consolidated results of operations and did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial position. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES Our consolidated financial statements are based on the selection and application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. We believe that the following are the more critical judgmental areas in the application of our accounting policies that currently affect our financial position and results of operations: Sales allowances and returns We have arrangements with many of our department and specialty store customers to support their sales of our products. We establish accruals which, based on a review of the individual customer arrangements and the expected performance of our products in their stores, we believe will be required to satisfy our sales allowance obligations. We also establish accruals, which are partly based on historical data, that we believe are necessary to provide for inventory returns. It is possible that the accrual estimates could vary from actual results, which would require adjustment to the allowance and returns accruals. Inventories Inventories related to our wholesale operations, comprised principally of finished goods, are stated at the lower of cost or market. Inventories related to our retail operations, comprised entirely of finished goods, are valued at the lower of average cost or market using the retail inventory method. Under the retail inventory method, the valuation of inventories at cost is calculated by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the retail value of inventories. Permanent and point of sale markdowns, when recorded, reduce both the retail and cost components of inventory on hand so as to maintain the already established cost-to-retail relationship. Based on a review of current business trends, inventory agings and discontinued merchandise categories, a further adjustment to inventory is recorded to reflect additional markdowns which are estimated to be necessary to liquidate existing clearance inventories and reduce inventori es to the lower of cost or market. We believe that all inventory writedowns required at February 4, 2007 have been recorded. If market conditions were to change, it is possible that the required level of inventory reserves would need to be adjusted. Asset impairments In each of the last three years, we determined that the long-lived assets in various outlet retail stores and certain other locations were not recoverable, which resulted in us recording impairment charges. In order to calculate the impairment charges, we estimated the related undiscounted future cash flows and the fair value of each asset. The undiscounted future cash flows for each asset were estimated using current sales trends and other assumptions. If different assumptions had been used for future sales trends, the recorded impairment charges could have been significantly higher or lower. Note 14, Activity Exit Costs, Asset Impairments and Other Charges, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further discussion of the circumstances surrounding the impairments and the assumptions related to the impairment charges. Allowance for doubtful accounts Accounts receivable as shown on our Consolidated Balance Sheets is net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. An allowance for doubtful accounts is determined through an analysis of the aging of accounts receivable and assessments of collectibility based on historic trends, the financial position of our customers and an evaluation of economic conditions. Any significant changes to the above factors could impact our allowance for doubtful accounts. 38 Income taxes We have deferred tax assets principally related to state net operating loss carryforwards which begin to expire principally in 2007. Realization of these carryforwards is primarily dependent upon the achievement of future taxable income by certain of our subsidiaries. Based on the expiration dates and projections of future taxable income, we have determined that realization of certain of these state net operating loss carryforwards is not likely, and as a result we have recorded a valuation allowance. If future conditions require a change in judgment as to realization, it is possible that material adjustments to the valuation allowance may be required. Additionally, we are subject to examination of our income tax returns for multiple years by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. We periodically assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the impact on o ur deferred taxes and income tax liabilities. Based on our assessments, we establish reserves for those amounts that we deem may result in future liabilities related to these examinations. If the actual outcomes resulting from these examinations vary from our expectations, adjustments to the reserves could be required. Goodwill and other intangible assets Goodwill and other indefinitely lived intangible assets are tested for impairment based on fair value. These tests are performed annually, and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. An impairment loss could have a material adverse impact on our financial position and results of operations. Performance of the goodwill impairment tests requires significant judgments regarding the allocation of net assets to the reporting unit level, which is the level at which the impairment tests are required. The determination of whether an impairment exists also depends on, among other factors, the estimated fair value of the reporting units, which itself depends in part on market conditions. Pension benefits Included in the calculations of expense, assets and liabilities for our pension plans are various assumptions, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. Note 8, Retirement and Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report sets forth the significant rate assumptions used in performing certain calculations related to our pension plans. Actual results could differ from these assumptions, which would require adjustments to our asset and liability balances and could result in volatility in our future pension expense. 
