CIK: 78239
Company Name: PHILLIPS VAN HEUSEN CORP DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2006-04-14


Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations OVERVIEW The following discussion and analysis is intended to help you understand us, our operations and our financial performance. It should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes which are included elsewhere in this report. We are one of the largest apparel companies in the world, with a heritage dating back over 125 years. Our brand portfolio consists of nationally recognized brand names, including Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, Arrow, Bass and Eagle, which are owned, and Geoffrey Beene, Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, Sean John, Chaps, Donald J. Trump Signature Collection and MICHAEL Michael Kors, which are licensed. We launched a new licensed line of dress shirts under the unlisted, A Kenneth Cole Production brand in the beginning of 2006 and will launch a new licensed line of dress shirts under the JOE Joseph Abboud brand in the second half of 2006. We had an exceptional year in 2005, following on a very strong performance in 2004. It was a year in which all of our businesses performed above expectations and fueled double digit growth in earnings and record cash flow generation. At the core of our success was the power of our expanded business model. Our historical strategy has been to manage and market a portfolio of nationally recognized brands across multiple product categories, through multiple channels of distribution and at multiple price points. This strategy was enhanced by our acquisition of Calvin Klein, Inc. in February 2003, which provided us with one of the most famous designer names in the world and an additional platform for growth in revenues and profitability. Through that transaction, and to a lesser extent, our acquisition of Arrow in December 2004, we were able to diversify our business model by providing growth opportunities from strong and highly profitable licensing streams which do not require capital investments. Equally important, we also have broadened the reach of the Calvin Klein brands through growth of existing businesses and entry into new businesses, both directly by us and through licensees. This additional diversification, in terms of product, positioning, business model and opportunity has not only enhanced our growth prospects, but has also further moderated our risk to a downturn in any one of our businesses. While the expansion of the Calvin Klein brands, in terms of both product and global reach has contributed significant growth and profitability, it was also the exceptional performance of our heritage 27 businesses that drove consolidated results in 2005. Market share gains in both our wholesale dress shirt and sportswear businesses along with strong comparative store performance in the outlet retail channel added to our success. The current year was notable not only in terms of profitability but also in terms of cash flow and strength in our balance sheet. We generated $143 million of cash flow, ending the year with $267 million of cash. In July 2005, the holders of our Series B convertible preferred stock converted approximately 40% of their holdings into shares of our common stock and then sold the common stock in a successful secondary offering. While we did not receive any of the proceeds from the secondary offering, and made payment to the preferred stockholders of approximately $13 million to induce the conversion and sale, we were able to strengthen our balance sheet and broaden our investor base as a result. This positions us well as we enter 2006. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Operations Overview We generate net sales from (i) the wholesale distribution of men's dress shirts and sportswear, principally under the brand names Van Heusen, Arrow, Geoffrey Beene, Calvin Klein, IZOD, BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, Chaps, Sean John, Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, Kenneth Cole New York , Kenneth Cole Reaction and MICHAEL Michael Kors , as well as various private labels, and, through the end of 2003, footwear under the Bass brand and (ii) the sale, through approximately 700 company-operated retail stores, of apparel, footwear and accessories under the brand names Van Heusen , IZOD , Geoffrey Beene , Bass and Calvin Klein . Our stores operate in an outlet format, except for our Calvin Klein Collection store located in New York City, in which we sell men's and women's high-end collection apparel and accessories, soft home furnishings and tableware. We closed our Calvin Klein Collection stores in Dallas and Paris at the end of 2005 and will be discontinuing sales of our licensed line of MICHAEL Michael Kors dress shirts in connection with the licensor's discontinuance of its other licensed menswear offerings under the brand. We generate royalty and other revenues from fees for licensing the use of our trademarks. Calvin Klein royalty and other revenues comprised 85% of total royalty and other revenues in 2005. Calvin Klein royalty and other revenues are derived under licenses and other arrangements primarily for jeans, underwear, fragrances, eyewear, watches and home furnishings. In December 2004, we acquired the companies that own and license Arrow , which has generated, and will continue to generate, additional royalty and other revenues. Gross profit on total revenues is total revenues less cost of goods sold. We include as cost of goods sold costs associated with the production and procurement of product, including inbound freight costs, purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, internal transfer costs and other product procurement related charges. Since there is no cost of goods sold associated with royalty and other revenues, 100% of such revenues are included in gross profit. Due to the above factors, our gross profit may not be comparable to that of other entities. Selling, general and administrative expenses include all other expenses, excluding interest and income taxes. Salaries and related fringe benefits are the largest component of selling, general and administrative expenses, comprising 48% of such expenses in 2005. Rent and occupancy for offices, warehouses and retail stores is the next largest expense, comprising 21% of selling, general and administrative expenses in 2005. 28 The following table summarizes our results of operations in 2005, 2004 and 2003: (in millions, except per share amounts and percentages) 2005 2004 2003 Net sales $ 1,697.3 $ 1,460.2 $ 1,425.7 Royalty and other revenues 211.6 181.2 143.1 Total revenues 1,908.8 1,641.4 1,568.8 Gross profit 891.1 751.0 644.4 % of total revenues 46.7 % 45.8 % 41.1 % Selling, general and administrative expenses 684.2 621.8 588.6 % of total revenues 35.8 % 37.9 % 37.5 % Gain on sale of investments 0.7 3.5 Income before interest and taxes 206.8 129.9 59.3 Interest expense 34.4 44.6 37.5 Interest income 5.8 1.7 1.1 Income before taxes 178.3 87.0 22.9 Income tax expense 66.6 28.4 8.2 Net income $ 111.7 $ 58.6 $ 14.7 Diluted net income (loss) per common share $ 1.85 $ 1.14 $ (0.18 ) Net Sales Our net sales in 2005 increased to $1,697.3 million from $1,460.2 million in 2004 and $1,425.7 million in 2003. Our 2005 net sales increase of $237.1 million over 2004 net sales was due principally to the net effect of the items described below. Net sales increases in 2005 included: The addition of $100.5 million of net sales attributable to our Calvin Klein men's better sportswear line marketed to upscale specialty and department stores, which was launched for the Fall 2004 season, as well as the continued opening of Calvin Klein retail outlet stores in premium outlet malls. We currently intend to have as many as 85 to 90 Calvin Klein outlet stores by the end of 2008. The addition of $79.2 million of net sales attributable to growth in our IZOD , Arrow and Van Heusen wholesale sportswear businesses. The addition of $75.7 million of net sales attributable to growth in our wholesale dress shirt business, particularly from the BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, Sean John and Chaps lines, which were launched in the second half of 2004, and the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection line, which was launched in the first quarter of 2005, as well as growth in our core brands, Van Heusen, Arrow, Geoffrey Beene, IZOD, Eagle and Calvin Klein . The addition of net sales attributable to a 6.0% sales increase in our Van Heusen, IZOD, Geoffrey Beene and Bass retail stores open at least two years, offset, in part, by a reduction in the overall number of stores in these divisions. 29 Net sales decreases in 2005 included: A $15.5 million net sales decline due to the elimination of our private label wholesale sportswear business and the discontinuation in 2004 of our sales of a licensed line of DKNY dress shirts. Our 2004 net sales increase of $34.5 million over 2003 net sales was due principally to the net effect of the items described below. Net sales increases in 2004 included: The addition of $88.0 million of net sales attributable to the launch of our Calvin Klein men's better sportswear line, as well as the continued opening of Calvin Klein retail outlet stores in premium outlet malls. The addition of $41.5 million attributable to growth in our IZOD and Arrow wholesale sportswear businesses. The addition of $12.0 million attributable to growth in our wholesale dress shirt business, particularly from the launch in 2004 of five new labels: BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, MICHAEL Michael Kors, Sean John and Chaps. Net sales decreases in 2004 included: The loss of the net sales attributable to the wholesale distribution of footwear, principally under the Bass brand, which in 2003 was $63.2 million. The Bass wholesale footwear business was transferred to a third party under a license agreement as of the first day of 2004. The loss of the net sales attributable to the wholesale distribution of the Calvin Klein men's and women's high-end collection apparel businesses, which businesses were transferred at the end of 2003 to a third party under a license agreement. The net sales of these businesses were $20.9 million in 2003. The loss of the net sales attributable to retail store closings, an 0.8% sales decline in our retail stores open at least two years and reduced wholesale sales of private label sportswear. Our net sales in 2006 are expected to increase 3% to 4% due principally to growth in our Calvin Klein men's better sportswear line, the continued opening of Calvin Klein retail outlet stores in premium outlet malls and increases in our wholesale sportswear business, particularly from our Arrow brand. These projected increases include the impact of the 2005 acquisition by Federated Department Stores, Inc. of The May Department Stores Company, as the combined company is closing certain of its stores and implementing a brand mix strategy that limits our sales opportunity to them. Royalty and Other Revenues Royalty and other revenue increases over the prior year were $30.4 million and $38.1 million in 2005 and 2004, respectively. These increases were primarily attributable to increases of $19.2 million and $31.6 million in 2005 and 2004, respectively, in our Calvin Klein Licensing segment due to new licensees and growth exhibited by existing licensees. Approximately 75% of the growth in Calvin Klein royalty revenue in 2005 was attributable to growth from existing licenses, with the remaining 25% stemming from new licenses. In particular, our existing licenses for jeanswear and fragrances generated significant increases. Royalty and other revenues for our other segments increased $11.2 million and $6.5 million in 2005 and 2004, respectively. The increase in 2005 was due principally to the royalties generated by the Arrow brand license agreements acquired as part of our acquisition of Arrow in December 2004. We currently expect that royalty and other revenues will increase 4% to 5% in 2006, both as a result of growth in the businesses of existing licensees as well as royalties generated from new license agreements. 30 Gross Profit on Total Revenues The following table shows our revenue mix between net sales and royalty and other revenues, as well as our gross profit as a percentage of total revenues for 2005, 2004 and 2003: 2005 2004 2003 Net sales 88.9 % 89.0 % 90.9 % Royalty and other revenues 11.1 % 11.0 % 9.1 % Gross profit as a % of total revenues 46.7 % 45.8 % 41.1 % The 90 basis point improvement in the 2005 gross profit on total revenues percentage compared with 2004 was due principally to overall lower product costs and the elimination of Arrow royalty costs in connection with our acquisition of Arrow in December 2004. The increase in the 2004 gross profit on total revenues percentage compared with 2003 was due principally to the increase in royalty and other revenues as a percentage of total revenues. Since royalty and other revenues do not carry a cost of sales, the gross profit percentage on such revenues is 100.0%. In addition to revenue mix, our gross profit percentage improvement in 2004 was enhanced by (i) a stronger retail environment for our outlet stores, which resulted in less promotional selling, (ii) stronger sell-throughs of our product in department stores, requiring less support under margin allowance arrangements with many of our department and specialty store customers and (iii) the exiting of the lower margin Bass wholesale and Calvin Klein Collection wholesale businesses at the end of 2003, as both businesses were transferred to third parties under license agreements which went into effect at the beginning of 2004. We currently expect that the gross profit on total revenues percentage will increase slightly in 2006 as royalty and other revenues should increase moderately as a percentage of total revenues. Additionally, we expect to realize lower product costs beginning in the latter part of the year resulting from the closing of our apparel manufacturing facility in Ozark, Alabama during the first half of the year. Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) Expenses Our SG&A expenses were as follows: (in millions, except percentages) 2005 2004 2003 SG&A expenses $ 684.2 $ 621.8 $ 588.6 % of total revenues 35.8 % 37.9 % 37.5 % Our 2005 SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenues decreased 210 basis points to 35.8% in 2005 from the prior year's 37.9%. This decrease was due principally to leveraging a 16% revenue increase against a 10% expense increase in 2005. The $62.4 million increase in 2005 SG&A expenses versus the prior year was due principally to the following: (i) additional expenses associated with operating our Calvin Klein businesses, including our Calvin Klein men's better sportswear line, which was launched in the second quarter of 2004, and additional Calvin Klein retail outlet store openings in premium outlet malls; (ii) additional operating expenses, including increased advertising expenses, in our wholesale dress shirt and sportswear businesses to support the sales growth mentioned previously and (iii) an increase in corporate and other expenses, including incentive compensation costs. Offsetting these increases, in part, was the absence of expenses incurred in 2004 associated with exiting our wholesale footwear business and other related costs, as the Bass wholesale footwear business was transferred to a third party under a license agreement as of the first day of 2004. Our 2004 SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenues of 37.9% remained relatively flat compared with 37.5% in 2003. While significant Calvin Klein integration and retail store impairment 31 costs that were incurred in 2003 did not recur in 2004, we incurred $12.6 million associated with exiting the wholesale footwear business and other related costs. In addition, our advertising expenses, principally for Calvin Klein, increased by $23.3 million in 2004. Our 2006 SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenues are currently expected to increase approximately 100 basis points as we anticipate that we will incur approximately $10.0 million in costs associated with the closing of our apparel manufacturing facility in Ozark, Alabama and approximately $10.0 million in costs associated with the February 2006 departure of Mark Weber, our former Chief Executive Officer. Also impacting 2006 will be noncash stock option expense of approximately $10.0 million resulting from the requirement to expense stock options beginning in 2006. Partially offsetting these items will be expense savings in 2006 of approximately $9.0 million due to the closure at the end of 2005 of our Calvin Klein Collection stores in Dallas and Paris. Excluding the effect of these items, we expect that our 2006 SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenues will decrease slightly compared to 2005. Gain on Sale of Investments We did not sell any investments in 2005. In the first quarter of 2006, we sold minority interests held by one of our subsidiaries in certain entities that operated various licensed Calvin Klein jeans and sportswear businesses in Europe and Asia. We estimate that this will result in a pre-tax gain of approximately $31.0 million, which is net of related fees, amounts held in escrow and the carrying value of the investments. In 2004, we sold an investment in marketable securities for a pre-tax gain of $0.7 million. In 2003, we sold our minority interest in Gant Company AB for $17.2 million, net of related expenses, which resulted in a pre-tax gain of $3.5 million. Interest Expense and Interest Income Interest expense in 2005 decreased to $34.4 million compared with $44.6 million in 2004. Interest expense in 2004 included a prepayment penalty of $7.3 million and the write-off of debt issuance costs of $2.1 million in connection with the purchase and redemption of our 9 1 / 2 % senior subordinated notes due 2008 in February 2004. These notes were purchased and redeemed with the net proceeds of the issuance on February 18, 2004 of 7 1 / 4 % senior unsecured notes. Excluding the effect of these items, 2005 interest expense was relatively flat compared with 2004. The 2005 interest income increase to $5.8 million compared with $1.7 million in 2004 was due principally to an increase in our average cash position during 2005 and an increase in interest rates over the prior year. Interest expense in 2004 increased to $44.6 million compared with $37.5 million in 2003 due to the prepayment penalty and write-off of debt issuance costs noted above. Excluding the effect of these items, 2004 interest expense was below 2003 levels due to the realization of the benefits of the lower interest rate of the 7 1 / 4 % notes. The 2004 interest income of $1.7 million remained relatively flat compared with the 2003 amount of $1.1 million. Interest expense is expected to be relatively flat in 2006 as compared with 2005 while interest income is expected to increase approximately $7.0 million to $8.0 million as a result of the estimated increase in our average cash position during the year. 32 Income Taxes Income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income was as follows: 2005 2004 2003 37.3 % 32.6 % 35.8 % The increased percentage for 2005 compared with 2004 related principally to a $3.0 million reduction in the valuation allowance for state net operating loss carryforwards recorded in 2004. Excluding the effect of the valuation allowance reduction, our income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income in 2004 would have been 36.1%. The decreased percentage for 2004 compared with 2003 related principally to non-deductible expenses included in 2003 pre-tax income related to the sale of our minority interest in Gant and the reduction in the valuation allowance for state net operating loss carryforwards noted above. We are currently undergoing examinations of our income tax returns for multiple years by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. We have reserves for exposures we believe could result from these examinations. Any favorable or unfavorable result as compared with our reserves will affect our tax rate in the year it materializes. Excluding any such discrete items, we currently anticipate our 2006 tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income will approximate the 2005 percentage of 37.3%. Earnings Per Share Our calculation of earnings per share in 2005 was impacted by the voluntary conversion of a portion of our Series B convertible preferred stock by the holders of such stock into shares of common stock. Such shares of common stock were subsequently sold in a registered offering by the holders. In connection with these transactions, we made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $1.75 for each share of common stock sold, or an aggregate of $12.9 million, and incurred certain costs, totaling $1.3 million, specifically related to the registered common stock offering. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it is estimated that we would have the right to convert the Series B convertible preferred stock, net of the present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the Series B convertible preferred stock was convertible. In accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, the portion of our Series B convertible preferred stock that was converted was considered separately from the portion of our Series B convertible preferred stock that was not converted for purposes of our earnings per share calculation. Further, the aggregate $14.2 million inducement payment and offering costs were treated as a preferred stock dividend and attributed to the portion of our Series B convertible preferred stock that was converted. Note 15, "Earnings per Share," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further explanation and the calculation of net income per diluted common share. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Generally, our principal source of cash is from operations, and our principal uses of cash are for capital expenditures, contingent purchase price payments to Mr. Calvin Klein and dividends on our common stock and Series B convertible preferred stock. Operations Cash provided by operating activities in 2005 was $189.4 million, which significantly exceeded our net income of $111.7 million, principally as a result of depreciation and amortization and deferred taxes. Included in cash provided by operating activities were contributions of $38.3 million to our 33 qualified pension plans in 2005. In 2006, we expect our cash provided by operating activities to again exceed net income, due to depreciation and amortization, deferred taxes and noncash stock option expense resulting from the requirement to expense stock options beginning in 2006. This will be offset, in part, by increases in working capital and an expected increase in income tax payments due to exhausting certain net operating loss carryforwards. We do not currently intend to make any material contributions to our qualified pension plans in 2006. Capital Expenditures Our capital expenditures in 2005 were $37.4 million. We currently expect capital expenditures in 2006 to be in a range of $40 million to $45 million, and decrease moderately thereafter, as the roll-out of our Calvin Klein stores in premium outlet centers will be substantially complete. Our capital expenditures are generally for information systems, warehouse and office facilities and retail outlet stores. As such, we have no long-term contractual commitments for capital expenditures. Contingent Purchase Price Payments In connection with our acquisition of Calvin Klein in 2003, we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein contingent purchase price payments through 2017 based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands. Such contingent purchase price payments are recorded as an addition to goodwill and totaled $25.5 million in 2005. We currently expect that such payments will be $26 million to $28 million in 2006, and will continue to increase moderately thereafter. Dividends During 2005, the holders of our Series B convertible preferred stock voluntarily converted a portion of such stock into shares of our common stock. The shares of common stock issued upon conversion were then sold in a registered offering by the holders. In connection with these transactions, we made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $1.75 for each share of common stock sold, or an aggregate of $12.9 million, and incurred certain costs, totaling $1.3 million, in connection with the offering. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it is estimated that we would have the right to convert the Series B convertible preferred stock, net of the present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the Series B convertible preferred stock was convertible. Under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, the aggregate $14.2 million inducement payment and offering costs were treated as a preferred stock dividend. Our Series B convertible preferred stock has a dividend rate of 8.0% per annum, payable in cash. If we elect not to pay a cash dividend for any quarter, the then-outstanding shares will be treated for purposes of the payment of future dividends and upon conversion, redemption or liquidation as if an in-kind dividend had been paid. We currently expect to pay the dividends on the Series B convertible preferred stock in cash for the foreseeable future. Based on the liquidation preference of $161.9 million as of January 29, 2006, cash dividends are expected to aggregate $13.2 million in 2006, which is a 53 week fiscal year, and $12.9 million in each 52 week fiscal year thereafter. Our common stock currently pays an annual dividend of $0.15 per share. Based on the number of shares of our common stock outstanding at January 29, 2006 and our estimates of stock option exercises in 2006, we project that cash dividends on our common stock in 2006 will be $6.3 million to $6.5 million. 34 Cash Flow Summary Our net cash flow in 2005 was $143.2 million. Cash flow in 2006 will be impacted by various other factors in addition to those noted above. For example, the exercise of stock options provided $52.6 million of cash in 2005. We currently estimate that 2006 will include $10.0 million to $15.0 million of cash from the exercise of stock options. In connection with the announced closing of our apparel manufacturing facility in Ozark, Alabama, we expect to incur cash expenditures of approximately $9.0 million in 2006 related to severance, employee termination benefits and facility closing costs. In addition, we expect to incur cash expenditures of approximately $10.0 million in 2006 in connection with the departure of Mark Weber, our former Chief Executive Officer. Offsetting these cash expenditures in 2006 will be cash receipts of approximately $31.0 million, net of amounts held in escrow and certain associated fees, generated by the sale by one of our subsidiaries of its minority interests in certain entities. We currently expect to generate $115.0 million to $125.0 million of cash flow in 2006. There can be no assurance that this estimate will prove to be accurate. Unforeseen events, including changes in our net income, working capital requirements or other items, including acquisitions, could occur which could cause our cash flow to vary significantly from this estimate. Financing Arrangements Our capital structure as of January 29, 2006 was as follows: (in millions) Long-term debt $ 399.5 Series B convertible preferred stock 161.9 Stockholders' equity 610.7 We believe our capital structure provides a secure base to support our current operations and our planned growth in the future. There are no maturities of our long-term debt until 2011. Our Series B convertible preferred stock has a conversion price of $14.00 per share, and based on current market conditions, and that redemption cannot be required until November 2013, we believe the Series B convertible preferred stock will be converted to common stock rather than redeemed. The preferred stockholders have the right to convert the remaining Series B convertible preferred stock to common stock at any time. Conversion may occur at our option after February 12, 2007, if the market value of our common stock equals or exceeds 225% of the conversion price then in effect for 60 consecutive trading days. For near-term liquidity, in addition to our cash balance, we have a $325.0 million secured revolving credit facility that provides for revolving credit borrowings, as well as the issuance of letters of credit. We may, at our option, borrow and repay amounts up to a maximum of $325.0 million for revolving credit borrowings and the issuance of letters of credit, with a sublimit of $30.0 million for standby letters of credit and with no sublimit on trade letters of credit. Based on our working capital projections, we believe that our borrowing capacity under this facility provides us with adequate liquidity for our peak seasonal needs for the foreseeable future. During 2005, we had no revolving credit borrowings under the facility, and the maximum amount of letters of credit outstanding on any one date was $189.3 million. As of January 29, 2006, we had $156.1 million outstanding letters of credit under this facility. We currently do not expect to have any revolving credit borrowings under the facility in 2006. Our secured revolving credit facility requires us to maintain certain financial covenants, including a minimum level of availability under the secured revolving credit facility. If such minimum level is not maintained, we are then required to maintain a minimum ratio of (i) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and rent (EBITDAR) less capital expenditures paid in cash; cash dividends 35 and cash distributions; Federal, state, local and foreign income taxes paid in cash and management fees paid during the period to (ii) Fixed Charge Expense for the period, which consists of principal payments of debt, cash interest expense and rent expense (as such terms are defined in the secured revolving credit facility). Our secured revolving credit facility also contains covenants that, subject to specified exceptions, may restrict or limit our ability to: sell or dispose of assets, including equity interests; make loans, advances or guarantees; make investments; declare and pay dividends; engage in transactions with affiliates; incur additional debt, prepay or modify existing debt; incur liens; engage in businesses that are not a related line of business; and merge with or acquire other companies, liquidate or dissolve. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under our secured revolving credit facility, the lenders may cease making loans, terminate the secured revolving credit facility and declare all amounts outstanding to be immediately due and payable. The secured revolving credit facility specifies a number of events of default (many of which are subject to applicable grace periods), including, among others, the failure to make timely principal and interest payments or to satisfy the covenants, including the financial covenants described above. In addition, we are subject to similar covenants and restrictions in connection with our long-term debt agreements. As of January 29, 2006, we were in compliance with all financial and non-financial covenants. During 2005, Standard & Poor's raised our corporate credit rating to BB+ from BB, with a stable outlook. During the year, Moody's also raised our long term corporate credit rating to Ba3 from B1, with a positive outlook. Our credit ratings of BB+ from Standard & Poor's and Ba3 from Moody's contribute to our ability to successfully access capital markets. Given our capital structure and our projections for future profitability and cash flow, we believe we could obtain additional financing, if necessary, for refinancing our long-term debt or preferred stock, or, if opportunities present themselves, future acquisitions. 36 Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes, as of January 29, 2006, our contractual cash obligations by future period: Payments Due by Period Description Total Obligations 2006 2007-2008 2009-2010 Thereafter (in millions) Long-term debt $ 400.0 $ $ $ $ 400.0 Interest payments on long-term debt 280.9 30.8 61.6 61.6 126.9 Operating leases(1) 371.9 77.2 121.5 76.5 96.7 Inventory purchase commitments 233.1 233.1 Minimum contractual royalty payments(2) 30.5 9.5 16.8 4.2 Supplemental defined benefit plan(3) 31.3 0.9 2.7 2.6 25.1 Total contractual cash obligations $ 1,347.7 $ 351.5 $ 202.6 $ 144.9 $ 648.7 (1) Includes store operating leases, which generally provide for payment of direct operating costs in addition to rent. These obligation amounts include future minimum lease payments and exclude such direct operating costs. (2) We currently anticipate that future payments required under our license agreements on an aggregate basis will exceed significantly the contractual minimums shown in the table. (3) We have an unfunded supplemental defined benefit plan covering 23 executives under which the participants will receive a predetermined amount during the 10 years following the attainment of age 65. Not included in the above table are severance payments we are obligated to pay Mark Weber, our former Chief Executive Officer, in connection with his departure. Such payments are expected to aggregate approximately $8.0 million over the next three years. Not included in the above table are contingent purchase price payments we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein through 2017 based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands. Such payments were $25.5 million in 2005. Not included in the above table are contributions to our defined benefit qualified pension plans, or payments to employees and retirees in connection with our supplemental pension plan and postretirement health plan. Contractual cash obligations for these plans can not be determined due to the number of assumptions required to estimate our future benefit obligations, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. The liabilities associated with these plans are presented in more detail in Note 8, "Retirement and Benefit Plans," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. Also not included in the above table are payments of cash dividends on our Series B convertible preferred stock. If we elect not to pay a cash dividend, then the Series B convertible preferred stock will be treated for purposes of the payment of future dividends and upon conversion, redemption or liquidation as if an in-kind dividend had been paid. We currently expect to pay the dividends on the Series B convertible preferred stock in cash for the forseeable future. Based on the liquidation preference of $161.9 million as of January 29, 2006, cash dividends are expected to aggregate $13.2 million in 2006, which is a 53-week fiscal year, and $12.9 million in each 52 week fiscal year thereafter. In addition, the preferred stockholders can require us to redeem for cash all of the then outstanding shares of Series B convertible preferred stock on or after November 1, 2013. Based on the 37 conversion price of $14.00 per share, we believe the Series B convertible preferred stock will be converted to common stock rather than redeemed. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect, or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect, on our financial position, changes in financial position, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. MARKET RISK INTEREST AND EXCHANGE RATE SENSITIVITY Financial instruments held by us include cash equivalents and long-term debt. Interest rates on our long-term debt are fixed, therefore a change in rates would not have an effect on our interest expense. Note 7, "Long-Term Debt," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report outlines the principal amounts, interest rates, fair values and other terms required to evaluate the expected sensitivity of interest rate changes on the fair value of our fixed rate long-term debt. Cash equivalents held by us are affected by short-term interest rates. Therefore, a change in short-term interest rates would have an impact on our interest income. Given our balance of cash and cash equivalents as of January 29, 2006, the effect of a 50 basis point change in short-term interest rates on our interest income would be approximately $1.3 million. Substantially all of our sales and expenses are currently denominated in United States dollars. However, certain of our operations and license agreements expose us to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the rate of exchange of the United States dollar against the Euro and the Yen. Our principal exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our licensing business. Many of our license agreements require the licensee to report sales to us in their local currency but to pay us in United States dollars based on the exchange rate as of the last day of the contractual selling period. Thus, while we are not exposed to exchange rate gains and losses between the end of the selling period and the date we collect payment, we are exposed to exchange rates during and up to the last day of the selling period. During times of a strengthening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenues will be negatively impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenues will be favorably impacted. Not all foreign license agreements expose us to foreign exchange risk. Many of our foreign license agreements specify that contractual minimums be paid in United States dollars. Thus, for foreign license agreements where the licensee's sales do not exceed contractual minimums, the licensee, not us, assumes the risk of changes in exchange rates. Also somewhat mitigating our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro is our Calvin Klein administrative office in Milan, Italy. During times of a strengthening United States dollar against the Euro, the United States dollar impact of our Milan expenses will be favorably impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar against the Euro, our Milan expenses will effectively increase. Due to the fact that foreign royalties comprise about half of our total royalty revenues which themselves are only 11% of our total revenues, changes in the exchange rate for the United States dollar have not had a material effect on our financial position or results of operations. SEASONALITY Our business generally follows a seasonal pattern. Our dress shirt and sportswear wholesale businesses generate higher levels of sales and income in the first and third quarters, as the selling of Spring and Fall merchandise to our customers occurs at higher levels as these selling seasons begin. Royalty and other revenues tend to be earned somewhat evenly throughout the year. The third quarter 38 has the highest level of royalty income, due to higher sales by licensees in advance of the holiday selling season. The aggregate effect of our seasonality is that our first and third quarters have the highest levels of revenues and income. Revenues in the second and fourth quarters are relatively equal, but earnings in the fourth quarter are lower as a result of significant holiday marketing costs, as well as post-holiday promotional selling and inventory clearance activity. ACCOUNTING POLICY CHANGES In November 2004, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Statement No. 151, "Inventory Costs." FASB Statement No. 151 requires that abnormal amounts of idle facility expense, freight, handling costs, and wasted material (spoilage) be recognized as current period charges. FASB Statement No. 151 is effective for inventory costs incurred during fiscal years beginning after June 15, 2005. As such, we will adopt the provisions of FASB Statement No. 151 in the first quarter of 2006. We do not expect this to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. In December 2004, the FASB issued Statement No. 123R, "Share-Based Payment," which is a revision of FASB Statement No. 123, "Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation" and supersedes APB Opinion No. 25, "Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees" and FASB Statement No. 148, "Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation Transition and Disclosure." FASB Statement No. 123R requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the financial statements based on their fair values. FASB Statement No. 123R is effective for the first annual period beginning after June 15, 2005. As such, we will adopt the requirements of FASB Statement No. 123R on a prospective basis beginning in the first quarter of 2006. We estimate that adoption of FASB Statement No. 123R in 2006 will decrease our full year 2006 net income per diluted common share by approximately $0.10 to $0.11, dependent, in part, on the timing and amount of any future stock option grants. In October 2005, the FASB issued Staff Position No. FAS 13-1, "Accounting for Rental Costs Incurred During a Construction Period." FASB Staff Position No. FAS 13-1 requires that rental costs associated with operating leases that are incurred during a construction period be recognized as rental expense and allocated over the lease term in accordance with the guidance in FASB Statement No. 13, "Accounting for Leases," and FASB Technical Bulletin No. 85-3, "Accounting for Operating Leases with Scheduled Rent Increases." FASB Staff Position No. FAS 13-1 is effective with reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2005. As such, we will adopt the provisions of FASB staff position No. FAS 13-1 in the first quarter of 2006. We do not expect this to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. 39 CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES Our consolidated financial statements are based on the selection and application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. We believe that the following are the more critical judgmental areas in the application of our accounting policies that currently affect our financial position and results of operations: Sales allowances and returns We have arrangements with many of our department and specialty store customers to support their sales of our products. We establish accruals which, based on a review of the individual customer arrangements and the expected performance of our products in their stores, we believe will be required to satisfy our sales allowance obligations. We also establish accruals, which are partly based on historical data, that we believe are necessary to provide for inventory returns. It is possible that the accrual estimates could vary from actual results, which would require adjustment to the allowance and returns accruals. Inventories Inventories related to our wholesale operations, comprised principally of finished goods, are stated at the lower of cost or market. Inventories related to our retail operations, comprised entirely of finished goods, are valued at the lower of average cost or market using the retail inventory method. Under the retail inventory method, the valuation of inventories at cost is calculated by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the retail value inventories. Permanent and point of sale markdowns, when recorded, reduce both the retail and cost components of inventory on hand so as to maintain the already established cost-to-retail relationship. Based on a review of current business trends, inventory agings and discontinued merchandise categories, a further adjustment to inventory is recorded to reflect additional markdowns which are estimated to be necessary to liquidate existing clearance inventories and reduce inventories to the lower of cost or market. We believe that all inventory writedowns required at January 29, 2006 have been recorded. If market conditions were to change, it is possible that the required level of inventory reserves would need to be adjusted. Asset impairments In each of the last three years, we determined that the long-lived assets in various retail outlet stores and certain other locations were not recoverable, which resulted in us recording impairment charges. In order to calculate the impairment charges, we estimated the related undiscounted future cash flows and the fair value of each asset. The undiscounted future cash flows for each asset were estimated using current sales trends and other assumptions. If different assumptions had been used for future sales trends, the number of assets resulting in impairment could have been significantly higher or lower. Note 14, "Activity Exit Costs and Asset Impairments," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further discussion of the circumstances surrounding the impairments and the assumptions related to the impairment charges. Allowance for doubtful accounts Accounts receivable as shown on our Consolidated Balance Sheets is net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. An allowance for doubtful accounts is determined through an analysis of the aging of accounts receivable and assessments of collectibility based on historic trends, the financial position of our customers and an evaluation of economic conditions. Any significant changes to the above factors could impact our financial position and results of operations. Income taxes We have deferred tax assets related to tax loss and credit carryforwards which begin to expire principally in 2010. Realization of these carryforwards is primarily dependent upon the achievement of future taxable income. Based on the expiration dates and projections of future taxable income, we have determined that realization of certain of these assets relating to state net operating loss carryforwards is not likely. If future conditions require a change in judgment as to realization, it is possible that material adjustments to these deferred tax assets may be required. Additionally, we are subject to examination of our income tax returns for multiple years by the Internal Revenue Service 40 and other tax authorities. We periodically assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the impact on our deferred taxes and income tax liabilities. Based on our assessments, we establish reserves for those amounts that we deem will result in future liabilities related to these examinations. If the actual outcomes resulting from these examinations vary from our expectations, adjustments to the reserves could be required. Goodwill and other intangible assets Goodwill and other indefinitely lived intangible assets are tested for impairment based on fair value. These tests are performed annually, and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. An impairment loss could have a material adverse impact on our financial position and results of operations. Performance of the goodwill impairment tests requires significant judgments regarding the allocation of net assets to the reporting unit level, which is the level at which the impairment tests are required. The determination of whether an impairment exists also depends on, among other factors, the estimated fair value of the reporting units, which itself depends in part on market conditions. Medical claims accrual We self-insure a significant portion of our employee medical costs. Based on trends and the number of covered employees, we record estimates of medical claims which have been incurred but not paid. Although our claims experience has not displayed substantial volatility in the past, actual experience could materially vary from our past trends in the future, which could require an adjustment to the medical claims accrual. Pension benefits Included in the calculations of expense and liability for our pension plans are various assumptions, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. Note 8, "Retirement and Benefit Plans," in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report sets forth the significant rate assumptions used in performing certain calculations related to our pension plans. Based on these assumptions, and due in large part to decreases in discount rates and the poor performance of United States equity markets in recent years, we have significant unrecognized costs for our pension plans. Depending on future asset performance and discount rates, such costs could be required to be amortized in the future which could have a material effect on future pension expense. We are currently estimating that our 2006 pension expense will be approximately $5.0 million lower than our 2005 pension expense. 
