CIK: 78239
Company Name: PHILLIPS VAN HEUSEN CORP DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2009-04-01


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations References to the brand names Calvin Klein Collection, ck Calvin Klein, Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, Eagle, Bass, Geoffrey Beene, ARROW, BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, CHAPS, Sean John, Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, DKNY, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Ike Behar, Jones New York, J. Garcia, Claiborne, Timberland and to other brand names are to registered trademarks owned by us or licensed to us by third parties and are identified by italicizing the brand name. Our fiscal years are based on the 52-53 week period ending on the Sunday closest to February 1 and are designated by the calendar year in which the fiscal year commences. References to a year are to our fiscal year, unless the context requires otherwise. Our 2008 year commenced on February 4, 2008 and ended on February 1, 2009; 2007 commenced on February 5, 2007 and ended on February 3, 2008; 2006 commenced on January 30, 2006 and ended on February 4, 2007. References to the BVH acquisition refer to our October 2008 acquisition from The British Van Heusen Company Limited, a former licensee of Van Heusen men dresswear and accessories in the United Kingdom and Ireland, and one of its affiliates of certain assets (including inventories) of the licensed business. We refer to The British Van Heusen Company Limited and its affiliate together as BVH. References to the Mulberry acquisition refer to our April 2008 acquisition of certain assets (including certain trademark licenses, inventories and receivables) of Mulberry Thai Silks, Inc., a manufacturer and distributor of branded neckwear in the United States, which we refer to as Mulberry. References to our acquisition of CMI refer to our January 2008 acquisition from Warnaco, Inc. ( Warnaco ) of Confezioni Moda Italia S.r.L., which we refer to as CMI. CMI is the licensee of the Calvin Klein Collection apparel and accessories businesses under agreements with our Calvin Klein, Inc. subsidiary. References to the Superba acquisition refer to our January 2007 acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Superba, Inc., a manufacturer and distributor of neckwear in the United States and Canada, which we refer to as Superba. References to our acquisition of Arrow refer to our December 2004 acquisition of Cluett Peabody Resources Corporation and Cluett Peabody & Co., Inc., which companies we refer to collectively as Arrow. References to our acquisition of Calvin Klein refer to our February 2003 acquisition of Calvin Klein, Inc. and certain affiliated companies, which companies we refer to collectively as Calvin Klein. 25 OVERVIEW The following discussion and analysis is intended to help you understand us, our operations and our financial performance. It should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes, which are included elsewhere in this report. We are one of the largest apparel companies in the world, with a heritage dating back over 125 years. Our brand portfolio consists of nationally recognized brand names, including Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, ARROW, Bass and Eagle, which are owned, and Geoffrey Beene, Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, Sean John, CHAPS, Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, DKNY, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Ike Behar, J. Garcia, Claiborne, Jones New York and Timberland, which are licensed. We faced a very challenging environment during 2008. The global economic crisis began early in 2008 in the United States, affecting the principal market for our heritage businesses. The crisis deepened and became more widespread, affecting travel and foreign currency exchange rates, as well as consumer confidence and spending. This resulted in further deterioration of our heritage businesses and interrupted the growth trajectory of our Calvin Klein businesses. We announced during the fourth quarter of 2008 a series of actions we are undertaking to respond to these economic conditions, including restructuring certain of our operations and implementing a number of other cost reduction efforts. The restructuring initiatives include the shutdown of domestic production of machine-made neckwear, a realignment of our global sourcing organizational structure and reductions in warehousing capacity, all of which have headcount reductions associated w ith them, as well as other initiatives to reduce corporate and administrative expenses. In addition, during 2008, we recorded fixed asset impairments for approximately 200 retail stores. Earlier in 2008, we had announced that we would not renew our license agreements to operate Geoffrey Beene outlet retail stores and we executed our plan to close our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division before the end of 2008. Revenue grew to record levels and we generated a significant amount of net income and cash flow despite the difficulties that existed throughout 2008. We believe that our historical business strategy is the driving force which allows us to achieve these results in difficult economic times. Our strategy is to manage and market a portfolio of nationally recognized brands at multiple price points and across multiple channels of distribution. We believe this strategy reduces our reliance on any one demographic group, merchandise preference or distribution channel. We have enhanced this strategy by expanding our portfolio of brands through acquisitions of well-known brands, such as Calvin Klein and ARROW , that offer additional distribution channel and price point opportunities in our traditional categories of dress shirts and sportswear. These acquisitions also enhanced our business strategy by providing us with established interna tional licensing businesses which do not require working capital investments. We have successfully pursued growth opportunities in extending these brands through licensing into additional product categories and geographic areas. The Superba and Mulberry acquisitions helped to advance our historical strategy by adding a product category that is complementary to our heritage dress shirt business and leverages our position in dress furnishings. Our business strategy was also extended by our assumption in 2007 of the wholesale IZOD women sportswear collection, which was previously a licensed business. Further, in the second quarter of 2008, we began marketing men sportswear under the Timberland brand in North America under a licensing arrangement with The Timberland Company. Timberland is an authentic outdoor traditional brand targeted to the department and specialty store channels of distribution that we believe has a unique positioning that complements our existing portfolio of sportswear brands and enables us to reach a broader spectrum of consumers. A significant portion of our total income before interest and taxes is derived from international sources, primarily driven by the international component of our Calvin Klein licensing business. We intend to continue to expand our operations globally through direct marketing by us and through partnerships with licensees. We recently expanded our international operations to include sales of certain of our products to department and specialty stores throughout Canada and parts of Europe, including through the recent BVH acquisition that provided us with a wholesale distribution component, and a limited number of retail stores, principally for Van Heusen dress furnishings, in the United Kingdom and Ireland. We have also entered into many license agreements with partners across the globe for our brands. Despite the challenges that 2008 presented, we further strengthened our balance sheet in 2008 by recording positive cash flow to end the year with $328 million in cash, an increase of $58 million from the prior year after making a voluntary pension contribution of $25 million. We have no debt maturities until 2011 and no short term borrowings, and we have significant availability under our revolving credit facility which does not expire until mid-2012. 26 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Operations Overview We generate net sales from (i) the wholesale distribution of men dress shirts, men sportswear, neckwear (beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006) and women sportswear (beginning in the second quarter of 2007); and (ii) the sale, through over 650 company-operated retail locations, of apparel, footwear and accessories under the brand names Van Heusen, IZOD, Bass and Calvin Klein . In addition, into the fourth quarter of 2008, we operated retail stores under the brand name Geoffrey Beene . Our stores principally operate in outlet centers in the United States. We also operate a full price store located in New York City under the Calvin Klein Collection brand, in which we principally sell men and women high-end collection apparel and accessories, soft home furnishings and tableware. We began opening and operating in the third quarter of 2007 a limited number of specialty retail stores in premier malls in the United States under the Calvin Klein brand. As of the end of 2008, we operated 10 of these stores. Additionally, in connection with our acquisition of BVH, we assumed the operation of 10 retail stores located in the United Kingdom and Ireland that principally market Van Heusen brand dress furnishings. We announced in the second quarter of 2008 our plan to close our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division. The Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division, which operated approximately 100 stores at the time of the announcement, ceased operations before the end of 2008. Approximately 20 of the Geoffrey Beene store locations have been or are in the process of being converted, substantially all to the Calvin Klein outlet retail format. We have recorded pre-tax charges in 2008 that totaled approximately $18 million, of which approximately $7 million related to non-cash asset impairments and approximately $11 million related to inventory liquidations, lease terminations, severance and other costs in connection with the closure of the division. We announced in the fourth quarter of 2008 a series of actions to respond to the current economic conditions by restructuring certain of our operations and implementing a number of other cost reduction efforts. We have recorded pre-tax charges in 2008 that totaled approximately $82 million, of which approximately $64 million related to non-cash asset impairments and approximately $18 million related to lease terminations, severance and other costs in connection with these restructuring initiatives implemented in the fourth quarter. We expect to incur additional charges of approximately $10 million in 2009 in connection with these initiatives. We generate royalty, advertising and other revenue from fees for licensing the use of our trademarks. Calvin Klein royalty, advertising and other revenue, which comprised 91% of total royalty, advertising and other revenue in 2008, is derived under licenses and other arrangements for a broad array of products, including jeans, underwear, fragrances, eyewear, watches and home furnishings. Gross profit on total revenue is total revenue less cost of goods sold. Included as cost of goods sold are costs associated with the production and procurement of product, including inbound freight costs, purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, internal transfer costs and other product procurement related charges. Because there is no cost of goods sold associated with royalty, advertising and other revenue, 100% of such revenue is included in gross profit. As a result, our gross profit may not be comparable to that of other entities. Selling, general and administrative expenses include all other expenses, excluding interest and income taxes. Salaries and related fringe benefits is the largest component of selling, general and administrative expenses, comprising 42% of such expenses in 2008. Rent and occupancy for offices, warehouses and retail stores is the next largest expense, comprising 21% of selling, general and administrative expenses in 2008. 27 The following table summarizes our results of operations in 2008, 2007 and 2006: 2008 2007 2006 (dollars in millions, except per share amounts) Net sales $2,160.7 $2,127.7 $1,849.2 Royalty revenue 236.6 214.4 182.3 Advertising and other revenue 94.7 83.0 59.1 Total revenue 2,491.9 2,425.2 2,090.6 Gross profit 1,200.7 1,191.0 1,029.9 % of total revenue 48.2% 49.1% 49.3% Selling, general and administrative expenses 1,028.8 882.5 796.6 % of total revenue 41.3% 36.4% 38.1% Gain on sale of investments, net 1.9 3.3 32.0 Income before interest and taxes 173.7 311.8 265.3 Interest expense 33.6 33.8 34.3 Interest income 6.2 16.7 17.4 Income before taxes 146.3 294.8 248.4 Income tax expense 54.5 111.5 93.2 Net income $ 91.8 $ 183.3 $ 155.2 Diluted net income per common share $ 1.76 $ 3.21 $ 2.64 Net Sales Our net sales in 2008 increased to $2,160.7 million from $2,127.7 million in 2007 and $1,849.2 million in 2006. The 2008 net sales increase of $33.0 million over 2007 net sales included the net effect of the items described below: The addition of $25.3 million of net sales attributable to our acquisition of CMI. The addition of $10.1 million of net sales attributable to growth in our retail segments. This was primarily driven by the opening of Calvin Klein retail stores located in premier malls and outlet centers in the United States, partially offset by decreases due principally to (i) comparable store sales declines of 5% resulting from the overall weak retail environment; and (ii) our closing of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division, which was completed during the fourth quarter of 2008. The reduction of $5.5 million of net sales attributable to declines in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment. This was comprised of decreases in our heritage brand wholesale sportswear businesses resulting from the difficult economic environment, which were mostly offset by increases resulting from the launch of our Timberland wholesale men sportswear business in the second quarter of 2008, a full year of sales of our IZOD women sportswear line, which began shipping late in the second quarter of 2007, and growth in our Calvin Klein men sportswear business. The addition of $3.1 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment. The 2007 net sales increase of $278.5 million over 2006 net sales was due to the net effect of the items described below: The addition of $153.2 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment. This was primarily driven by the addition of sales from the Superba acquisition. 28 The addition of $73.3 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment. This was primarily driven by the addition of sales associated with our assumption of the IZOD women sportswear line, which began shipping late in the second quarter of 2007, as well as growth in our Calvin Klein men sportswear business. The addition of $52.0 million of net sales attributable to growth in our retail segments. This was primarily driven by the opening of Calvin Klein and other outlet retail stores. Given the overall negative economic environment and our exit in 2008 of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail business, we currently estimate our 2009 full year sales to decrease 7% to 8%. Royalty, Advertising and Other Revenue Royalty, advertising and other revenue increases over the prior year were $33.8 million and $56.0 million in 2008 and 2007, respectively. These increases were primarily attributable to our Calvin Klein Licensing segment. Approximately 92% of the growth in Calvin Klein royalty, advertising and other revenue in 2008 was attributable to growth from existing licenses, with the remaining 8% generated through new licenses. The growth from existing licenses was due to strong performance across virtually all product categories, with particular strength in jeans and underwear, partially offset by a decrease in the fragrance business, which was particularly affected by reductions in travel and discretionary spending resulting from the difficult economic environment. The increase in 2007 as compared to the prior year was due, in part, to continued strength in fragrances, due to the successful launches of the men and women ck IN2U fragrance lines and the Calvin Klein MAN fragrance line, as well as continued strength in sales of both the men and women euphoria fragrance lines. In addition, jeans and underwear experienced significant international and domestic growth in 2007 which, combined with the success of licensed product categories that, at the time had been recently launched, further contributed to the revenue increase. We currently expect that royalty, advertising and other revenue will remain relatively flat in our Calvin Klein Licensing segment in 2009, as anticipated global licensee sales growth in local currency is expected to be offset by the negative impact of a stronger U.S. dollar. Royalty, advertising and other revenue in our other segments is expected to decrease approximately 6% in 2009 as a result of taking certain heritage licensed businesses in-house, combined with the impact on our licensees of the overall negative economic environment. Royalty, advertising and other revenue is expected to decrease approximately 1% in total in 2009. Gross Profit on Total Revenue The following table shows our revenue mix between net sales and royalty, advertising and other revenue, as well as our gross profit as a percentage of total revenue for 2008, 2007 and 2006: 2008 2007 2006 Components of revenue: Net sales 86.7% 87.7% 88.4% Royalty, advertising and other revenue 13.3 % 12.3 % 11.6 % Total 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Gross profit as a % of total revenue 48.2 % 49.1 % 49.3 % Gross profit as a percentage of total revenue decreased 90 basis points in 2008, due principally to the net effect of the items described below: An increase due to a change in revenue mix, as royalty, advertising and other revenue, which does not carry a cost of sales and has a gross profit percentage of 100%, increased as a percentage of total revenue. A decrease due to increased promotional selling in our heritage brand outlet retail businesses during the first nine months of the year due to the negative effect of the overall weak retail environment, combined with even greater promotional selling across all of our divisions during the holiday season. A decrease due to inventory liquidation markdowns associated with the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division, which resulted in a 20 basis point reduction in gross margin. 29 Gross profit as a percentage of total revenue decreased 20 basis points in 2007, due principally to the net effect of the items described below: An increase due to strong product sell-throughs in our wholesale dress shirt business throughout the year and in our outlet retail business during the first half of the year, which yielded more full-price selling. An increase due to a change in revenue mix, as royalty, advertising and other revenue, which does not carry a cost of sales and has a gross profit percentage of 100%, increased as a percentage of total revenue. A decrease due to a change in sales mix, as net sales attributable to our wholesale businesses, which typically have lower gross margins than our retail businesses, increased as a percentage of our total net sales, due to faster sales growth in our wholesale businesses, partially resulting from the addition of sales associated with our neckwear and Izod women sportswear businesses which we added in the fourth quarter of 2006 and the second quarter of 2007, respectively. A decrease due to increased promotional selling in our wholesale sportswear business, which was negatively affected throughout the year by the overall weak retail environment and by the unseasonably warm weather that was experienced in much of the United States during September and October of 2007. We currently expect that the gross profit on total revenue percentage will decrease in 2009 as compared with 2008 due principally to increased promotional selling resulting from the overall difficult economic environment. Selling, General and Administrative ( SG&A ) Expenses Our SG&A expenses were as follows: 2008 2007 2006 (dollars in millions) SG&A expenses $1,028.8 $882.5 $796.6 % of total revenue 41.3% 36.4% 38.1% SG&A expenses in 2008 were $1,028.8 million, or 41.3% of total revenue, compared to $882.5 million, or 36.4% of total revenue, in 2007. The 490 basis point increase includes 380 basis points related to fixed asset impairments, lease termination, severance and other costs associated with the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division, our fourth quarter restructuring initiatives mentioned previously and other asset impairments. The remaining 110 basis point increase was due principally to SG&A expenses associated with the opening of Calvin Klein specialty retail stores in premier malls in the United States and expenses associated with the continued opening of Calvin Klein outlet retail stores, combined with the deleveraging of expenses due to the sales decreases mentioned previously. The $146.3 million increase in SG&A expenses in 2008 included: (i) expenses related to fixed asset impairments, lease termination, severance and other costs associated with the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division, our fourth quarter restructuring initiatives mentioned previously and other asset impairments of $94.2 million; (ii) increased expenses of $40.0 million in our retail segments principally related to the continued opening of Calvin Klein specialty retail stores located in premier malls in the United States and the continued opening of Calvin Klein outlet retail stores; (iii) operating expenses of $13.0 million related to our acquisition of CMI; (iv) increased expenses of $12.3 million in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment due principally to additional SG&A associated with the Mulberry and BVH businesses subsequent to these acquisitions; (v) increased expenses of approximately $7.1 million associated with our new Timberland wholesale men sportswear business; and (vi) an increase in advertising expenditures of $2.5 million. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease in incentive compensation costs of $22.1 million. SG&A expenses in 2007 were $882.5 million, or 36.4% of total revenue, compared to $796.6 million, or 38.1% of total revenue, in 2006. The 170 basis point decrease was due principally to the growth in our wholesale businesses mentioned above, as our wholesale businesses typically have lower expense rates than our retail businesses. The $85.9 million increase in SG&A expenses in 2007 included: (i) additional expenses of approximately $33.0 million related to operating our neckwear business subsequent to the completion of the Superba acquisition; (ii) increased expenses of $25.8 million in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment and our retail segments principally to support the sales growth previously mentioned; (iii) an increase in advertising expenditures of $19.9 million; and (iv) start-up costs of approximately $15.0 million associated with our Timberland wholesale sportswear business and the opening of Calvin Kle in specialty retail stores in premier malls in the United States. Also impacting the change in SG&A expenses for 2007 compared to the prior 30 year was the absence of costs incurred in 2006 of: (i) $11.3 million associated with the closing of our manufacturing facility in Ozark, Alabama in May 2006; and (ii) $10.5 million in severance and other separation costs associated with the departure in February 2006 of a former chief executive officer. Our 2009 SG&A expenses in dollars are currently expected to decrease compared to 2008 principally as a result of a reduction in costs associated with restructuring initiatives and impairments. SG&A expenses for 2009 as a percentage of total revenue is also expected to decrease, as this reduction in costs associated with restructuring initiatives and impairments is expected to more than offset the impact of the deleveraging of expenses due to the anticipated sales decrease mentioned previously. The dollar amount of SG&A expenses, excluding the costs associated with restructuring initiatives and impairments, is expected to remain relatively flat compared to 2008, as additional expenses associated with the opening of additional Calvin Klein outlet retail stores is expected to be offset by the realization of savings resulting from our restructuring initiatives. Gain on Sale of Investments We sold, in the first quarter of 2006, minority interests held by one of our subsidiaries in certain entities that operate the licenses and related wholesale and retail businesses of Calvin Klein jeans and accessories in Europe and Asia and the ck Calvin Klein bridge line of sportswear and accessories in Europe. The sale resulted in a pre-tax gain of $32.0 million in 2006, which was net of related fees, an amount held in escrow and the carrying value of the investments. Our share of the proceeds held in escrow represented security for indemnification of certain potential losses incurred by the purchaser, as well as other adjustments to the purchase price. During 2007, $3.3 million was released to us from escrow. We received in 2008 a distribution of $1.9 million representing our share of the amount that remained in escrow. We recorded these amounts as gains in each of the respective years. Interest Expense and Interest Income The majority of our interest expense relates to our fixed rate long-term debt. As a result, variances in our net interest expense tend to be driven by changes in interest income and, to a lesser extent, costs related to our revolving credit facility. Interest expense of $33.6 million in 2008 was relatively flat to the 2007 and 2006 amounts of $33.8 million and $34.3 million, respectively. Interest income decreased to $6.2 million in 2008 from $16.7 million in 2007. This decrease was due principally to a decrease in our average cash position in 2008 as a result of the completion of our $200.0 million stock repurchase in the fourth quarter of 2007, combined with a decrease in average investment rates of return compared to the prior year. Interest income decreased to $16.7 million in 2007 from $17.4 million in 2006. The interest income decline was due principally to a decrease in our cash position in the fourth quarter of 2007 as a result of the completion of our $200.0 million stock repurchase. Interest expense is expected to be relatively flat in 2009 as compared with 2008, while interest income is expected to decrease due principally to a decrease in average investment rates of return, partially offset by an increase in our average cash position during the year. Income Taxes Income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income was as follows: 2008 2007 2006 37.3% 37.8% 37.5% We adopted the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 ( FIN 48 ) in the first quarter of 2007. Under FIN 48, volatility in our tax rate may occur in the future, either from quarter to quarter, or from year to year, due to events or new information that causes us to re-evaluate our unrecognized tax benefits. Income taxes decreased by $57.0 million to $54.5 million in 2008 from $111.5 million in 2007. The decrease was primarily due to a decrease in income before taxes in 2008 compared to 2007 and also resulted from a reduction in our effective tax rate for 2008. The decline in our effective tax rate for 2008 was due to discrete items, principally related to state net operating loss carryforward valuation allowance adjustments recorded in 2008. 31 We currently anticipate that our 2009 tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income will be between 37.0% and 37.5%. It is possible that our estimated full year rate could change from discrete events arising from specific transactions, audits by tax authorities or the receipt of new information. Net Income per Common Share Our calculation of net income per common share in 2006 was impacted by the voluntary conversion in May 2006 of all of the remaining outstanding shares of our Series B convertible preferred stock by the holders of such stock into shares of our common stock. The holders sold the majority of such shares in a registered common stock offering. We made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $0.88 for each share of common stock received upon conversion, or an aggregate of $10.2 million, and incurred certain costs, totaling $0.7 million in connection with these transactions. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it was estimated that we would have had the right to convert the convertible preferred stock, net of the net present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the convertible preferred stock was convertible. The aggregate $10.9 million inducement payment and offering costs was treated similar to a preferred stock dividend and attributed to the convertible preferred stock for purposes of our net income per common share calculation in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Note 17, Net Income per Common Share, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further explanation and the calculations of basic and diluted net income per common share. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Generally, our principal source of cash is from operations, and our principal uses of cash are for capital expenditures, contingent purchase price payments and dividends. Additionally, in 2007 we utilized $200.0 million of cash to repurchase approximately 5.2 million shares of our common stock. Operations Cash provided by operating activities was $238.7 million in 2008, which compares with $219.3 million in 2007. Net income adjusted for depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, deferred taxes, impairments and the gains on the sale of investments decreased $32.5 million, but was more than offset by changes in working capital, including the following: An increase in cash resulting from lower inventories due to (i) the closing of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail business; and (ii) the anticipated sales decrease in the first quarter of 2009 as compared to the first quarter of 2008 attributable to the difficult economic environment. An increase in cash due to the $38.5 million paid to us in connection with our acquisition of CMI. We acquired 100% of the issued and outstanding shares of CMI from Warnaco on January 30, 2008. Warnaco acquired the shares of CMI in January 2008 and was obligated to operate the Calvin Klein Collection businesses through 2013. In return for us assuming ownership of CMI, Warnaco made a payment of $38.5 million to us in the first quarter of 2008. Please see Note 3, Acquisition of CMI, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion. A decrease in cash resulting from a change in current liabilities and other, net due principally to (i) a $25.0 million voluntary pension contribution made during the fourth quarter of 2008; (ii) the timing and amounts of inventory payments in our sportswear and retail businesses; and (iii) a significant reduction in accruals for incentive compensation for 2008, combined with payments of incentive compensation expenses that were incurred in the fourth quarter of 2007 and paid in the first quarter of 2008. Included in the change in other, net for 2008 as compared to the prior year was the reclassification of approximately $30.0 million from other liabilities to accrued expenses, as these liabilities are expected to be relieved within the next year. This had no impact on cash provided by operating activities for 2008. Capital Expenditures Our capital expenditures in 2008 were $88.1 million compared to $94.7 million expended in 2007. We currently expect capital expenditures in 2009 to be approximately $40.0 million. 32 Contingent Purchase Price Payments In connection with our acquisition of Calvin Klein, we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein contingent purchase price payments based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales, as defined in the agreement governing the Calvin Klein acquisition, of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands with respect to sales made during the first 15 years following the closing of the acquisition. A significant portion of the sales on which the payments to Mr. Klein are made are wholesale sales by us and our licensees and other business partners to retailers. Such contingent purchase price payments totaled $40.8 million in 2008. We currently expect that such payments will be relatively flat in 2009. In connection with the Superba acquisition, we are obligated to pay Superba contingent purchase price payments if the earnings of the acquired business exceed certain targets in 2007, 2008 and 2009. Any such contingent purchase price payments would be payable 90 days after the applicable fiscal year end. Such contingent purchase price payments totaled $14.5 million in the first quarter of 2008 based on the calculation of 2007 earnings, as defined in the underlying asset purchase agreement, achieved by the acquired business. Superba did not achieve the minimum earnings in 2008 required for a payout in 2009. The maximum payout that Superba can receive with respect to 2009 earnings is $30.0 million. We currently anticipate that no payment will be made in 2010 with respect to 2009 earnings. Acquisition of CMI We acquired CMI from Warnaco on January 30, 2008. CMI is the licensee of the Calvin Klein Collection apparel and accessories businesses under agreements with our Calvin Klein, Inc. subsidiary. Warnaco acquired the shares of CMI in January 2008 and was obligated to operate the Calvin Klein Collection businesses through 2013. In return for us assuming ownership of CMI, Warnaco made a payment of $38.5 million to us in the first quarter of 2008. As part of this transaction, we paid to Warnaco $17.1 million in the first quarter of 2008 based on a percentage of Warnaco estimate of the net working capital of CMI as of the closing date. This amount is subject to adjustment. During 2008, we adjusted the preliminary allocation of the purchase price based on our calculation of the working capital of CMI as of the closing date. Pursuant to the process set forth in the amended acquisition agreement, we submitted our calculation of the clos ing date working capital to Warnaco and Warnaco has disputed the calculation. We are in discussion with Warnaco to resolve the disputed calculation. Our results in 2009 could be impacted depending on the outcome of these discussions. Please see Note 3, Acquisition of CMI, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion. Acquisition of Mulberry We completed the Mulberry acquisition in the first quarter of 2008. We acquired certain assets (including certain trademark licenses, inventories and receivables) and the rights to produce and market neckwear under the Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, J. Garcia, Claiborne, Sean John, BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, U.S. POLO ASSN . and Axcess brands in connection with this transaction. We paid $11.3 million, including transaction expenses, during 2008 in connection with the acquisition. Please see Note 4, Acquisition of Mulberry Assets, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion. Acquisition of BVH We completed the BVH acquisition in the third quarter of 2008. As part of this transaction, we acquired certain assets (including inventories) of the licensed Van Heusen men dresswear and accessories business in the United Kingdom and Ireland. We paid $6.6 million, including transaction expenses, during 2008 in connection with this acquisition. Please see Note 5, Acquisition of BVH Assets, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion. Dividends Our common stock, which as of February 1, 2009 is the only class of stock outstanding, currently pays annual dividends totaling $0.15 per share. Cash dividends on our common stock totaled $7.8 million for the full year 2008. We project that cash dividends on our common stock in 2009 will be approximately $7.8 million to $7.9 million based on our current dividend rate, the number of shares of our common stock outstanding at February 1, 2009 and our estimates of stock to be issued in 2009 under our stock incentive plans. 33 Cash Flow Summary Our net cash flow in 2008 was $58.3 million. Cash flow in 2009 will be impacted by various other factors in addition to those noted above in this Liquidity and Capital Resources section. We currently expect to generate approximately $65.0 million to $75.0 million of cash flow in 2009 after making cash payments for severance, lease termination and other costs in connection with our restructuring initiatives. There can be no assurance that this estimate will prove to be accurate. Unforeseen events, including changes in our net income, working capital requirements or other items, including acquisitions and equity transactions, could occur, which could cause our cash flow to vary significantly from this estimate. Financing Arrangements Our capital structure as of February 1, 2009 was as follows: (in millions) Long-term debt $399.6 Stockholders equity $998.8 We believe our capital structure provides a secure base to support our current operations and our planned growth in the future. There are no maturities of our long-term debt until 2011. For near-term liquidity, in addition to our cash balance, we have a $325.0 million secured revolving credit facility with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. as the Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent that expires in July 2012 and provides for revolving credit borrowings, as well as the issuance of letters of credit. We may, at our option, borrow and repay amounts up to a maximum of $325.0 million for revolving credit borrowings and the issuance of letters of credit, which may be increased by us under certain conditions by up to $100.0 million, with a sublimit of $50.0 million for standby letters of credit and with no sublimit on trade letters of credit. Based on our working capital projections, we believe that our borrowing capacity under this facility provides us with adequate liquidity for our peak seasonal needs for the foreseeable future. During 2008, we had no revolving credit borrowings under the facility, and the maximum amount of letters of credit outstanding was $148.1 million. As of February 1, 2009, we had $116.2 million of outstanding letters of credit under this facility. We currently do not expect to have any revolving credit borrowings under the facility in 2009. All obligations under the secured revolving credit facility are secured by liens on substantially all of our assets and the assets of our domestic subsidiaries and a pledge of all of the equity interests in all of our domestic subsidiaries. Our secured revolving credit facility requires us to maintain certain financial covenants, including a minimum level of availability under the secured revolving credit facility. If such minimum level is not maintained, we are then required to maintain a minimum ratio of (i) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and rent (EBITDAR) less capital expenditures paid in cash; cash dividends and cash distributions; Federal, state, local and foreign income taxes paid in cash; and management fees paid during the period to (ii) fixed charge expense for the period, which consists of principal payments of debt, cash interest expense and rent expense (as such terms are defined in the se cured revolving credit facility). Our secured revolving credit facility also contains covenants that, subject to specified exceptions, may restrict or limit our ability to: sell or dispose of assets, including equity interests; make loans, advances or guarantees; make investments; declare and pay dividends; engage in transactions with affiliates; incur additional debt, prepay or modify existing debt; incur liens; 34 engage in businesses that are not in a related line of business; and merge with or acquire other companies, liquidate or dissolve. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under our secured revolving credit facility, the lenders may cease making loans, terminate the secured revolving credit facility and declare all amounts outstanding to be immediately due and payable. The secured revolving credit facility specifies a number of events of default (many of which are subject to applicable grace periods), including, among others, the failure to make timely principal and interest payments or to satisfy the covenants, including the financial covenants described above. In addition, we are subject to similar covenants and restrictions in connection with our long-term debt agreements. As of February 1, 2009, we were in compliance with all financial and non-financial covenants. During 2008, both Standard & Poor and Moody maintained our corporate credit ratings at BBB- with a stable outlook and a Ba2 with a positive outlook, respectively. Our credit ratings contribute to our ability to access the credit markets. Notwithstanding our credit ratings, the current global credit crisis and economic slowdown creates greater uncertainty than in the past with regard to financing opportunities and the cost of such financing. Given our capital structure and our projections for future profitability and cash flow, we believe we are well positioned to obtain additional financing, if necessary, for refinancing our long-term debt, or, if opportunities present themselves, future acquisitions. Although we believe we could obtain such financing, due to the current state of credit markets, such financing, if undertaken, would likely be at significantly higher costs and potentially more restrictive terms than our current borrowings. As a result, there can be no assurance that such financing, if needed, could be obtained on terms satisfactory to us or be obtained at such time as a specific need may arise. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes, as of February 1, 2009, our contractual cash obligations by future period: Payments Due by Period Description Total Obligations 2009 2010-2011 2012-2013 Thereafter (in millions) Long-term debt (1) $ 400.0 $ - $150.0 $150.0 $100.0 Interest payments on long-term debt (1) 188.5 30.8 51.2 30.6 75.9 Operating leases (2) 633.4 109.3 176.4 122.7 225.0 Inventory purchase commitments (3) 257.4 257.4 - - - Minimum contractual royalty payments (4) 66.6 20.5 30.7 15.4 - Non-qualified supplemental defined benefit plan (5) 24.2 1.3 3.0 3.4 16.5 Severance payments (6) 12.6 11.6 1.0 - - Total contractual cash obligations $1,582.7 $430.9 $412.3 $322.1 $417.4 (1) We issued $150.0 million of 7 1/4% senior unsecured notes due 2011 on February 28, 2004, $150.0 million of 8 1/8% senior unsecured notes due 2013 on May 5, 2003 and $100.0 million of 7 3/4% debentures due 2023 on November 15, 1993. Interest on each of these securities is payable semi-annually. (2) Includes store operating leases, which generally provide for payment of direct operating costs in addition to rent. The obligation amounts listed include future minimum lease payments and exclude such direct operating costs. (3) Represents contractual commitments for goods on order and not received as of February 1, 2009. Substantially all of these goods are expected to be received and the related payments are expected to be made within six months of our fiscal year end. (4) Our minimum contractual royalty payments arise under numerous license agreements we have with third parties, each of which has different royalty rates and terms. Agreements typically require us to make minimum payments to the licensors of the licensed trademarks based on expected or required minimum levels of sales of licensed products, as well as additional royalty payments when our sales exceed such minimum sales. Certain of our license agreements require that we pay a specified percentage of net sales to the licensor for advertising and promotion of the licensed products, with no minimum 35 amount required to be paid. These amounts, as well as any advertising spending requirements, are excluded from the minimum contractual royalty payments shown in the table. There is no guarantee that we will exceed the minimum payments under any of these license agreements. However, given our projected sales levels for products covered under these agreements, we currently anticipate that future payments required under our license agreements on an aggregate basis will exceed the contractual minimums shown in the table. (5) We have an unfunded non-qualified supplemental defined benefit plan covering six current and 16 retired executives under which the participants will receive a predetermined amount during the 10 years following the attainment of age 65, provided that prior to the termination of employment with us, the participant has been in such plan for at least 10 years and has attained age 55. (6) Represents severance payment obligations primarily related to our fourth quarter of 2008 restructuring initiatives and the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division during 2008. Not included in the above table are contingent purchase price payments we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales, as defined in the agreement governing the Calvin Klein acquisition, of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands with respect to sales made during the first 15 years following the closing of the acquisition. A significant portion of the sales on which the payments to Mr. Klein are made are wholesale sales by the Company and its licensees and other licensing partners to retailers. Such contingent purchase price payments totaled $40.8 million in 2008. Also not included in the above table are contingent purchase price payments we are obligated to pay Superba if the earnings of the acquired business exceed certain targets in 2007, 2008 and 2009. We paid Superba $14.5 million in the first quarter of 2008 based on the calculation of 2007 earnings, as defined in the unde rlying asset purchase agreement, achieved by the acquired business. Superba did not achieve the minimum earnings in 2008 required for a payout in 2009. The maximum payout that Superba can receive with respect to 2009 earnings is $30.0 million. We currently anticipate that no payment will be made in 2010 with respect to 2009 earnings. Not included in the above table are contributions to our defined benefit qualified pension plans, or payments to employees and retirees in connection with our supplemental pension and postretirement health plans. Contractual cash obligations for these plans cannot be determined due to the number of assumptions required to estimate our future benefit obligations, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. The liabilities associated with these plans are presented in Note 10, Retirement and Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. Not included in the above table are $89.8 million of net potential cash obligations associated with unrecognized tax benefits due to the uncertainty regarding the future cash outflows associated with such obligations. Please refer to Note 11, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further information related to unrecognized tax benefits. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect, or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect, on our financial position, changes in financial position, revenue, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. MARKET RISK INTEREST AND EXCHANGE RATE SENSITIVITY Financial instruments held by us include cash equivalents and long-term debt. Interest rates on our long-term debt are fixed. Therefore, a change in rates generally would not have an effect on our interest expense. Note 9, Long-Term Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report outlines the principal amounts, interest rates, fair values and other terms required to evaluate the expected sensitivity of interest rate changes on the fair value of our fixed rate long-term debt. Cash and cash equivalents held by us are affected by short-term interest rates. Therefore, a change in short-term interest rates would have an impact on our interest income. Given our balance of cash and cash equivalents as of February 1, 2009, the effect of a 50 basis point change in short-term interest rates on our interest income would be approximately $1.6 million annually. Principally all of our revenue and expenses are currently denominated in United States dollars. However, certain of our operations and license agreements expose us to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the rate of exchange of the United States dollar against the Euro, the Pound, the Yen and the Canadian dollar. Our principal exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our licensing businesses. Many of our license agreements require the 36 licensee to report sales to us in the licensee local currency but to pay us in United States dollars based on the exchange rate as of the last day of the contractual selling period. Thus, while we are not exposed to exchange rate gains and losses between the end of the selling period and the date we collect payment, we are exposed to exchange rate changes during and up to the last day of the selling period. Therefore, during times of a strengthening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenue will be negatively impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenue will be favorably impacted. Not all foreign license agreements expose us to foreign exchange risk. Many of our foreign license agreements specify that contractual minimums be paid in United States dollars. Thus, for these foreign license agreements where the licensee sales do not exceed contractual minimums, the licensee assumes the risk of changes in exchange rates and we do not. A secondary exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our foreign operations. Our foreign operations include sales of our products to department and specialty stores throughout Canada and parts of Europe. Sales for these foreign operations are both generated and collected in foreign currency, which exposes us to foreign exchange gains and losses between the date of the sale and the date we collect payment. Therefore, as with our licensing businesses, the results of these operations will be negatively impacted during times of a strengthening United States dollar and favorably impacted during times of a weakening United States dollar. Somewhat mitigating our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro is our Calvin Klein administrative office in Milan, Italy. Our acquisition of CMI has further mitigated our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro, as the acquired business has certain operations in Italy. Therefore, during times of a strengthening United States dollar against the Euro, the expenses associated with these business operations will be favorably impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar against the Euro, the expenses associated with these business operations will be negatively impacted. SEASONALITY Our business generally follows a seasonal pattern. Our wholesale businesses tend to generate higher levels of sales and income in the third quarter, due to selling to our customers in advance of the holiday season. Royalty, advertising and other revenue tends to be earned somewhat evenly throughout the year, although the third quarter has the highest level of royalty revenue due to higher sales by licensees in advance of the holiday season. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS The Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued FASB Statement No. 157, Fair Value Measurements, in September 2006. This statement clarifies the definition of fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosures about the use of fair value measurements. In February 2008, the FASB issued Staff Position No. 157-2, Effective Date of FASB Statement No. 157, which deferred the effective date of FASB Statement No. 157 for one year for all non-financial assets and non-financial liabilities, except those recognized or disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least annually). We adopted FASB Statement No. 157 prospectively as of the beginning of 2008 for all financial assets and liabilities and for non-financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis. This partial adoption did not have a material impact on our co nsolidated results of operations and financial position. For all other non-financial assets and liabilities, we will adopt FASB Statement No. 157 as of the beginning of 2009. We do not expect that this full adoption will have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations and financial position. The FASB issued FASB Statement No. 141R, Business Combinations, to replace FASB Statement No. 141 in December 2007. FASB Statement No. 141R establishes the principles and requirements for accounting for business combinations. Under the new standard, the acquirer must recognize the assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree, primarily measured at their fair values as of the acquisition date. Contingent consideration will be recognized at fair value on the acquisition date and, for certain arrangements, changes in fair value will be recognized in earnings until settled. Certain acquisition-related costs will be recognized separately from the acquisition and expensed as incurred. We will adopt FASB Statement No. 141R on a prospective basis for business combinations for which the acquisition date is on or after February 2, 2009, with the exception of the accounting for valuation allowanc es on deferred taxes and acquired tax contingencies, which applies to all acquisitions, including those prior to February 2, 2009. Adopting this standard will not have a material impact on our consolidated financial position and results of operations. However, if we enter into any business combinations after the adoption of FASB Statement No. 141R, a transaction may significantly impact our consolidated financial position and results of operations. The FASB issued FASB Statement No. 160, Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements - an amendment of ARB No. 51, in December 2007. FASB Statement No. 160 establishes accounting and reporting standards for a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary and for the deconsolidation of a subsidiary. FASB Statement No. 160 requires that a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary be displayed in the consolidated statement of financial position as a separate 37 component of equity and that consolidated net income include the net income attributable to any noncontrolling interest. We will adopt FASB Statement No. 160 prospectively as of the beginning of 2009. We do not expect the adoption of FASB Statement No. 160 to have any impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial position. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES Our consolidated financial statements are based on the selection and application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. We believe that the following are the more critical judgmental areas in the application of our accounting policies that currently affect our financial position and results of operations: Sales allowances and returns We have arrangements with many of our department and specialty store customers to support their sales of our products. We establish accruals which, based on a review of the individual customer arrangements and the expected performance of our products in their stores, we believe will be required to satisfy our sales allowance obligations. We also establish accruals, which are based on historical data and authorized amounts, that we believe are necessary to provide for inventory returns. It is possible that the accrual estimates could vary from actual results, which would require adjustment to the allowance and returns accruals. Inventories Inventories related to our wholesale operations, comprised principally of finished goods, are stated at the lower of cost or market. Inventories related to our retail operations, comprised entirely of finished goods, are stated at the lower of average cost or market using the retail inventory method. Under the retail inventory method, the valuation of inventories at cost is calculated by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the retail value of inventories. Permanent and point of sale markdowns, when recorded, reduce both the retail and cost components of inventory on hand so as to maintain the already established cost-to-retail relationship. Based on a review of current business trends, inventory agings and discontinued merchandise categories, a further adjustment to inventory is recorded to reflect additional markdowns which are estimated to be necessary to liquidate existing clearance inventories and reduce inventori es to the lower of cost or market. We believe that all inventory writedowns required at February 1, 2009 have been recorded. If market conditions were to change, it is possible that the required level of inventory reserves would need to be adjusted. Asset impairments In each of the last three years, we determined that the long-lived assets in certain of our outlet retail stores and other locations were not recoverable, which resulted in us recording impairment charges. In order to calculate the impairment charges, we estimated the undiscounted future cash flows and the related fair value of each asset. The undiscounted future cash flows for each asset were estimated using current sales trends and other assumptions. If different assumptions had been used for future sales trends, the recorded impairment charges could have been significantly higher or lower. Note 16, Activity Exit Costs, Asset Impairments and Other Charges, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further discussion of the circumstances surrounding the impairments and the assumptions related to the impairment charges. Allowance for doubtful accounts Accounts receivable, as presented on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, is net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. An allowance for doubtful accounts is determined through an analysis of the aging of accounts receivable and assessments of collectibility based on historic trends, the financial position of our customers and an evaluation of economic conditions. Because we cannot predict future changes in economic conditions and in the financial stability of our customers, actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from our estimates and could impact our allowance for doubtful accounts. Income taxes We apply an asset and liability approach to accounting for income taxes. Deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. FASB Statement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, requires that deferred tax assets be evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe a portion will not be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent earnings experience and expectations of future taxable income by taxing jurisdiction, the carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes and other relevant factors. The actual realization of deferred tax assets may differ sign ificantly from the amounts we have recorded. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. In 2007, we adopted the provisions of FIN 48 . FIN 48 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions accounted for in accordance with FASB Statement No. 109. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the 38 tax position will be fully sustained upon review by taxing authorities, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. For tax positions that are 50 percent or less likely of being sustained upon audit, we do not recognize any portion of that benefit in the financial statements. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes. Our actual results could differ materially from our current estimates. Goodwill and other intangible assets Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment based on fair value. These tests are performed annually, at the beginning of the third quarter of each fiscal year, and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. Performance of the goodwill impairment tests requires significant judgments regarding projecting future discounted cash flows and allocations of net assets to the reporting units. If different assumptions for future discounted cash flows and allocation of net assets to our reporting units had been applied, significantly different results of our goodwill impairment tests could have resulted. Pension benefits Included in the calculations of expense, assets and liabilities for our pension plans are various assumptions, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. Note 10, Retirement and Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report sets forth the significant rate assumptions used in performing certain calculations related to our pension plans. Actual results could differ from these assumptions, which would require adjustments to our asset and liability balances and could result in volatility in our future pension expense. Stock-based compensation We adopted FASB Statement No. 123R, Share-Based Payment, in 2006. FASB Statement No. 123R requires measurement of compensation cost for all stock-based awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognition of compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options. This model uses assumptions that include the risk free interest rate, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and expected life of the options. The fair value of restricted stock units is determined based on the quoted price of our common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of contingently issuable performance shares is based on the quoted price of our common stock on the date of grant, reduced for the present value of any dividends expected to be paid on our common stock during the performance cycle, as the contingently issuable performance shares do not accrue dividends prior to being earned. We record expense for contingently issuable performance shares based on our current expectations of the probable number of shares that will ultimately be issued. The value of our stock-based awards is recognized as expense over the service period, net of estimated forfeitures. The estimation of stock awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from our current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. We consider many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, employee class and historical experience. Actual results and future estimates may differ substantially from our current estimates. 
