CIK: 78239
Company Name: PHILLIPS VAN HEUSEN CORP DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2008-04-03


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations References to the brand names Calvin Klein Collection, ck Calvin Klein, Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, Eagle, Bass, Geoffrey Beene, ARROW, BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, CHAPS, Sean John, Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, DKNY, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Perry Ellis Portfolio, Ike Behar, Jones New York, Timberland and to other brand names are to registered trademarks owned by us or licensed to us by third parties and are identified by italicizing the brand name. References to our acquisition of CMI refer to our January 2008 acquisition of Confezioni Moda International S.r.L., which we refer to as CMI. CMI is the licensee of the Calvin Klein Collection apparel and accessories businesses. References to our acquisition of Superba refer to our January 2007 acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Superba, Inc., a privately-held manufacturer and distributor of neckwear in the United States and Canada, which we refer to as Superba. References to our acquisition of Arrow refer to our December 2004 acquisition of Cluett Peabody Resources Corporation and Cluett Peabody & Co., Inc., which companies we refer to collectively as Arrow. References to our acquisition of Calvin Klein refer to our February 2003 acquisition of Calvin Klein, Inc. and certain affiliated companies, which companies we refer to collectively as Calvin Klein. 27 OVERVIEW The following discussion and analysis is intended to help you understand us, our operations and our financial performance. It should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes, which are included elsewhere in this report. We are one of the largest apparel companies in the world, with a heritage dating back over 125 years. Our brand portfolio consists of nationally recognized brand names, including Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, ARROW, Bass and Eagle, which are owned, and Geoffrey Beene, Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, BCBG Max Azria, BCBG Attitude, Sean John, CHAPS, Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, DKNY, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Perry Ellis Portfolio, Ike Behar and Jones New York , which are licensed. Our results in 2007 were strong despite the macroeconomic challenges that impacted the overall retail environment. These results built on the positive trends and strong performance we have experienced since 2004 and included recording revenue and net income at record levels. Our strong performance over the past few years also provided us with sufficient cash flow to fund a $200 million stock repurchase in the interest of returning value to our stockholders. Our historical business strategy has been to manage and market a portfolio of nationally recognized brands at multiple price points and across multiple channels of distribution. We believe this strategy reduces our reliance on any one demographic group, merchandise preference or distribution channel. We have expanded this strategy, including through our acquisitions of Calvin Klein in February 2003 and Arrow in December 2004. These acquisitions not only provided us with brands that offer additional distribution channel and price point opportunities in our traditional categories of dress shirts and sportswear, thus building on our historical strategy, but also provided us with established international licensing businesses which do not require capital investments. These acquisitions have also provided us with growth opportunities in extending these brands through licensing into additional product categories and jurisdictions, as well as by providing us with some protection against general downturns in the U.S. economy. Our acquisition in January 2007 of Superba established neckwear business advances our historical strategy by adding a product category that can be leveraged into the strategy and is complementary to our heritage dress shirt business. This presents us with opportunities to grow and enhance the performance of both businesses by providing us with the ability to produce all of the neckwear for our owned brands over time and to leverage the design, merchandising and selling capabilities of both businesses to offer our customers a cohesive and comprehensive portfolio of branded dress shirts and neckwear. Our business strategy was further supported by our assumption of the wholesale IZOD women sportswear collection, which was previously a licensed business. During the second quarter of 2007, we assumed responsibility for the development and sale of the line, which allowed us to expand our operations for the fir st time to include the wholesale distribution of women sportswear. Our financial results in 2007 were driven by the continued strength of our Calvin Klein brand, through the growth of existing businesses and entry into new businesses, both directly by us and through licensees in the U.S. and abroad. Approximately 25% of our total earnings before interest and taxes is derived from international sources, driven by the significant international component of our Calvin Klein licensing business. Additionally, the performance of our new neckwear and IZOD women sportswear businesses contributed to our revenue and earnings increases. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our business strategy, as the positive performance of these businesses offset the negative impact that the overall soft retail environment had on our sportswear and heritage brand retail businesses. We intend to continue to build upon our business strategy by implementing new initiatives that provide us with the opportunity to promote our products and to fill product and brand portfolio needs. This is evidenced by our opening of Calvin Klein specialty retail stores in premier malls in the U.S., which are intended to serve as a platform for showcasing the totality of the Calvin Klein white label better product. We opened five of these stores during 2007 and plan to open another five stores during 2008. In addition, we have entered into a licensing arrangement with The Timberland Company to design, source and market men and women casual sportswear under the Timberland brand in North America. We will assume the management of the men apparel line, which is currently produced by The Timberland Company, for the Fall 2008 season and currently plan to launch a women line for Spring 2 010. Timberland is an authentic outdoor traditional brand targeted to the department and specialty store channels of distribution that we believe has a unique positioning that will complement our existing portfolio of sportswear brands and enable us to reach a broader spectrum of consumers. We intend to continue to expand our operations globally, through direct marketing by us and through partnerships with licensees. We recently expanded our wholesale operations to include sales of certain of our products to department and specialty stores throughout Canada and parts of Europe, and have entered into many license agreements with partners across the globe for our brands. 28 Our strong earnings and positive cash flow over the past few years enabled us to return value to our stockholders through a $200 million stock repurchase program, which was completed during the fourth quarter of 2007. In addition, during 2007, we continued to invest heavily in the marketing of our brands by spending a record $153 million on advertising (funded partially by licensees and other partners). We also made significant investments in people and infrastructure for existing and new businesses, including through the expansion of our office facilities both domestically and internationally. After funding these investments and the stock repurchase with cash on hand, we ended 2007 with $270 million in cash and a strong balance sheet with significant credit availability, which we believe enables us to continue to explore licensing and acquisition opportunities that will enhance our business strategy and promote our future growth. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Operations Overview We generate net sales from (i) the wholesale distribution of men dress shirts, men sportswear, neckwear (beginning in the fourth quarter of 2006) and women sportswear (beginning in the second quarter of 2007); and (ii) the sale, through approximately 750 company-operated retail stores, of apparel, footwear and accessories under the brand names Van Heusen, IZOD, Geoffrey Beene, Bass and Calvin Klein . Our stores principally operate in an outlet format. We also operate a full price store located in New York City under the Calvin Klein Collection brand, in which we principally sell men and women high-end collection apparel and accessories, soft home furnishings and tableware. In the third quarter of 2007, we began operating a limited number of specialty retail stores in premier malls in the United States under the Calvin Klein brand, in which we principally sell men and women better apparel and accessories. We generate royalty, advertising and other revenue from fees for licensing the use of our trademarks. Calvin Klein royalty, advertising and other revenue, which comprised 89% of total royalty, advertising and other revenue in 2007, is derived under licenses and other arrangements for a broad array of products, including jeans, underwear, fragrances, eyewear, watches and home furnishings. Gross profit on total revenue is total revenue less cost of goods sold. Included as cost of goods sold are costs associated with the production and procurement of product, including inbound freight costs, purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, internal transfer costs and other product procurement related charges. Because there is no cost of goods sold associated with royalty, advertising and other revenue, 100% of such revenue is included in gross profit. As a result, our gross profit may not be comparable to that of other entities. Selling, general and administrative expenses include all other expenses, excluding interest and income taxes. Salaries and related fringe benefits is the largest component of selling, general and administrative expenses, comprising 47% of such expenses in 2007. Rent and occupancy for offices, warehouses and retail stores is the next largest expense, comprising 21% of selling, general and administrative expenses in 2007. 29 The following table summarizes our results of operations in 2007, 2006 and 2005: 2007 2006 2005 (dollars in millions, except per share amounts) Net sales $2,127.7 $1,849.2 $1,697.3 Royalty revenue 214.4 182.3 158.8 Advertising and other revenue 83.0 59.1 52.8 Total revenue 2,425.2 2,090.6 1,908.8 Gross profit 1,191.0 1,029.9 891.1 % of total revenue 49.1% 49.3% 46.7% Selling, general and administrative expenses 882.5 796.6 684.2 % of total revenue 36.4% 38.1% 35.8% Gain on sale of investments, net 3.3 32.0 - Income before interest and taxes 311.8 265.3 206.8 Interest expense 33.8 34.3 34.4 Interest income 16.7 17.4 5.8 Income before taxes 294.8 248.4 178.3 Income tax expense 111.5 93.2 66.6 Net income $ 183.3 $ 155.2 $ 111.7 Diluted net income per common share $ 3.21 $ 2.64 $ 1.85 Net Sales Our net sales in 2007 increased to $2,127.7 million from $1,849.2 million in 2006 and $1,697.3 million in 2005. Our 2007 net sales increase of $278.5 million over 2006 net sales was due principally to: the addition of $153.2 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment, resulting principally from sales of our new neckwear division that we created in connection with our January 2007 acquisition of Superba; the addition of $73.3 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment, driven primarily by the addition of sales associated with our assumption of the IZOD women sportswear business in the second quarter of 2007, as well as growth in our Calvin Klein sportswear business; and the addition of $52.0 million of net sales attributable to growth in our retail segments, primarily driven by comparable store sales growth of approximately 1% in our outlet retail business and the opening of Calvin Klein and other outlet retail stores. The year-to-year comparative results of our retail segments were negatively impacted by approximately $10.0 million as a result of an extra week of revenue in the prior year, as 2006 included 53 weeks of operations. We believe that 2007 comparable store sales are more appropriately compared with 2006 excluding the impact of the extra week of revenue. The impact of the extra week of revenue was a decrease in comparable store sales of 2%. Therefore, excluding the impact of the extra week of revenue in 2006, our outlet retail divisions would have achieved comparable store sales growth of approximately 3%. 30 Our 2006 net sales increase of $151.9 million over 2005 net sales was due principally to the net effect of the items described below. Net sales increases in 2006 included: the addition of $111.6 million of net sales attributable to growth in our retail segments, driven by an increase of approximately 9% in comparable store sales and the opening of additional Calvin Klein outlet retail stores in premium outlet malls. Included in our net sales increase was approximately $10.0 million in additional revenue from the extra week (53 rd week) in 2006. Excluding the extra week of revenue, our outlet retail divisions achieved comparable store sales growth of approximately 8%; and the addition of $63.5 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment, driven by increases across all of our wholesale sportswear divisions, particularly Calvin Klein men better sportswear. Net sales decreases in 2006 included: a $23.2 million sales decrease in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment, resulting principally from door closings associated with the 2005 acquisition by Federated Department Stores, Inc. (now known as Macy s, Inc.) of The May Department Stores Company. Our net sales in fiscal 2008 are expected to increase approximately 6% to 7% due principally to growth in our existing businesses, particularly our Calvin Klein men sportswear and outlet retail businesses, as well as the impact of a full year of sales from our IZOD women sportswear business. Sales are also expected to increase as a result of our Timberland men sportswear line, which will launch for Fall 2008, the expected opening of Calvin Klein specialty retail stores in premier malls in the United States, and our January 2008 acquisition of CMI, the licensee of our Calvin Klein Collection apparel and accessories businesses. Royalty, Advertising and Other Revenue Royalty, advertising and other revenue increases over the prior year were $56.0 million and $29.9 million in 2007 and 2006, respectively. These increases were primarily attributable to our Calvin Klein Licensing segment. Approximately 93% of the growth in Calvin Klein royalty, advertising and other revenue in 2007 was attributable to growth from existing licenses, with the remaining 7% generated through new licenses. These increases were due, in part, to continued strength in fragrances, particularly in 2007, which experienced the successful launches of the new men and women ckIN2U fragrance lines and the new Calvin Klein MAN fragrance line, as well as continued strength in sales of both the men and women euphoria fragrance lines. In addition, jeans and underwear experienced significant international and domestic growth which, combined with the success of licensed product categories introduced over the past four years, further contributed to the revenue increase. We currently expect that royalty, advertising and other revenue will increase approximately 10% in our Calvin Klein Licensing segment in fiscal 2008 as a result of growth in the businesses of existing licensees, as well as royalties generated under new license agreements. Royalty, advertising and other revenue in our other segments is expected to be relatively flat in fiscal 2008. Gross Profit on Total Revenue The following table shows our revenue mix between net sales and royalty, advertising and other revenue, as well as our gross profit as a percentage of total revenue for 2007, 2006 and 2005: 2007 2006 2005 Net sales 87.7% 88.4% 88.9% Royalty, advertising and other revenue 12.3% 11.6% 11.1% Gross profit as a % of total revenue 49.1% 49.3% 46.7% 31 Gross profit as a percentage of total revenue decreased 20 basis points in 2007, due principally to the net effect of the items described below: Gross margin improved due to: strong product sell-throughs in our wholesale dress shirt business throughout the year and in our outlet retail business during the first half of the year, which yielded more full-price selling; and a change in revenue mix, as royalty, advertising and other revenue, which does not carry a cost of sales and has a gross profit percentage of 100%, increased as a percentage of total revenue. Gross margin declined due to: a change in sales mix, as net sales attributable to our wholesale businesses, which typically have lower gross margins than our retail businesses, increased as a percentage of our total net sales, due to faster sales growth in our wholesale businesses. The faster revenue growth in our wholesale businesses was due, in part, to the addition of sales associated with our new neckwear and IZOD women sportswear businesses; and increased promotional selling in our wholesale sportswear business, which was negatively affected throughout the year by the overall weak retail environment and by the unseasonably warm weather that was experienced in much of the United States during September and October of 2007. Gross profit as a percentage of total revenue increased 260 basis points in 2006 due principally to strong product sell-throughs, which yielded more full-price selling. Also contributing to the increase was a change in revenue mix, as (i) net sales attributable to our outlet retail businesses, which have higher gross margins than our wholesale businesses, increased as a percentage of our total net sales in 2006; and (ii) royalty, advertising and other revenue increased as a percentage of total revenue in 2006. Royalty, advertising and other revenue does not carry a cost of sales, and as such, the gross profit percentage of such revenue is 100%. We currently expect that the gross profit on total revenue percentage will decrease approximately 50 to 60 basis points in fiscal 2008 compared to 2007, as gross margin growth attributable to our Calvin Klein businesses is expected to be more than offset by gross margin declines in our heritage brand wholesale and retail outlet businesses due principally to additional promotional selling. Selling, General and Administrative (SG&A) Expenses Our SG&A expenses were as follows: 2007 2006 2005 (dollars in millions) SG&A expenses $882.5 $796.6 $684.2 % of total revenue 36.4% 38.1% 35.8% SG&A expenses in 2007 were $882.5 million, or 36.4% of total revenue, compared to $796.6 million or 38.1% of total revenue, in 2006. The 170 basis point decrease was due principally to the growth in our wholesale businesses mentioned above, as our wholesale businesses typically have lower expense rates than our retail businesses. The $85.9 million increase in SG&A expenses in 2007 included: (i) additional expenses of approximately $33.0 million related to operating our recently-acquired neckwear business; (ii) increased expenses of $25.8 million in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment and our retail segments principally to support the sales growth previously mentioned; (iii) an increase in advertising expenditures of $19.9 million; and (iv) start-up costs of approximately $15.0 million associated with our Timberland wholesale sportswear business and Calvin Klein specialty retail stores. Also impacting the change in SG&A expenses for 2007 compared to the prior year was the absence of costs incurred in 2006 of: (i) $11.3 million associated with the closing of our manufacturing facility in Ozark, Alabama in the second quarter of 2006; and (ii) $10.5 million in severance and other separation costs associated with the departure in the first quarter of 2006 of Mark Weber, our former Chief Executive Officer. SG&A expenses in 2006 were $796.6 million, or 38.1% of total revenue, compared to $684.2 million, or 35.8% of total revenue, in 2005. The $112.4 million increase in SG&A expenses in 2006 included: (i) increased advertising expenditures of $26.8 million; (ii) $11.3 million in costs associated with the closing of our manufacturing facility in Ozark, Alabama in May 2006; (iii) $10.5 million in severance and other separation costs associated with the February 2006 departure of Mark Weber, 32 our former Chief Executive Officer; and (iv) $6.9 million of noncash stock-based compensation expense resulting from the requirement to expense stock-based compensation beginning in 2006. Please see Note 11, Stock-Based Compensation, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion of our stock-based compensation expense and related information. Also contributing to the increase were: (i) increased operating expenses in our Retail Apparel and Related Products, Retail Footwear and Related Products, and Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segments to support the sales growth previously mentioned, including from operating additional Calvin Klein outlet retail stores; and (ii) increased corporate and other expenses, including medical expenses due to increased claims in 2006. Partially offsetting these items were expense savings in 2006 of approximately $9.0 million du e to the closure at the end of 2005 of our Calvin Klein Collection stores in Dallas and Paris. Our fiscal 2008 SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenue is currently expected to increase approximately 60 to 70 basis points, due primarily to the addition of expenses associated with our Calvin Klein specialty retail stores, as our retail businesses typically have higher expense rates than our wholesale businesses. Gain on Sale of Investments We sold, in the first quarter of 2006, minority interests held by one of our subsidiaries in certain entities that operate the licenses and related wholesale and retail businesses of Calvin Klein jeans and accessories in Europe and Asia and the ck Calvin Klein bridge line of sportswear and accessories in Europe. The sale resulted in a pre-tax gain of $32.0 million in 2006, which was net of related fees, an amount held in escrow and the carrying value of the investments. Our share of the proceeds being held in escrow represented security for indemnification of certain potential losses incurred by the purchaser, as well as other adjustments to the purchase price. During 2007, $3.3 million was released to us from escrow. We recorded this release of escrow as an additional gain. We received in fiscal 2008 a distribution of $1.9 million representing our share of the amount that remained in escrow, and will record the release o f such amount as an additional gain. Interest Expense and Interest Income The majority of our interest expense relates to our fixed rate long-term debt. As a result, variances in our net interest expense tend to be driven by changes in interest income and, to a lesser extent, costs related to our revolving credit facility. Interest expense decreased to $33.8 million in 2007 from $34.3 million in 2006. Interest income decreased to $16.7 million in 2007 from $17.4 million in 2006. The interest income decline was due principally to a decrease in our cash position in the fourth quarter of 2007 as a result of the completion of our $200.0 million stock repurchase. Interest expense decreased to $34.3 million in 2006 from $34.4 million in 2005. Interest income increased to $17.4 million in 2006 from $5.8 million in 2005. The interest income increase was due to an increase in our average cash position throughout the year and an increase in investment rates of return over the prior year. Interest expense is expected to be relatively flat in fiscal 2008 as compared with 2007, while interest income is expected to decrease approximately $7.0 million as a result of a decrease in our average cash position during the year due principally to our use of cash to fund our $200.0 million stock repurchase, combined with a reduction in interest rates. Income Taxes Income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income was as follows: 2007 2006 2005 37.8% 37.5% 37.3% We adopted the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board Interpretation No. 48, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes an interpretation of FASB Statement No. 109 ( FIN 48 ) in the first quarter of 2007. We currently anticipate that our fiscal 2008 tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income will be between 36.5% and 37.0%. It is possible that our estimated full year rate could change from discrete events arising from specific transactions, audits by tax authorities or the receipt of new information. Under FIN 48, additional volatility in our tax rate may occur in the future, either from quarter to quarter, or from year to year, due to events or new information that causes us to re-evaluate our unrecognized tax benefits. 33 Net Income per Common Share Our calculation of net income per common share in 2005 was impacted by the voluntary conversion of a portion of our Series B convertible preferred stock by the holders of such stock into shares of our common stock. Such shares of common stock were subsequently sold in a registered offering by the holders. We made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $1.75 for each share of common stock sold, or an aggregate of $12.9 million, and incurred certain costs, totaling $1.3 million in connection with these transactions. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it was estimated that we would have had the right to convert the convertible preferred stock, net of the net present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the convertible preferred stock was convertible. The portion of the convertible preferred stock that was converted was considered separately from the portion of the convertible preferred stock that was not converted for purposes of our net income per common share calculation in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Further, the aggregate $14.2 million inducement payment and offering costs was treated similar to a preferred stock dividend and attributed to the portion of the convertible preferred stock that was converted. Our calculation of net income per common share in 2006 was impacted by the voluntary conversion in May 2006 of all of the remaining outstanding shares of the Series B convertible preferred stock by the holders of such stock into shares of common stock. The holders sold the majority of such shares in a registered common stock offering. We made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $0.88 for each share of common stock received upon conversion, or an aggregate of $10.2 million, and incurred certain costs, totaling $0.7 million in connection with these transactions. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it was estimated that we would have had the right to convert the convertible preferred stock, net of the net present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the convertible preferred stock was convertible. The aggregate $10.9 million inducement payment and offering costs was treated similar to a preferred stock dividend and attributed to the convertible preferred stock for purposes of our net income per common share calculation in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. Note 15, Net Income per Common Share, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further explanation and the calculations of basic and diluted net income per common share. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Generally, our principal source of cash is from operations, and our principal uses of cash are for capital expenditures, contingent purchase price payments and dividends. Operations Cash provided by operating activities was $221.0 million in 2007, compared to $254.5 million in 2006. This decrease was due principally to changes in working capital, including an increase in accounts receivable, due, in part, to the revenue growth exhibited by our wholesale and licensing businesses in the latter part of the fourth quarter of 2007. In addition, our balance sheet at the end of 2007 includes the impact of our new IZOD women sportswear and Calvin Klein specialty retail businesses. Partially offsetting this cash decrease was a $66.4 million increase in net income adjusted for depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, impairments and the gains on the sale of investments. Capital Expenditures Our capital expenditures paid in cash in 2007 were $94.7 million, compared with $46.2 million in 2006. This increase was due to: (i) additional office space, warehouse and distribution facility expansion and information technology spending, both domestically and internationally, to allow our infrastructure to support the sales growth and new businesses mentioned previously; and (ii) the build out of Calvin Klein specialty retail stores. We currently expect capital expenditures in fiscal 2008 to be approximately $100.0 million as we continue to build our infrastructure and open Calvin Klein specialty retail stores. Contingent Purchase Price Payments In connection with our acquisition of Calvin Klein, we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein contingent purchase price payments through 2017 based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands. Such contingent purchase price payments are recorded as additions to goodwill and totaled $37.5 million in 2007. We currently expect that such payments will be $38.0 million to $40.0 million in fiscal 2008, and will continue to increase moderately thereafter. 34 In connection with the Superba acquisition, we are obligated to pay Superba contingent purchase price payments if the earnings of the acquired business exceed certain targets in fiscal 2007, 2008 and 2009. The maximum payout that Superba can receive is $15.0 million, $25.0 million and $30.0 million with respect to earnings in fiscal 2007, 2008 and 2009, respectively. Any such contingent purchase price payments are payable 90 days after the applicable fiscal year end and are recorded as additions to goodwill. We expect to pay Superba $15.0 million in fiscal 2008 based on the estimated 2007 earnings, as defined in the underlying asset purchase agreement, achieved by the acquired business. Dividends Our common stock, which as of February 3, 2008 is the only class of stock outstanding, currently pays annual dividends totaling $0.15 per share. Cash dividends on our common stock totaled $8.5 million for the full year 2007. In connection with our acquisition of Calvin Klein, we issued $250.0 million of Series B convertible preferred stock. During the second quarter of 2006, the holders of our Series B convertible preferred stock voluntarily converted all of the remaining outstanding shares of Series B convertible preferred stock into 11.6 million shares of our common stock. The holders subsequently sold a majority of such shares in a registered common stock offering. We made an inducement payment to the preferred stockholders of $0.88 for each share of common stock received upon conversion, or an aggregate of $10.2 million in connection with the conversion, and incurred certain costs, totaling $0.7 million, specifically related to the registered common stock offering. The inducement payment was based on the net present value of the dividends that we would have been obligated to pay the preferred stockholders through the earliest date on which it was estimated that we would have had the right to convert the Series B convertible preferred stock, net of the net present value of the dividends payable over the same period on the shares of common stock into which the Series B convertible preferred stock was convertible. The aggregate $10.9 million inducement payment and offering costs was treated similar to a preferred stock dividend under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. We project that cash dividends on our common stock in fiscal 2008 will be $7.7 million to $7.8 million based on our current dividend rate, the number of shares of our common stock outstanding at February 3, 2008 and our estimates of stock issuances in connection with our stock-based compensation in fiscal 2008. This decrease compared to 2007 is primarily attributable to the $200.0 million share repurchase program discussed below, which is expected to result in a lower number of shares of our common stock being outstanding in fiscal 2008 as compared to 2007. Share Repurchase Program Our Board of Directors authorized us in November 2007 to repurchase up to $200.0 million of our outstanding common stock through the end of fiscal 2008. In the fourth quarter of 2007, we repurchased 5.2 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $200.0 million, excluding commissions. As of the end of 2007, we deemed this share repurchase program to have been completed. Cash Flow Summary Our net cash outflow in 2007 was $96.2 million, which included $200.0 million used to complete the stock repurchase mentioned previously. Excluding the repurchase, our cash flow would have been $103.8 million. Cash flow in fiscal 2008 will be impacted by various other factors in addition to those noted above in this Liquidity and Capital Resources section. For example, in connection with our 2007 acquisition of CMI, we received a net cash payment of approximately $18.0 million in fiscal 2008, which is subject to adjustment. Please see Note 3, Acquisition of CMI, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further description of this transaction. In addition, the exercise of stock options provided $12.6 million of cash in 2007. We currently estimate such amount to be lower in fiscal 2008. We currently expect to generate $80.0 million to $90.0 million of cash flow in fiscal 2008. There can be no assurance that this estimate will prove to be accurate. Unforeseen events, including changes in our net income, working capital requirements or other items, including acquisitions and equity transactions, could occur, which could cause our cash flow to vary significantly from this estimate. 35 Financing Arrangements Our capital structure as of February 3, 2008 was as follows: (in millions) Long-term debt $399.6 Stockholders equity $956.3 We believe our capital structure provides a secure base to support our current operations and our planned growth in the future. There are no maturities of our long-term debt until 2011. For near-term liquidity, in addition to our cash balance, we have a $325.0 million secured revolving credit facility that provides for revolving credit borrowings, as well as the issuance of letters of credit. We may, at our option, borrow and repay amounts up to a maximum of $325.0 million for revolving credit borrowings and the issuance of letters of credit, which may be increased by us under certain conditions by up to $100.0 million, with a sublimit of $50.0 million for standby letters of credit and with no sublimit on trade letters of credit. Based on our working capital projections, we believe that our borrowing capacity under this facility provides us with adequate liquidity for our peak seasonal needs for the foreseeable future. During 2007, we had no revolving credit borrowings under the facility, and the maximum amount of letters of credit outstanding was $142.4 million. As of February 3, 2008, we had $107.9 mi llion of outstanding letters of credit under this facility. We currently do not expect to have any revolving credit borrowings under the facility in fiscal 2008. All obligations under the secured revolving credit facility are secured by liens on substantially all of our assets and the assets of our domestic subsidiaries and a pledge of all of the equity interests in all of our domestic subsidiaries. Our secured revolving credit facility requires us to maintain certain financial covenants, including a minimum level of availability under the secured revolving credit facility. If such minimum level is not maintained, we are then required to maintain a minimum ratio of (i) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and rent (EBITDAR) less capital expenditures paid in cash; cash dividends and cash distributions; Federal, state, local and foreign income taxes paid in cash; and management fees paid during the period to (ii) fixed charge expense for the period, which consists of principal payments of debt, cash interest expense and rent expense (as such terms are defined in the se cured revolving credit facility). Our secured revolving credit facility also contains covenants that, subject to specified exceptions, may restrict or limit our ability to: sell or dispose of assets, including equity interests; make loans, advances or guarantees; make investments; declare and pay dividends; engage in transactions with affiliates; incur additional debt, prepay or modify existing debt; incur liens; engage in businesses that are not in a related line of business; and merge with or acquire other companies, liquidate or dissolve. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under our secured revolving credit facility, the lenders may cease making loans, terminate the secured revolving credit facility and declare all amounts outstanding to be immediately due and payable. The secured revolving credit facility specifies a number of events of default (many of which are subject to applicable grace periods), including, among others, the failure to make timely principal and interest payments or to satisfy the covenants, including the financial covenants described above. 36 In addition, we are subject to similar covenants and restrictions in connection with our long-term debt agreements. As of February 3, 2008, we were in compliance with all financial and non-financial covenants. During 2007, Standard & Poor raised our corporate credit rating to BBB-, with a stable outlook. During the year, Moody affirmed our long term corporate credit rating of Ba2 , but revised its outlook to positive from stable. Our credit ratings of BBB- from Standard & Poor and Ba2 from Moody contribute to our ability to successfully access capital markets. Given our capital structure and our projections for future profitability and cash flow, we believe we could obtain additional financing, if necessary, for refinancing our long-term debt, or, if opportunities present themselves, future acquisitions. Although we believe we could obtain such financing, due to the current state of credit markets, there can be no assurance that such financing could be obtained on terms as favorable to us as our current financings or otherwise on terms satisfactory to us. Furthermore, as credit markets are constantly changing, there can be no assurance that such financing, if needed, could be obtained at such time as a need arises or that it would be available to us on terms satisfactory to us. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes, as of February 3, 2008, our contractual cash obligations by future period: Payments Due by Period Description Total Obligations 2008 2009-2010 2011-2012 Thereafter (in millions) Long-term debt $ 400.0 $ - $ - $150.0 $250.0 Interest payments on long-term debt 219.3 30.8 61.6 40.3 86.6 Operating leases (1) 562.8 105.6 160.8 97.0 199.4 Inventory purchase commitments 276.5 276.5 - - - Minimum contractual royalty payments (2) 67.2 19.0 30.2 18.0 - Non-qualified supplemental defined benefit plan (3) 26.7 1.3 2.9 3.2 19.3 Severance payments 3.3 3.1 0.2 - - Total contractual cash obligations $1,555.8 $436.3 $255.7 $308.5 $555.3 (1) Includes store operating leases, which generally provide for payment of direct operating costs in addition to rent. The obligation amounts listed include future minimum lease payments and exclude such direct operating costs. (2) We currently anticipate that future payments required under our license agreements on an aggregate basis will exceed significantly the contractual minimums shown in the table. (3) We have an unfunded non-qualified supplemental defined benefit plan covering 22 current and retired executives under which the participants will receive a predetermined amount during the 10 years following the attainment of age 65, provided that prior to the termination of employment with us, the participant has been in such plan for at least 10 years and has attained age 55. Not included in the above table are contingent purchase price payments we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein through 2017 based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands. Such payments were $37.5 million in 2007. Also not included in the above table are contingent purchase price payments we are obligated to pay Superba if the earnings of the acquired business exceed certain targets in fiscal 2007, 2008 and 2009. The maximum payout that Superba can receive is $15.0 million, $25.0 million and $30.0 million with respect to earnings in fiscal 2007, 2008 and 2009, respectively. We expect to pay Superba $15.0 million in fiscal 2008 based on the estimated 2007 earnings, as defined in the underlying asset purchase agreement, achieved by the acquired business. Not included in the above table are contributions to our defined benefit qualified pension plans, or payments to employees and retirees in connection with our supplemental pension and postretirement health plans. Contractual cash obligations for these plans cannot be determined due to the number of assumptions required to estimate our future benefit obligations, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. The liabilities associated with these plans are presented in Note 8, Retirement and Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. 37 Not included in the above table are $71.5 million of net potential cash obligations associated with unrecognized tax benefits due to the high degree of uncertainty regarding the timing of future cash outflows associated with such obligations. Please refer to Note 9, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further information related to unrecognized tax benefits. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect, or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect, on our financial position, changes in financial position, revenue, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. MARKET RISK INTEREST AND EXCHANGE RATE SENSITIVITY Financial instruments held by us include cash equivalents and long-term debt. Interest rates on our long-term debt are fixed. Therefore, a change in rates generally would not have an effect on our interest expense. Note 7, Long-Term Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report outlines the principal amounts, interest rates, fair values and other terms required to evaluate the expected sensitivity of interest rate changes on the fair value of our fixed rate long-term debt. Cash and cash equivalents held by us are affected by short-term interest rates. Therefore, a change in short-term interest rates would have an impact on our interest income. Given our balance of cash and cash equivalents as of February 3, 2008, the effect of a 50 basis point change in short-term interest rates on our interest income would be approximately $1.3 million annually. Principally all of our revenue and expenses are currently denominated in United States dollars. However, certain of our operations and license agreements expose us to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the rate of exchange of the United States dollar against the Euro, the Yen and the Canadian dollar. Our principal exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our licensing businesses. Many of our license agreements require the licensee to report sales to us in the licensee local currency, but to pay us in United States dollars based on the exchange rate as of the last day of the contractual selling period. Thus, while we are not exposed to exchange rate gains and losses between the end of the selling period and the date we collect payment, we are exposed to exchange rate changes during and up to the last day of the selling period. During times of a strengthening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenue will be negatively impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenue will be favorably impacted. A secondary exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our foreign wholesale operations. Our wholesale operations include sales of certain of our products to department and specialty stores throughout Canada and parts of Europe. Sales for these foreign operations are both generated and collected in foreign currency, which exposes us to foreign exchange gains and losses between the date of the sale and the date we collect payment. As with our licensing business, the results of these operations will be negatively impacted during times of a strengthening United States dollar and favorably impacted during times of a weakening United States dollar. Not all foreign license agreements expose us to foreign exchange risk. Many of our foreign license agreements specify that contractual minimums be paid in United States dollars. Thus, for these foreign license agreements where the licensee sales do not exceed contractual minimums, the licensee assumes the risk of changes in exchange rates and we do not. Somewhat mitigating our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro is our Calvin Klein administrative office in Milan, Italy. Our acquisition of CMI is expected to further mitigate our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro, as the acquired business has certain operations in Italy. During times of a strengthening United States dollar against the Euro, the expenses associated with these business operations will be favorably impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar against the Euro, the expenses associated with these business operations will be negatively impacted. SEASONALITY Our business generally follows a seasonal pattern. Our wholesale businesses tend to generate higher levels of sales and income in the first and third quarters, as the selling of Spring and Fall merchandise to our customers occurs at higher levels as these selling seasons begin. Our retail businesses tend to generate higher levels of sales and income in the third and fourth quarters, due to the back to school and holiday selling seasons. Royalty, advertising and other revenue tends to be earned somewhat evenly throughout the year, although the third quarter has the highest level of royalty revenue due to higher sales by licensees in advance of the holiday season. 38 RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS The Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued FASB Statement No. 157, Fair Value Measurements, in September 2006. This statement clarifies the definition of fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosures about the use of fair value measurements. We adopted FASB Statement No. 157 prospectively as of the beginning of our fiscal year 2008 for all financial assets and liabilities and for non-financial assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis (at least annually). For all other non-financial assets and liabilities, we will adopt FASB Statement No. 157 as of the beginning of our fiscal year 2009. We are currently evaluating the impact that the adoption of FASB Statement No. 157 will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial position. The FASB issued FASB Statement No. 158, Employers Accounting for Defined Benefit Pension and Other Postretirement Plans - an amendment of FASB Statements No. 87, 88, 106, and 132(R), in September 2006. This statement requires a company to: (i) recognize the overfunded or underfunded status of a defined benefit pension or other postretirement plan as an asset or a liability in its statement of financial position; (ii) recognize gains and losses that have not yet been recognized through net periodic benefit cost in comprehensive income, net of income tax effects; and (iii) measure the funded status of defined benefits and other postretirement plans as of the date of a company fiscal year end. We adopted FASB Statement No. 158 as of the end of our fiscal year 2006, except for the requirement to measure the funded status of retirement benefit plans as of a company fiscal year end, which is effective for our fiscal year 2008. We do not expect the adoption in our fiscal year 2008 of the final requirement of FASB Statement No. 158 to change the measurement date for the funded status of the plan to our year end date to have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial position. The FASB issued FASB Statement No. 141R, Business Combinations, to replace FASB Statement No. 141 in December 2007. FASB Statement No. 141R establishes the principles and requirements for accounting for business combinations. Under the new standard, the acquirer must recognize the assets acquired, the liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree, primarily measured at their fair values as of the acquisition date. Contingent consideration will be recognized at fair value on the acquisition date and, for certain arrangements, changes in fair value will be recognized in earnings until settled. Any acquisition related costs will be recognized separately from the acquisition and expensed as incurred. We will adopt FASB Statement No. 141R on a prospective basis for business combinations for which the acquisition date is on or after February 2, 2009, with the exception of the accounting for valuation allowances o n deferred taxes and acquired tax contingencies, which applies to all acquisitions, including those prior to February 2, 2009. Early adoption of FASB Statement No. 141R is not permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact that the adoption of FASB Statement No. 141R will have on our consolidated results of operations and financial position. The FASB issued FASB Statement No. 160, Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Financial Statements - an amendment of ARB No. 51, in December 2007. FASB Statement No. 160 establishes accounting and reporting standards for a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary and for the deconsolidation of a subsidiary. FASB Statement No. 160 requires that a noncontrolling interest in a subsidiary be displayed in the consolidated statement of financial position as a separate component of equity and that consolidated net income include the net income attributable to any noncontrolling interest. We will adopt FASB Statement No. 160 prospectively as of the beginning of our fiscal year 2009. We do not expect the adoption of FASB Statement No. 160 to have any impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial position. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES Our consolidated financial statements are based on the selection and application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. We believe that the following are the more critical judgmental areas in the application of our accounting policies that currently affect our financial position and results of operations: Sales allowances and returns We have arrangements with many of our department and specialty store customers to support their sales of our products. We establish accruals which, based on a review of the individual customer arrangements and the expected performance of our products in their stores, we believe will be required to satisfy our sales allowance obligations. We also establish accruals, which are based on historical data and authorized amounts, that we believe are necessary to provide for inventory returns. It is possible that the accrual estimates could vary from actual results, which would require adjustment to the allowance and returns accruals. Inventories Inventories related to our wholesale operations, comprised principally of finished goods, are stated at the lower of cost or market. Inventories related to our retail operations, comprised entirely of finished goods, are stated at the lower of average cost or market using the retail inventory method. Under the retail inventory method, the valuation of inventories at 39 cost is calculated by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the retail value of inventories. Permanent and point of sale markdowns, when recorded, reduce both the retail and cost components of inventory on hand so as to maintain the already established cost-to-retail relationship. Based on a review of current business trends, inventory agings and discontinued merchandise categories, a further adjustment to inventory is recorded to reflect additional markdowns which are estimated to be necessary to liquidate existing clearance inventories and reduce inventories to the lower of cost or market. We believe that all inventory writedowns required at February 3, 2008 have been recorded. If market conditions were to change, it is possible that the required level of inventory reserves would need to be adjusted. Asset impairments In each of the last three years, we determined that the long-lived assets in various outlet retail stores and certain other locations were not recoverable, which resulted in us recording impairment charges. In order to calculate the impairment charges, we estimated the related undiscounted future cash flows and the fair value of each asset. The undiscounted future cash flows for each asset were estimated using current sales trends and other assumptions. If different assumptions had been used for future sales trends, the recorded impairment charges could have been significantly higher or lower. Note 14, Asset Impairments, Activity Exit Costs and Other Charges, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further discussion of the circumstances surrounding the impairments and the assumptions related to the impairment charges. Allowance for doubtful accounts Accounts receivable as shown on our Consolidated Balance Sheets is net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. An allowance for doubtful accounts is determined through an analysis of the aging of accounts receivable and assessments of collectibility based on historic trends, the financial position of our customers and an evaluation of economic conditions. Any significant changes to the above factors could impact our allowance for doubtful accounts. Income taxes Deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. FASB Statement No. 109, Accounting for Income Taxes, requires that deferred tax assets be evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe a portion will not be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent earnings experience and expectations of future taxable income by taxing jurisdiction, the carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes and other relevant factors. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. In the first quarter of 2007, we adopted the provisions of FIN 48 . FIN 48 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions accounted for in accordance with FASB Statement No. 109. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately anticipate actual outc omes. Our actual results could differ materially from our current estimates. Goodwill and other intangible assets Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment based on fair value. These tests are performed annually, at the beginning of the third quarter of each fiscal year, and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. Performance of the goodwill impairment tests requires significant judgments regarding the allocation of net assets to the reporting unit level, which is the level at which the impairment tests are required. The determination of whether an impairment exists also depends on, among other factors, the estimated fair value of the reporting units, which itself depends in part on market conditions. An impairment loss could have a material adverse impact on our financial position and results of operations. Pension benefits Included in the calculations of expense, assets and liabilities for our pension plans are various assumptions, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. Note 8, Retirement and Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report sets forth the significant rate assumptions used in performing certain calculations related to our pension plans. Actual results could differ from these assumptions, which would require adjustments to our asset and liability balances and could result in volatility in our future pension expense. Stock-based compensation We adopted FASB Statement No. 123R, Share-Based Payment, in the first quarter of 2006. FASB Statement No. 123R requires measurement of compensation cost for all stock-based awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognition of compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options. This model uses assumptions that include the 40 risk free interest rate, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and expected life of the options. The fair value of restricted stock units is determined based on the number of shares granted and the quoted price of our common stock on the date of grant. The value of our stock-based awards is recognized as expense over the service period, net of estimated forfeitures. The estimation of stock awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from our current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. We consider many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, employee class and historical experience. Actual results and future estimates may differ substantially from our current estimates. 
