CIK: 78239
Company Name: PHILLIPS VAN HEUSEN CORP DE 
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2010-03-31


Item 7. Management Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations We announced on March 15, 2010 that we had entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Tommy Hilfiger B.V. and certain affiliated companies that are controlled by funds affiliated with Apax Partners L.P., for total consideration of 2.2 billion, or approximately $3.0 billion, plus the assumption of 100 million in liabilities. The consideration includes 1.924 billion in cash and 276 million in shares of our common stock. We have entered into a forward foreign exchange contract with respect to 1.3 billion of the purchase price to hedge against our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro. Our obligations under this contract are contingent upon the closing of the acquisition. The closing of the transaction is subject to the receipt of financing and other customary conditions, including the receipt of required regulatory approvals. The transaction is expected to close during our second quarter of 2010. If the transaction do es not close due to the failure to obtain the financing or satisfy certain other conditions, we have agreed to pay 69.0 million to the selling shareholders. We expect to finance the 1.924 billion cash portion of the Tommy Hilfiger acquisition and refinance our $300 million of existing senior unsecured notes using a combination of cash on hand, bank debt and public and/or private offerings of debt and/or equity. There can be no assurance that we can obtain the financing that we need to complete the deal or that such financing can be obtained on the terms currently contemplated. We anticipate that our operations will be significantly impacted if the Tommy Hilfiger acquisition is completed, including the following: (i) the operations of the acquired business will significantly impact our future results, including our revenue, gross margin, operating expenses and cash flows; (ii) the financing of the transaction will significantly impact our capital structure and require significant amounts of our cash flow to pay interest and principal on the debt we incur to finance the transaction; and (iii) we expect to incur significant costs and charges related to the acquisition, which will materially impact our selling, general and administrative expenses in 2010. Certain significant costs will be incurred regardless of whether the acquisition is completed. As with the other Items in this report, the following management discussion and analysis does not contemplate the effects of the Tommy Hilfiger transaction, except where specifically noted. References to the brand names Calvin Klein Collection, ck Calvin Klein, Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, Eagle, Bass, Geoffrey Beene, ARROW, CHAPS, Sean John, JOE Joseph Abboud, MICHAEL Michael Kors, Michael Kors Collection, Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, DKNY, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Ike Behar, Ted Baker, Jones New York, J. Garcia, Claiborne and Timberland and to other brand names are to registered trademarks owned by us or licensed to us by third parties and are identified by italicizing the brand name. Our fiscal years are based on the 52-53 week period ending on the Sunday closest to February 1 and are designated by the calendar year in which the fiscal year commences. References to a year are to our fiscal year, unless the context requires otherwise. Our 2009 year commenced on February 2, 2009 and ended on January 31, 2010; 2008 commenced on February 4, 2008 and ended on February 1, 2009; 2007 commenced on February 5, 2007 and ended on February 3, 2008. References to the BVH acquisition refer to our October 2008 acquisition from The British Van Heusen Company Limited, a former licensee of Van Heusen men dresswear and accessories in the United Kingdom and Ireland, and one of its affiliates of certain assets (including inventories) of the licensed business. We refer to The British Van Heusen Company Limited and its affiliate together as BVH. References to the Mulberry acquisition refer to our April 2008 acquisition of certain assets (including certain trademark licenses, inventories and receivables) of Mulberry Thai Silks, Inc., a manufacturer and distributor of branded neckwear in the United States, which we refer to as Mulberry. References to our acquisition of CMI refer to our January 2008 acquisition of Confezioni Moda Italia S.r.L., which we refer to as CMI, from a subsidiary of The Warnaco Group, Inc. (We refer to The Warnaco Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries, separately and together, as Warnaco. ) CMI is the licensee of the Calvin Klein Collection apparel and accessories businesses under agreements with our Calvin Klein, Inc. subsidiary. References to the Superba acquisition refer to our January 2007 acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Superba, Inc., a manufacturer and distributor of neckwear in the United States and Canada. 26 OVERVIEW The following discussion and analysis is intended to help you understand us, our operations and our financial performance. It should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes, which are included elsewhere in this report. We are one of the largest apparel companies in the world, with a heritage dating back over 125 years. Our brand portfolio consists of nationally recognized brand names, including Calvin Klein, Van Heusen, IZOD, ARROW, Bass and Eagle, which are owned, and Geoffrey Beene, Kenneth Cole New York, Kenneth Cole Reaction, Sean John, JOE Joseph Abboud, MICHAEL Michael Kors, Michael Kors Collection, CHAPS, Donald J. Trump Signature Collection, DKNY, Tommy Hilfiger, Nautica, Ike Behar, Ted Baker, J. Garcia, Claiborne, Jones New York and Timberland, which are licensed. The difficult economic conditions that existed during 2008 continued into the first half of 2009 and presented many challenges for our businesses. However, as 2009 progressed, the strength behind our businesses and brands intensified, allowing us to generate significant increases in revenue and earnings to our plan, with cash flow reaching over $150 million. We believe that our historical business strategy allowed us to achieve these results. Our business strategy is to manage and market a portfolio of nationally recognized brands at multiple price points and across multiple channels of distribution. We believe this strategy allows us to provide products to a broad range of consumers while reducing our reliance on any one demographic group, merchandise preference or distribution channel. We have enhanced this strategy by expanding our portfolio of brands through strategic acquisitions of well-known brands, including Calvin Klein and ARROW , that offer addi tional distribution channel and price point opportunities in our traditional categories of dress shirts and sportswear. We have also broadened our strategy through acquisitions of businesses, including the Superba and Mulberry acquisitions, which are complementary to our heritage businesses. We have successfully pursued growth opportunities in extending our brands through licensing into additional product categories and geographic areas. Our licensing activities, principally our Calvin Klein business, diversify our business model by providing us with a sizeable base of profitable licensing revenues. A significant portion of our total income before interest and taxes is derived from international sources, primarily driven by the international component of our Calvin Klein licensing business. We have approximately 55 license and other agreements covering over 130 territories outside of the United States for our Calvin Klein brands and approximately 50 license agreements covering approximately 150 territories outside of the United States for our heritage brands, and we intend to continue to expand our operations globally through direct marketing by us and through partnerships with licensees. We recently expanded our international operations to include sales of certain of our products to department and specialty stores throughout Canada and parts of Europe, including through the BVH acquisition, which provided us with a wholesale distribution business in the United Kingdom and Ireland and a limited number of retail stores. We continued to strengthen our balance sheet in 2009, ending the year with over $480 million in cash, $400 million of long-term debt and no short-term borrowings. We also have significant availability under our revolving credit facility which does not expire until mid-2012. We believe that the strength of our balance sheet, coupled with the systematic and consistent execution and enhancement of our business strategy, will allow us to invest appropriately in our businesses and our brands while capitalizing on opportunities for our future growth. 27 RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Operations Overview We generate net sales from (i) the wholesale distribution of men dress shirts and neckwear and men and women sportswear; and (ii) the sale, through approximately 650 company-operated retail locations, of apparel, footwear and accessories under the brand names Van Heusen, IZOD, Bass and Calvin Klein . In addition, into the fourth quarter of 2008, we operated retail stores under the brand name Geoffrey Beene . We operate stores principally in outlet centers in the United States. We also operate a full price store located in New York City under the Calvin Klein Collection brand in which we principally sell men and women high-end collection apparel and accessories, soft home furnishings and tableware. Additionally, we operate a limited number of retail stores located principally in the United Kingdom that primarily market Van Heusen brand dress furnishings. We announced during the fourth quarter of 2008 a series of actions that we planned to undertake to respond to the difficult economic conditions that existed during the second half of 2008 and were expected to (and did) continue into 2009, including restructuring certain of our operations and implementing a number of other cost reduction efforts. We began implementing the restructuring initiatives during the fourth quarter of 2008 and we completed substantially all of them by the end of 2009. The restructuring initiatives included the shutdown of domestic production of machine-made neckwear, a realignment of our global sourcing organization and reductions in warehousing capacity, all of which had headcount reductions associated with them, as well as lease terminations for the majority of our Calvin Klein specialty retail stores and other initiatives to reduce corporate and administrative expenses. We recorded pre-tax charges in the fourth quarter of 2008 in conne ction with these initiatives that totaled approximately $82 million, of which approximately $64 million related to non-cash asset impairments, principally associated with our retail stores, and approximately $18 million related to lease terminations, severance and other costs. We recorded additional pre-tax charges of $25.9 million related to severance, non-cash asset impairments, Calvin Klein specialty retail store lease terminations and other costs during 2009. We generate royalty, advertising and other revenue from fees for licensing the use of our trademarks. Calvin Klein royalty, advertising and other revenue, which comprised 92% of total royalty, advertising and other revenue in 2009, is derived under licenses and other arrangements for a broad array of products, including jeans, underwear, fragrances, eyewear, footwear, women apparel, outerwear, watches and home furnishings. Gross profit on total revenue is total revenue less cost of goods sold. Included as cost of goods sold are costs associated with the production and procurement of product, including inbound freight costs, purchasing and receiving costs, inspection costs, internal transfer costs and other product procurement related charges. Because there is no cost of goods sold associated with royalty, advertising and other revenue, 100% of such revenue is included in gross profit. As a result, our gross profit may not be comparable to that of other entities. Selling, general and administrative expenses include all other expenses, excluding interest and income taxes. Salaries and related fringe benefits is the largest component of selling, general and administrative expenses, comprising 46% of such expenses in 2009. Rent and occupancy for offices, warehouses and retail stores is the next largest expense, comprising 22% of selling, general and administrative expenses in 2009. 28 The following table summarizes our results of operations in 2009, 2008 and 2007: 2009 2008 2007 (dollars in millions, except per share amounts) Net sales $2,070.8 $2,160.7 $2,127.7 Royalty revenue 245.9 236.6 214.4 Advertising and other revenue 82.1 94.7 83.0 Total revenue 2,398.7 2,491.9 2,425.2 Gross profit 1,182.6 1,200.7 1,191.0 % of total revenue 49.3% 48.2% 49.1% Selling, general and administrative expenses 938.8 1,028.8 882.5 % of total revenue 39.1% 41.3% 36.4% Gain on sale of investments - 1.9 3.3 Income before interest and taxes 243.8 173.7 311.8 Interest expense 33.5 33.6 33.8 Interest income 1.3 6.2 16.7 Income before taxes 211.6 146.3 294.8 Income tax expense 49.7 54.5 111.5 Net income $ 161.9 $ 91.8 $ 183.3 Diluted net income per share $ 3.08 $ 1.76 $ 3.21 Net Sales Our net sales were $2,070.8 million in 2009, $2,160.7 million in 2008 and $2,127.7 million in 2007. The 2009 net sales decrease of $90.0 million as compared to 2008 net sales was due principally to the net effect of the following items: The reduction of $94.9 million of net sales associated with our closing in 2008 of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division. The reduction of $53.1 million of net sales attributable to declines in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment resulting from the economic slowdown and the resulting reduction of sales to our department store customers, particularly in the first quarter of 2009. This decrease was partially offset by additional sales associated with our new Timberland men sportswear line, which was launched in the second quarter of 2008. The addition of $52.5 million of net sales attributable to growth in our retail segments associated with our ongoing retail businesses. This was primarily driven by (i) the addition of sales attributable to the conversion of a limited number of Geoffrey Beene outlet retail stores to the Calvin Klein outlet retail format; and (ii) comparable store sales growth in our retail divisions of 1% on a combined basis. The addition of $5.1 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment, particularly in the fourth quarter of 2009. The 2008 net sales increase of $33.0 million over 2007 net sales was due to the net effect of the following items: The addition of $25.3 million of net sales attributable to our acquisition of CMI. The addition of $10.1 million of net sales attributable to growth in our retail segments. This was primarily driven by the opening of Calvin Klein retail stores, partially offset by decreases due principally to (i) comparable store sales declines 29 of 5% resulting from the overall weak retail environment experienced during 2008; and (ii) the closing of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division, which was completed during the fourth quarter of 2008. The reduction of $5.5 million of net sales attributable to declines in our Wholesale Sportswear and Related Products segment. This was comprised of decreases in our heritage brand wholesale sportswear businesses resulting from the difficult economic environment experienced during 2008, which were mostly offset by increases resulting from the launch of our Timberland wholesale men sportswear business in the second quarter of 2008, a full year of sales of our IZOD women sportswear line, which began shipping late in the second quarter of 2007, and growth in our Calvin Klein men sportswear business. The addition of $3.1 million of net sales attributable to growth in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment. Our net sales in 2010 are expected to increase approximately 3% to 4% due principally to growth across all of our businesses. Royalty, Advertising and Other Revenue Royalty, advertising and other revenue decreased $3.2 million in 2009 compared to the prior year. Within the Calvin Klein Licensing segment, global licensee royalty revenue increased 6% in 2009 compared to the prior year, as a 7% increase in royalty revenue on a constant exchange rate basis more than offset a $2.1 million negative impact from a stronger United States dollar over the period. The royalty growth on a constant exchange rate basis was principally due to strong performance in the jeans, underwear, footwear, women apparel and outerwear businesses, mostly offset by a royalty decrease, particularly in the first half of the year, in the fragrance business, which was affected by reductions in travel and discretionary spending as a result of the difficult economic environment. Advertising and other revenue decreased 13% in 2009 compared to the prior year as a result of less discretionary spending in 2009 as compared to 2008 by our licensees, as 2008 include d spending associated with the 40 th anniversary of Calvin Klein . Such advertising and other revenue is generally collected and spent, and is therefore presented as both a revenue and an expense within our income statement, with minimal impact on earnings. Royalty, advertising and other revenue increased $33.8 million in 2008 over 2007. The increase was primarily attributable to our Calvin Klein Licensing segment. Approximately 92% of the growth in Calvin Klein royalty, advertising and other revenue in 2008 was attributable to growth from existing licenses, with the remaining 8% generated through new licenses. The growth from existing licenses was due to strong performance across virtually all product categories, with particular strength in jeans and underwear, partially offset by a decrease in the fragrance business, which was particularly affected by reductions in travel and discretionary spending resulting from the difficult economic environment in 2008. We currently expect that royalty, advertising and other revenue will increase approximately 5% to 7% in 2010, due principally to growth within the Calvin Klein Licensing segment. This includes an anticipated increase in Calvin Klein royalty revenue of approximately 5% to 7% in 2010. Gross Profit on Total Revenue The following table shows our revenue mix between net sales and royalty, advertising and other revenue, as well as our gross profit as a percentage of total revenue for 2009, 2008 and 2007: 2009 2008 2007 Components of revenue: Net sales 86.3% 86.7% 87.7% Royalty, advertising and other revenue 13.7 % 13.3 % 12.3 % Total 100.0 % 100.0 % 100.0 % Gross profit as a % of total revenue 49.3 % 48.2 % 49.1 % Gross profit as a percentage of total revenue increased 110 basis points in 2009 compared with 2008, due principally to the net effect of the following items: An increase of 70 basis points due principally to decreased promotional selling during the second half of 2009 due to strong performance across all of our businesses, partially offset by increased promotional selling during the first half of 2009 resulting from the difficult economic environment. 30 An increase of 20 basis points due to the absence of inventory liquidation markdowns which occurred during 2008 associated with the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division. An increase of 20 basis points due principally to a change in revenue mix, as royalty, advertising and other revenue, which does not carry a cost of sales and has a gross profit percentage of 100% increased as a percentage of total revenue. Gross profit as a percentage of total revenue decreased 90 basis points in 2008 as compared with 2007, due principally to the net effect of the following items: An increase due to a change in revenue mix, as royalty, advertising and other revenue, which does not carry a cost of sales and has a gross profit percentage of 100%, increased as a percentage of total revenue. A decrease due to increased promotional selling in our heritage brand outlet retail businesses during the first nine months of the year due to the negative effect of the overall weak retail environment, combined with even greater promotional selling across all of our divisions during the holiday season. A decrease due to inventory liquidation markdowns associated with the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division. We currently expect that the gross profit on total revenue percentage will be relatively flat in 2010 as compared with 2009, as an anticipated reduction in promotional selling in 2010 is expected to be mostly offset by faster anticipated growth in our wholesale businesses, which typically carry a lower gross margin percentage than our retail and licensing businesses. Selling, General and Administrative ( SG&A ) Expenses Our SG&A expenses were as follows: 2009 2008 2007 (dollars in millions) SG&A expenses $938.8 $1,028.8 $882.5 % of total revenue 39.1% 41.3% 36.4% SG&A expenses in 2009 were $938.8 million, or 39.1% of total revenue, compared to $1,028.8 million, or 41.3% of total revenue in 2008. The 220 basis point decrease in SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenue in 2009 as compared to 2008 was due principally to (i) the absence of asset impairment charges and costs associated with our 2008 restructuring initiatives and the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division; and (ii) the cost savings realized in 2009 from our restructuring initiatives, partially offset by a lack of sales leverage as a result of the sales decrease mentioned previously. The $90.0 million decrease in SG&A expenses in 2009 as compared to 2008 was due principally to the net effect of the following items: A decrease of $74.0 million in asset impairment charges and costs associated with our 2008 restructuring initiatives and the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division. A decrease due to cost savings resulting from our 2008 restructuring initiatives. An increase in advertising expenditures due principally to new marketing initiatives for our Van Heusen and IZOD brands. An increase in incentive compensation costs. SG&A expenses in 2008 were $1,028.8 million, or 41.3% of total revenue, compared to $882.5 million, or 36.4% of total revenue in 2007. The 490 basis point increase includes 380 basis points related to asset impairment charges and costs associated with our 2008 restructuring initiatives and the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division. The remaining 110 basis point increase was due principally to SG&A expenses associated with the opening of Calvin Klein retail stores, combined with the lack of sales leverage due to the sales decrease mentioned previously. 31 The $146.3 million increase in SG&A expenses in 2008 as compared to 2007 was due principally to the net effect of the following items: An increase due to fixed asset impairments and lease termination, severance and other costs associated with the closure of our Geoffrey Beene outlet retail division and our fourth quarter 2008 restructuring initiatives. An increase in our retail segments principally related to the opening of Calvin Klein retail stores. An addition of operating expenses related to our acquisition of CMI. An increase in our Wholesale Dress Furnishings segment due principally to additional SG&A expenses associated with the Mulberry and BVH businesses subsequent to these acquisitions. An increase associated with our new Timberland wholesale men sportswear business. An increase in advertising expenditures. A decrease in incentive compensation costs. SG&A expenses for 2010 as a percentage of total revenue is expected to decrease approximately 200 basis points due to (i) the absence of the costs associated with our restructuring initiatives; and (ii) the realization of cost savings from such restructuring initiatives. Although the acquisition of Tommy Hilfiger is not expected to close until the second quarter of 2010, we will incur costs in 2010 related to the transaction, regardless of whether or not the acquisition is ultimately consummated. These costs are not included in our SG&A guidance as they cannot be reasonably estimated as of the date of this report. Gain on Sale of Investments We sold, in the first quarter of 2006, minority interests held by one of our subsidiaries in certain entities that operate the licenses and related wholesale and retail businesses of Calvin Klein jeans and accessories in Europe and Asia and the ck Calvin Klein bridge line of sportswear and accessories in Europe. During 2007, $3.3 million was released to us from an escrow account established in connection with that transaction. We received in 2008 a distribution of $1.9 million representing our share of the amount that remained in escrow. We recorded these amounts as gains in each of the respective years. Interest Expense and Interest Income The majority of our interest expense relates to our fixed rate long-term debt. As a result, variances in our net interest expense tend to be driven by changes in interest income and, to a lesser extent, costs related to our revolving credit facility. Interest expense of $33.5 million in 2009 was relatively flat to the 2008 and 2007 amounts of $33.6 million and $33.8 million, respectively. Interest income decreased to $1.3 million in 2009 from $6.2 million in 2008. This decrease was due principally to a decrease in average investment rates of return compared to the prior year. Interest income decreased to $6.2 million in 2008 from $16.7 million in 2007. The interest income decline from 2007 to 2008 was due principally to a decrease in our average cash position in 2008 as a result of the completion of our $200.0 million stock repurchase in the fourth quarter of 2007, combined with a decrease in average investment rates of return compared to the prior year. Interest expense is expected to be relatively flat in 2010 as compared with 2009, while interest income is expected to increase due principally to an increase in average investment rates of return, combined with an increase in our average cash position during the year. Income Taxes Income tax expense was as follows: 2009 2008 2007 (dollars in millions) Income tax expense $49.7 $54.5 $111.5 Income tax expense as a % of pre-tax income 23.5% 37.3% 37.8% 32 The income tax expense decrease of $4.9 million and the corresponding rate decrease from 2008 to 2009 was due principally to a tax benefit related primarily to the effect of the lapse of the statute of limitations with respect to certain previously unrecognized tax positions in 2009, mostly offset by an increase in pre-tax income during 2009 compared to the prior year. We currently anticipate that our 2010 tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax income will be between 37.5% and 38.0%. It is possible that our estimated full year rate could change from discrete events arising from specific transactions, audits by tax authorities or the receipt of new information. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES Our capital structure will be significantly impacted if the acquisition of Tommy Hilfiger is consummated. The following discussion does not contemplate the effects of the proposed acquisition on our liquidity and capital resources. Generally, our principal source of cash is from operating activities, and our principal uses of cash are for capital expenditures, contingent purchase price payments and dividends. Additionally, in 2007 we utilized $200.0 million of cash to repurchase approximately 5.2 million shares of our common stock. Operations Cash provided by operating activities was $214.5 million in 2009, which compares with $238.7 million in 2008. Net income adjusted for depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation expense, deferred taxes, impairments and the gain on the sale of investments increased $28.4 million in 2009 as compared to 2008, but was more than offset by changes in working capital, including the following: A decrease in cash flow due to the $38.5 million Warnaco paid us in 2008 in connection with our acquisition of CMI. Please see the section entitled Acquisition of CMI in Note 2, Acquisitions, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion. A decrease in cash flow resulting from a change in other, net due primarily to a tax settlement with the Internal Revenue Service relating to the audit of our United States Federal income tax returns for 2006 and 2007, partially offset by a lower voluntary pension contribution made during 2009 as compared to 2008. A decrease in cash flow resulting from a change in inventories. Inventory balances decreased during 2009, reflecting increased turnover and strong sell-throughs. However, this decrease was not as pronounced as the decrease in inventories during 2008, as inventory levels at the beginning of 2008 were significantly higher than levels at the beginning of 2009. A decrease in cash flow resulting from a change in prepaid expenses due principally to the timing of rent payments in 2009 as compared to 2008. An increase in cash flow resulting from a change in net trade receivables due primarily to the timing of wholesale sales and cash receipts in the fourth quarter of 2009 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2008. Capital Expenditures Our capital expenditures in 2009 were $23.9 million compared to $88.1 million expended in 2008, as 2009 spending was planned to be reduced in the context of the overall economic environment. We currently expect capital expenditures in 2010 to be approximately $65.0 million. Contingent Purchase Price Payments In connection with our acquisition of Calvin Klein, Inc. and certain affiliated companies in 2003, we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein contingent purchase price payments based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales, as defined in the agreement governing this acquisition, of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands with respect to sales made through February 12, 2018. A significant portion of the sales on which the payments to Mr. Klein are made are wholesale sales by us and 33 our licensees and other partners to retailers. Such contingent purchase price payments totaled $37.4 million in 2009. We currently expect that such payments will be $40.0 million to $42.0 million in 2010. In connection with the Superba acquisition, we were obligated to pay the seller contingent purchase price payments if the earnings of the acquired business exceeded certain targets in 2007, 2008 and 2009. Any such contingent purchase price payment was payable 90 days after the applicable fiscal year end. Such contingent purchase price payments totaled $14.5 million in the first quarter of 2008 based on the calculation of 2007 earnings, as defined in the underlying asset purchase agreement, achieved by the acquired business. The acquired business did not achieve the minimum earnings in 2008 and 2009 required for a payout. Acquisitions We acquired in February 2009 from Block Corporation ( Block ), a former licensee of Van Heusen and IZOD big and tall sportswear in the United States, inventories and inventory purchase commitments related to the licensed businesses. We paid $5.7 million during the first quarter of 2009 in connection with the transaction. As part of this transaction, the license agreements between us and Block were terminated. Please see the section entitled Acquisition of Block Assets in Note 2, Acquisitions, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion. We acquired CMI from Warnaco in January 2008. CMI is the licensee of the Calvin Klein Collection apparel and accessories businesses under agreements with our Calvin Klein, Inc. subsidiary. Warnaco acquired the shares of CMI in January 2008 and was obligated to operate the Calvin Klein Collection businesses through 2013. In return for us assuming ownership of CMI, Warnaco made a payment of $38.5 million to us during the first quarter of 2008. As part of this transaction, we paid to Warnaco $17.1 million during the first quarter of 2008 based on a percentage of Warnaco estimate of the net working capital of CMI as of the closing date. This amount was subject to adjustment. We adjusted during 2008 the preliminary allocation of the purchase price based on our calculation of the working capital of CMI as of the closing date. Pursuant to the process set forth in the amended acquisition agreement, we submitted our calculation of the closing date working capital to Warnaco and Warnaco had disputed the calculation. Such dispute was resolved during the fourth quarter of 2009, resulting in Warnaco refunding to us $4.1 million of our consideration paid for the acquisition. Please see the section entitled Acquisition of CMI in Note 2, Acquisitions, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for a further discussion. Dividends Our common stock, which as of January 31, 2010 is the only class of stock issued, currently pays annual dividends totaling $0.15 per share. Cash dividends on our common stock totaled $7.8 million for the full year 2009. We project that cash dividends on our common stock in 2010 will be approximately $7.9 million to $8.0 million based on our current dividend rate, the number of shares of our common stock outstanding at January 31, 2010 and our estimates of stock to be issued during 2010 under our stock incentive plans. Cash Flow Summary Our net cash flow in 2009 was $152.7 million. Cash flow in 2010 will be impacted by various other factors in addition to those noted above in this Liquidity and Capital Resources section. We currently expect to generate approximately $100.0 million of cash flow in 2010. There can be no assurance that this estimate will prove to be accurate. Unforeseen events, including changes in our net income, working capital requirements or other items, including acquisitions and equity transactions, could occur, which could cause our cash flow to vary significantly from this estimate. Financing Arrangements Our capital structure as of January 31, 2010 was as follows: (in millions) Long-term debt $ 399.6 Stockholders equity $1,168.6 34 We believe our capital structure provides a secure base to support our current operations and our planned growth in the future. Our $150.0 million 7 1/4% senior unsecured notes are not due until February 2011, our $150.0 million 8 1/8% senior unsecured notes are not due until May 2013 and our $100.0 million 7 3/4% debentures are not due until November 2023. For near-term liquidity, in addition to our cash balance, we have a $325.0 million secured revolving credit facility with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. as the Administrative Agent and Collateral Agent that expires in July 2012 and provides for revolving credit borrowings, as well as the issuance of letters of credit. We may, at our option, borrow and repay amounts up to a maximum of $325.0 million for revolving credit borrowings and the issuance of letters of credit, with a sublimit of $50.0 million for standby letters of credit and with no sublimit on trade letters of credit. The total amount of the facility may be increased by us under certain conditions by up to $100.0 million. Based on our working capital projections, we believe that our borrowing capacity under this facility provides us with adequate liquidity for our peak seasonal needs for the foreseeable future. During 2009, we had no revolving credit borrowings under the facility, and the maximum amount of letters of credit outstanding was $148.0 million. As of January 31, 2010, we had $134.8 million of outstanding letters of credit under this facility. We currently do not expect to have any revolving credit borrowings under the facility during 2010. All obligations under our secured revolving credit facility are secured by liens on substantially all of our assets and the assets of our domestic subsidiaries and a pledge of all of the equity interests in all of our domestic subsidiaries. In addition, the obligations under our revolving credit facility are guaranteed by all of our domestic subsidiaries that are not borrowers. Our secured revolving credit facility requires us to maintain certain financial covenants, including a minimum level of availability under the secured revolving credit facility. If such minimum level is not maintained, we are then required to maintain a minimum ratio of (i) earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and rent (EBITDAR), less capital expenditures paid in cash; cash dividends and cash distributions; Federal, state, local and foreign income taxes paid in cash; and management fees paid during the period to (ii) fixed charge expense for the period, which con sists of principal payments of debt, cash interest expense and rent expense (as such terms are defined in the secured revolving credit facility). Our secured revolving credit facility also contains covenants that, subject to specified exceptions, may restrict or limit our ability to, among other things: sell or dispose of assets, including equity interests; make loans, advances or guarantees; make investments; declare and pay dividends; engage in transactions with affiliates; incur additional debt, prepay or modify existing debt; incur liens; engage in businesses that are not in a related line of business; and merge with or acquire other companies, liquidate or dissolve. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under our secured revolving credit facility, the lenders may cease making loans, terminate the secured revolving credit facility and declare all amounts outstanding to be immediately due and payable. The secured revolving credit facility specifies a number of events of default (many of which are subject to applicable grace periods), including, among others, the failure to make timely principal and interest payments or to satisfy the covenants, including the financial covenants described above. In addition, we are subject to similar covenants and restrictions in connection with our long-term debt agreements. As of January 31, 2010, we were in compliance with all financial and non-financial covenants. During 2009, both Standard & Poor's and Moody maintained our corporate credit ratings at BBB- and Ba2, respectively. However, in the context of the economic environment during 2009, Standard & Poor moved our outlook from 35 stable to negative and Moody moved our outlook from positive to stable. Our credit ratings contribute to our ability to access the credit markets. Given our capital structure and our projections for future profitability and cash flow, we believe we are well positioned to obtain additional financing, if necessary, for refinancing our long-term debt, or, if opportunities present themselves, future acquisitions, including our proposed acquisition of Tommy Hilfiger. There can be no assurance that such financing, if needed, could be obtained on terms satisfactory to us or be obtained at such time as a specific need may arise. Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes, as of January 31, 2010, our contractual cash obligations by future period: Payments Due by Period Description Total Obligations 2010 2011-2012 2013-2014 Thereafter (in millions) Long-term debt (1) $ 400.0 $ - $ 150.0 $ 150.0 $ 100.0 Interest payments on long-term debt (1) 157.7 30.8 40.4 18.4 68.1 Operating leases (2) 517.8 101.1 149.3 95.0 172.4 Inventory purchase commitments (3) 347.2 347.2 - - - Minimum contractual royalty payments (4) 68.2 19.9 38.3 10.0 - Non-qualified supplemental defined benefit plan (5) 24.1 1.6 3.9 4.0 14.6 Severance payments (6) 4.3 4.0 0.3 - - Sponsorship payments (7) 34.0 6.3 11.2 10.7 5.8 Total contractual cash obligations $ 1,553.3 $ 510.9 $ 393.4 $ 288.1 $ 360.9 (1) We have outstanding $150.0 million of 7 1/4% senior unsecured notes due February 15, 2011, $150.0 million of 8 1/8% senior unsecured notes due May 1, 2013 and $100.0 million of 7 3/4% debentures due November 15, 2023. Interest on each of these securities is payable semi-annually. (2) Includes retail store, warehouse, showroom, office and equipment operating leases. Retail store operating leases generally provide for payment of direct operating costs in addition to rent. The obligation amounts listed include future minimum lease payments and exclude such direct operating costs. (3) Represents contractual commitments for goods on order and not received or paid for as of January 31, 2010. Substantially all of these goods are expected to be received and the related payments are expected to be made within six months of our fiscal year end. (4) Our minimum contractual royalty payments arise under numerous license agreements we have with third parties, each of which has different royalty rates and terms. Agreements typically require us to make minimum payments to the licensors of the licensed trademarks based on expected or required minimum levels of sales of licensed products, as well as additional royalty payments when our sales exceed such minimum sales. Certain of our license agreements require that we pay a specified percentage of net sales to the licensor for advertising and promotion of the licensed products, with no minimum amount required to be paid. These amounts, as well as any advertising spending requirements, are excluded from the minimum contractual royalty payments shown in the table. There is no guarantee that we will exceed the minimum payments under any of these license agreements. However, given our projected sales levels for products covered under these agreements, w e currently anticipate that future payments required under our license agreements on an aggregate basis will exceed the contractual minimums shown in the table. (5) We have an unfunded non-qualified supplemental defined benefit plan covering four current and 16 retired executives under which the participants will receive a predetermined amount during the 10 years following the attainment of age 65, provided that prior to the termination of employment with us, the participant has been in such plan for at least 10 years and has attained age 55. (6) Represents severance payment obligations primarily related to our fourth quarter of 2008 restructuring initiatives. (7) Represents payment obligations primarily for the sponsorship of the Indy Racing League. We entered into an agreement for our IZOD brand to be the title sponsor of the newly re-named IZOD IndyCar Series and the official apparel partner of the Indy Racing League and the Indianapolis Motor Speedway. These amounts also include payment obligations 36 relating to our Van Heusen brand sponsorship of the Van Heusen Pro Football Hall of Fame Fan Choice and obligations related to our naming rights for the IZOD Center sports and entertainment arena. Not included in the above table are contingent purchase price payments we are obligated to pay Mr. Calvin Klein based on 1.15% of total worldwide net sales, as defined in the agreement governing the acquisition of Calvin Klein, Inc. and certain affiliated companies in 2003, of products bearing any of the Calvin Klein brands and are required to be made with respect to sales made through February 12, 2018. A significant portion of the sales on which the payments to Mr. Klein are made are wholesale sales by us and our licensees and other partners to retailers. Such contingent purchase price payments totaled $37.4 million in 2009. Not included in the above table are contributions to our defined benefit qualified pension plans, or payments to employees and retirees in connection with our supplemental pension and postretirement health plans. Contractual cash obligations for these plans cannot be determined due to the number of assumptions required to estimate our future benefit obligations, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. The liabilities associated with these plans are presented in Note 7, Retirement and Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. Not included in the above table are $31.5 million of net potential cash obligations associated with unrecognized tax benefits due to the uncertainty regarding the future cash outflows associated with such obligations. Please refer to Note 8, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report for further information related to unrecognized tax benefits. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current effect, or that are reasonably likely to have a material future effect, on our financial position, changes in financial position, revenue, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. MARKET RISK INTEREST AND EXCHANGE RATE SENSITIVITY Financial instruments held by us include cash equivalents and long-term debt. Interest rates on our long-term debt are fixed. Therefore, a change in rates generally would not have an effect on our interest expense. Note 9, Fair Value Measurements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report outlines the fair value of our fixed rate long-term debt as of January 31, 2010. Note 6, Long-Term Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report outlines the principal amounts, interest rates and other terms required to evaluate the expected sensitivity of interest rate changes on the fair value of our fixed rate long-term debt. Cash and cash equivalents held by us are affected by short-term interest rates. Therefore, a change in short-term interest rates would have an impact on our interest income. Due to the currently low rates of return we are receivi ng on our investments, the impact of a further decrease in short-term interest rates would not have a material impact on our interest income, while an increase in short-term interest rates could have a more material impact. Given our balance of cash and cash equivalents as of January 31, 2010, the effect of a 10 basis point increase in short-term interest rates on our interest income would be approximately $0.5 million annually. Principally all of our revenue and expenses are currently denominated in United States dollars. However, certain of our operations and license agreements expose us to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, primarily the rate of exchange of the United States dollar against the Euro, the Pound, the Yen and the Canadian dollar. Our principal exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our licensing businesses. Many of our license agreements require the licensee to report sales to us in the licensee local currency but to pay us in United States dollars based on the exchange rate as of the last day of the contractual selling period. Thus, while we are not exposed to exchange rate gains and losses between the end of the selling period and the date we collect payment, we are exposed to exchange rate changes during and up to the last day of the selling period. Therefore, during times of a strengthening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenue will be negatively impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar, our foreign royalty revenue will be favorably impacted. Not all foreign license agreements expose us to foreign exchange risk. Many of our foreign license agreements specify that contractual minimums be paid in United States dollars. Thus, for these foreign license agreements where the licensee sales do not exceed contractual minimums, the licensee assumes the risk of changes in exchange rates and we do not. A secondary exposure to changes in exchange rates for the United States dollar results from our foreign operations. Our foreign operations include sales of our products to department and specialty stores throughout Canada and parts of Europe. Sales 37 for these foreign operations are both generated and collected in foreign currency, which exposes us to foreign exchange gains and losses between the date of the sale and the date we collect payment. Therefore, as with our licensing businesses, the results of these operations will be negatively impacted during times of a strengthening United States dollar and favorably impacted during times of a weakening United States dollar. Somewhat mitigating our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro is our Calvin Klein administrative office in Milan, Italy. Our acquisition of CMI has further mitigated our exposure to changes in the exchange rate for the Euro, as the acquired business has certain operations in Italy. Therefore, during times of a strengthening United States dollar against the Euro, the expenses associated with these business operations will be favorably impacted, and during times of a weakening United States dollar against the Euro, the expenses associated with these business operations will be negatively impacted. SEASONALITY Our business generally follows a seasonal pattern. Our wholesale businesses tend to generate higher levels of sales and income in the third quarter, due to selling to our customers in advance of the holiday season. Royalty, advertising and other revenue tends to be earned somewhat evenly throughout the year, although the third quarter has the highest level of royalty revenue due to higher sales by licensees in advance of the holiday season. RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS In June 2009, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ( FASB ) issued guidance to amend the manner in which entities evaluate whether to consolidate variables interest entities as well as when to make these evaluations. The guidance also requires additional disclosures about an entity involvement in variable interest entities. We will adopt this guidance beginning in 2010. We do not expect the adoption to have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations or financial position. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES Our consolidated financial statements are based on the selection and application of significant accounting policies, which require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report. We believe that the following are the more critical judgmental areas in the application of our accounting policies that currently affect our financial position and results of operations: Sales allowances and returns We have arrangements with many of our department and specialty store customers to support their sales of our products. We establish accruals which, based on a review of the individual customer arrangements and the expected performance of our products in their stores, we believe will be required to satisfy our sales allowance obligations. We also establish accruals, which are based on historical data and authorized amounts, that we believe are necessary to provide for inventory returns. It is possible that the accrual estimates could vary from actual results, which would require adjustment to the allowance and returns accruals. Inventories Inventories related to our wholesale operations, comprised principally of finished goods, are stated at the lower of cost or market. Inventories related to our retail operations, comprised entirely of finished goods, are stated at the lower of average cost or market using the retail inventory method. Under the retail inventory method, the valuation of inventories at cost is calculated by applying a cost-to-retail ratio to the retail value of inventories. Permanent and point of sale markdowns, when recorded, reduce both the retail and cost components of inventory on hand so as to maintain the already established cost-to-retail relationship. Based on a review of current business trends, inventory agings and discontinued merchandise categories, a further adjustment to inventory is recorded to reflect additional markdowns which are estimated to be necessary to liquidate existing clearance inventories and reduce inventories to the lower of cost or ma rket. We believe that all inventory writedowns required at January 31, 2010 have been recorded. If market conditions were to change, it is possible that the required level of inventory reserves would need to be adjusted. Asset impairments During 2009, we determined that the long-lived assets in certain of our outlet retail stores and other locations were not recoverable, which resulted in us recording impairment charges. In order to calculate the impairment charges, we estimated the undiscounted future cash flows and the related fair value of each asset. The undiscounted future cash flows for each asset were estimated using current sales trends and other factors. If different assumptions had been used for future sales trends, the recorded impairment charges could have been significantly higher or lower. Note 14, Activity Exit Costs and Asset Impairments, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report includes a further discussion of the circumstances surrounding the impairments and the assumptions related to the impairment charges. 38 Allowance for doubtful accounts Accounts receivable, as presented on our Consolidated Balance Sheets, is net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. An allowance for doubtful accounts is determined through an analysis of the aging of accounts receivable and assessments of collectibility based on historic trends, the financial position of our customers and an evaluation of economic conditions. Because we cannot predict future changes in economic conditions and in the financial stability of our customers, actual future losses from uncollectible accounts may differ from our estimates and could impact our allowance for doubtful accounts. Income taxes We apply an asset and liability approach to accounting for income taxes. Deferred income tax balances reflect the effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases and are stated at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. FASB guidance on accounting for income taxes requires that deferred tax assets be evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent we believe a portion will not be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization of our deferred tax assets, including our recent earnings experience and expectations of future taxable income by taxing jurisdiction, the carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes and other relevant factors. The actual realization of deferred tax assets may differ significantly from the amounts we have recorded. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. FASB guidance on accounting for income taxes requires a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the tax position will be fully sustained upon review by taxing authorities, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. For tax positions that are 50 percent or less likely of being sustained upon audit, we do not recognize any portion of that benefit in the financial statements. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which ma y require periodic adjustments and which may not accurately anticipate actual outcomes. Our actual results could differ materially from our current estimates. Goodwill and other intangible assets Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment based on fair value. These tests are performed annually, at the beginning of the third quarter of each fiscal year, and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. Impairment testing for goodwill is done at a reporting unit level. A reporting unit is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment, called a component. However, two or more components of an operating segment shall be aggregated and deemed a single reporting unit if the components have similar operating characteristics. Under these criteria, as of January 31, 2010, we had 16 reporting units and our goodwill was directly assigned to five of our reporting units. We calculate the fair value of goodwill and intangible assets using a discounted cash flow method. The discounted cash flow method is based on the present value of projected cash flows. Assumptions used in these cash flow projections are generally consistent with our internal forecasts. The estimated cash flows are discounted using a rate that represents our weighted average cost of capital. The weighted average cost of capital is based on a number of variables, including the equity-risk premium and risk-free interest rate. Management believes the assumptions used for the impairment tests are consistent with those that would be utilized by a market participant performing similar valuations for our reporting units. The projected cash flows and weighted average cost of capital may be impacted by adverse changes in market and economic conditions and are subject to change based on the facts and circumstances that exist at the time of the valuation. If different assumptions for future discounted cash flows and allocation of net assets to our reporting units had been applied, significantly different results of our goodwill impairment tests could have resulted. Based upon the results of our annual goodwill impairment test during 2009 and our future cash flow projections, we currently do not believe that any of our reporting units are at significant risk for a future material goodwill impairment. Pension benefits Included in the calculations of expense and liabilities for our pension plans are various assumptions, including return on assets, discount rate and future compensation increases. Note 7, Retirement and Benefit Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this report sets forth the significant rate assumptions used in performing certain calculations related to our pension plans. Actual results could differ from these assumptions, which would require adjustments to our balance sheet and could result in volatility in our future pension expense. Stock-based compensation FASB guidance on stock-based compensation requires measurement of compensation cost for all stock-based awards at fair value on the date of grant and recognition of compensation over the service period for awards expected to vest. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options. This model uses assumptions that include the risk free interest rate, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and expected life of the options. The fair value of restricted stock units is determined based on the quoted price of our common 39 stock on the date of grant. The fair value of contingently issuable performance shares is based on the quoted price of our common stock on the date of grant, reduced for the present value of any dividends expected to be paid on our common stock during the performance cycle, as the contingently issuable performance shares do not accrue dividends prior to being earned. We record expense for contingently issuable performance shares based on our current expectations of the probable number of shares that will ultimately be issued. The value of our stock-based awards is recognized as expense over the service period, net of estimated forfeitures. The estimation of stock awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results or updated estimates differ from our current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period estimates are revised. We consider many factors when estimating expected forfeitures, including types of awards, empl oyee class and historical experience. Actual results and future estimates may differ substantially from our current estimates. 
