CIK: 796343
Company Name: ADOBE SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2012-01-26


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto. In addition to historical information, this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding product plans, future growth and market opportunities which involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled Risk Factors in Part 1, Item 1A of this report. You should carefully review the risks described herein and in other documents we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"), including our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q to be filed in fiscal 2012. When used in this report, the words expects , could , would , may , anticipates , intends , plans , believes , seeks , targets , estimates , looks for , looks to and similar expressions, as well as statements regarding our focus for the future, are generally intended to identify forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements which speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to the forward-looking statements or reflect events or circumstances after the date of this document. BUSINESS OVERVIEW Founded in 1982, Adobe Systems Incorporated is one of the largest and most diversified software companies in the world. We offer a line of software and services used by creative professionals, marketers, knowledge workers, application developers, enterprises and consumers for creating, managing, delivering, measuring, optimizing and engaging with compelling content and experiences across multiple operating systems, devices and media. We market and license our software directly to enterprise customers through our sales force, and to end users through app stores and our own website at www.adobe.com. We also distribute our products through a network of distributors, value-added resellers ( VARs ), systems integrators, independent software vendors ( ISVs ), retailers and original equipment manufacturers ( OEMs ). In addition, we license our technology to hardware manufacturers, software developers and service providers for use in their products and solutions. We offer some of our products via a Software-as-a-Service ( SaaS ) model (also known as a hosted model or cloud-based model) as well as through term subscription and pay-per-use models. Our software runs on personal computers ( PCs ) and server-based computers, as well as on smartphones, tablets and other devices, depending on the product. We have operations in the Americas, Europe, Middle East and Africa ( EMEA ) and Asia. ACQUISITIONS On January 13, 2012 , we completed the acquisition of privately held Efficient Frontier, a multi-channel ad buying and optimization company. Efficient Frontier will be integrated into our Digital Marketing reportable segment for financial reporting purposes beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2012 . See Note 2 and Note 21 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding this acquisition. During fiscal 2011 , we completed six business combinations and two asset acquisitions with aggregate purchase prices totaling approximately $328.3 million . We have included the financial results of the business combinations in our consolidated results of operations beginning on the respective acquisition dates however, the impact of these acquisitions was not material to our consolidated balance sheets and results of operations. On October 28, 2010 , we completed the acquisition of Day, a provider of WEM, digital asset management and social collaboration solutions based in Basel, Switzerland and Boston, Massachusetts for approximately $248.3 million . We have included the financial results of Day in our consolidated results of operations beginning on the acquisition date however the impact of this acquisition was not material to our consolidated balance sheets and results of operations in fiscal 2010. Following the closing, we integrated Day as a product line within our Enterprise segment for financial reporting purposes. On October 23, 2009 , we completed the acquisition of Omniture, an industry leader in web analytics and online business optimization based in Orem, Utah, for approximately $1.8 billion . Accordingly, we have included the results of the business operations acquired from Omniture in our consolidated results of operations beginning on October 24, 2009. Coinciding with the integration of Omniture, we created a new reportable segment for financial reporting purposes. See Note 2 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding these acquisitions. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, we make assumptions, judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our assumptions, judgments and estimates on historical 52 Table of Contents experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates. We also discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. We believe that the assumptions, judgments and estimates involved in the accounting for revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, business combinations, goodwill impairment and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. These areas are key components of our results of operations and are based on complex rules requiring us to make judgments and estimates, so we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results. Revenue Recognition Our revenue is derived from the licensing of software products, associated software maintenance and support plans, custom software development, non-software related hosting services, consulting services, training and technical support. We recognize revenue when all four revenue recognition criteria have been met: persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, we have delivered the product or performed the service, the fee is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Determining whether and when some of these criteria have been satisfied often involves assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue we report. We enter into multiple element revenue arrangements in which a customer may purchase a combination of software, upgrades, maintenance and support, hosting services, and consulting. For our software and software-related multiple element arrangements, we must: (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine whether undelivered products or services are essential to the functionality of the delivered products and services; (3) determine the fair value of each undelivered element using vendor-specific objective evidence ("VSOE"), and (4) allocate the total price among the various elements. VSOE of fair value is used to allocate a portion of the price to the undelivered elements and the residual method is used to allocate the remaining portion to the delivered elements. Absent VSOE, revenue is deferred until the earlier of the point at which VSOE of fair value exists for any undelivered element or until all elements of the arrangement have been delivered. However, if the only undelivered element is maintenance and support, the entire arrangement fee is recognized ratably over the performance period. Changes in assumptions or judgments or changes to the elements in a software arrangement could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of revenue that we report in a particular period. We determine VSOE for each element based on historical stand-alone sales to third parties or from the stated renewal rate for the elements contained in the initial arrangement. In determining VSOE, we require that a substantial majority of the selling prices for a product or service fall within a reasonably narrow pricing range. We have established VSOE for our software maintenance and support services, custom software development services, consulting services and training. In October 2009, the FASB amended the accounting standards for certain multiple deliverable revenue arrangements to: 1)provide updated guidance on whether multiple deliverables exist, how the deliverables in an arrangement should be separated, and how the consideration should be allocated; 2) require an entity to allocate revenue in an arrangement using best estimated selling price ("BESP") of deliverables if a vendor does not have VSOE of selling price or third-party evidence ("TPE") of selling price; and 3) eliminate the use of the residual method and require an entity to allocate revenue using the relative selling price method. We elected to early adopt this accounting guidance at the beginning of our first quarter of fiscal 2010 on a prospective basis for applicable transactions originating or materially modified after November 27, 2009 . The application of these new accounting standards, if applied in the same manner to the year ended November 27, 2009 , would not have had a material impact on total net revenues for that fiscal year. For multiple element arrangements containing our non-software services, we must (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine fair value of each element using the selling price hierarchy of VSOE of fair value, TPE BESP, as applicable, and (3) allocate the total price among the various elements based on the relative selling price method. For multiple-element arrangements that contain software and non-software elements such as our hosted offerings, we allocate revenue to software or software-related elements as a group and any non-software elements separately based on the selling price hierarchy. We determine the selling price for each deliverable using VSOE of selling price, if it exists, or TPE of selling 53 Table of Contents price. If neither VSOE nor TPE of selling price exist for a deliverable, we use its BESP for that deliverable. Once revenue is allocated to software or software-related elements as a group, it follows historic software accounting guidance. Revenue is then recognized when the basic revenue recognition criteria are met for each element. When we are unable to establish selling prices using VSOE or TPE, we use BESP in our allocation of arrangement consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price at which we would transact a sale if the product or service were sold on a stand-alone basis. We are generally unable to establish VSOE or TPE for non-software elements and as such, we use BESP. BESP is generally used for offerings that are not typically sold on a stand-alone basis or for new or highly customized offerings. We determine BESP for a product or service by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to major product groupings, geographies, market conditions, competitive landscape, internal costs, gross margin objectives and pricing practices. Significant pricing practices taken into consideration include historic contractually stated prices, volume discounts where applicable and our price lists. Given the nature of our transactions, which are primarily software and software-related, our go-to-market strategies and our pricing practices, total net revenue as reported during the year ended December 2, 2011 is materially consistent with total net revenue that would have been reported if the transactions entered into or materially modified after November 27, 2009 were subject to previous accounting guidance. In addition to multiple element arrangements, we must estimate certain royalty revenue amounts due to the timing of securing information from our customers. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, our assumptions and judgments regarding future products and services as well as our estimates of royalty revenue could differ from actual events, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. Product revenue is recognized when the above criteria are met. We reduce the revenue recognized for estimated future returns, price protection and rebates at the time the related revenue is recorded. In determining our estimate for returns and in accordance with our internal policy regarding global channel inventory which is used to determine the level of product held by our distributors on which we have recognized revenue, we rely upon historical data, the estimated amount of product inventory in our distribution channel, the rate at which our product sells through to the end user, product plans and other factors. Our estimated provisions for returns can vary from what actually occurs. Product returns may be more or less than what was estimated. The amount of inventory in the channel could be different than what is estimated. Our estimate of the rate of sell through for product in the channel could be different than what actually occurs. There could be a delay in the release of our products. These factors and unanticipated changes in the economic and industry environment could make our return estimates differ from actual returns, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. We offer price protection to our distributors that allows for the right to a credit if we permanently reduce the price of a software product. When evaluating the adequacy of the price protection allowance, we analyze historical returns, current sell-through of distributor and retailer inventory of our products, changes in customer demand and acceptance of our products and other related factors. In addition, we monitor the volume of sales to our channel partners and their inventories. Changes to these assumptions or in the economic environment could result in higher returns or higher price protection costs in subsequent periods. In the future, actual returns and price protection may materially exceed our estimates as unsold products in the distribution channels are exposed to rapid changes in consumer preferences, market conditions or technological obsolescence due to new platforms, product updates or competing products. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, if our estimates change, our returns and price protection reserves would change, which would impact the total net revenue we report. We recognize revenues for hosting services that are based on a committed number of transactions ratably beginning on the date the customer commences use of our services and continuing through the end of the customer term. Over-usage fees, and fees billed based on the actual number of transactions from which we capture data, are billed in accordance with contract terms as these fees are incurred. We record amounts that have been invoiced in accounts receivable and in deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Our consulting revenue is recognized on a time and materials basis and is measured monthly based on input measures, such as on hours incurred to date compared to total estimated hours to complete, with consideration given to output measures, such as contract milestones, when applicable. Stock-based Compensation Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. 54 Table of Contents For our ongoing traditional employee equity awards, we currently use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options and employee stock purchase plan ( ESPP ) shares. The determination of the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant using an option pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include our expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, the risk-free interest rate, estimated forfeitures and expected dividends. We estimate the expected term of options granted by calculating the average term from our historical stock option exercise experience. We estimate the volatility of our common stock by using implied volatility in market traded options. Our decision to use implied volatility was based upon the availability of actively traded options on our common stock and our assessment that implied volatility is more representative of future stock price trends than historical volatility. We base the risk-free interest rate on zero-coupon yields implied from U.S. Treasury issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future and therefore use an expected dividend yield of zero in the option pricing model. We estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting option forfeitures and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. If we use different assumptions for estimating stock-based compensation expense in future periods or if actual forfeitures differ materially from our estimated forfeitures, the change in our stock-based compensation expense could materially affect our operating income, net income and net income per share. Business Combinations We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, assumed equity awards, as well as to in-process research and development based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, deferred revenue obligations and equity assumed. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from software license sales, subscriptions, support agreements, consulting contracts and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed; the acquired company trade name and trademarks as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and trademarks will continue to be used in the combined company product portfolio; and discount rates. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the deferred revenue obligations assumed. The estimated fair value of the support obligations is determined utilizing a cost build-up approach. The cost build-up approach determines fair value by estimating the costs related to fulfilling the obligations plus a normal profit margin. The estimated costs to fulfill the obligations are based on the historical costs related to fulfilling the obligations. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the equity awards assumed. The estimated fair value is determined utilizing a modified binomial option pricing model which assumes employees exercise their stock options when the share price exceeds the strike price by a certain dollar threshold. If the acquired company has significant historical data on their employee exercise behavior, then this threshold is determined based upon the acquired company history. Otherwise, our historical exercise experience is used to determine the exercise threshold. Zero coupon yields implied by U.S. Treasury issuances, implied volatility for our common stock and our historical forfeiture rate are other inputs to the binomial model. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. Goodwill Impairment We complete our goodwill impairment test on an annual basis, during the second quarter of our fiscal year, or more frequently, if changes in facts and circumstances indicate that an impairment in the value of goodwill recorded on our balance sheet may 55 Table of Contents exist. In order to estimate the fair value of goodwill, we typically estimate future revenue, consider market factors and estimate our future cash flows. Based on these key assumptions, judgments and estimates, we determine whether we need to record an impairment charge to reduce the value of the asset carried on our balance sheet to its estimated fair value. Assumptions, judgments and estimates about future values are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy or our internal forecasts. Although we believe the assumptions, judgments and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions, judgments and estimates could materially affect our reported financial results. We completed our annual impairment test in the second quarter of fiscal 2011 and determined there was no impairment. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, we announced changes to in our business strategy which resulted in a reduction of forecasted revenue for certain of our products. We performed an update to our goodwill impairment test for the Enterprise reporting unit and determined there was no impairment.. The results of our annual impairment test and our update in the fourth quarter for our Enterprise reporting unit indicate there is no significant risk of future material goodwill impairment in any of our reporting units. Accounting for Income Taxes We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Management must make assumptions, judgments and estimates to determine our current provision for income taxes and also our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance to be recorded against a deferred tax asset. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the current provision for income taxes take into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of current and future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities. We have established reserves for income taxes to address potential exposures involving tax positions that could be challenged by tax authorities. In addition, we are subject to the continual examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other domestic and foreign tax authorities, including a current examination by the IRS for our fiscal 2008 and 2009 tax returns. These examinations are expected to focus on our intercompany transfer pricing practices as well as other matters. Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of the current and any future tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the value of a deferred tax asset take into account predictions of the amount and category of future taxable income, such as income from operations or capital gains income. Actual operating results and the underlying amount and category of income in future years could render our current assumptions, judgments and estimates of recoverable net deferred taxes inaccurate. Any of the assumptions, judgments and estimates mentioned above could cause our actual income tax obligations to differ from our estimates, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. We are a United States-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. A significant portion of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the U.S., we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries' earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the U.S. While we do not anticipate changing our intention regarding permanently reinvested earnings, if certain foreign earnings previously treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, the related U.S. tax liability may be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on these earnings. Our income tax expense has differed from the tax computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate due primarily to discrete items and to earnings considered as permanently reinvested in foreign operations. Our future effective tax rates could be unfavorably affected by changes in the tax rates in jurisdictions where our income is earned, by changes in, or our interpretation of, tax rules and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we do business, by unanticipated decreases in the amount of earnings in countries with low statutory tax rates, by lapses of the availability of the U.S. research and development tax credit, or by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. Recent Accounting Pronouncements See Note 1 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the effect of new accounting pronouncements on our financial statements. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective There have been no new accounting pronouncements not yet effective that have significance, or potential significance, to our consolidated financial statements. 56 Table of Contents RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview of 2011 Effective in the first quarter of fiscal 2011, we modified our segments due to changes in how we operate our business. We split our prior Creative Solutions segment into two new segments: Creative and Interactive Solutions and Digital Media Solutions. Creative and Interactive Solutions contains our Creative Suite family of products including our professional page layout and web layout products, whereas Digital Media Solutions contains our imaging and video products for professionals and hobbyists. We also merged our former Platform segment into the new Creative and Interactive Solutions segment to better align our focus with market trends and our opportunities. As part of our business unit reorganization, we also moved several products to different businesses. See Note 19 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Prior year information below has been updated to reflect these changes. For fiscal 2011 , we reported solid financial results and executed against our fiscal 2011 strategic growth initiatives: Content Authoring, Digital Marketing Optimization and Customer Experience Management. Our performance was driven by continued demand for our CS5 product family as well as strength in our other business segments including our Enterprise, Knowledge Worker, Omniture and Digital Media Solutions segments. For comparative purposes, financial results for the year ended December 3, 2010 benefited from an extra week in the first quarter of fiscal 2010 due to our 52/53 week financial calendar. This extra week had a favorable impact on our revenue in the first quarter of fiscal 2010 by approximately $35 million and related impact to expenses of approximately $20 million . Fiscal 2010 was a 53-week year, whereas fiscal 2011 was a 52-week year and our first quarter of fiscal 2011 contained one less week. In our Creative and Interactive Solutions segment, adoption of our CS5 family of products continued to drive the overall performance of our creative business. The launch of CS5.5 in May 2011 helped to maintain the revenue run-rate achieved by CS5. Overall, this resulted in 9% revenue growth in fiscal 2011 when compared to fiscal 2010 in this segment. Our Digital Media Solutions segment revenue increased 5% during fiscal 2011 when compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to an overall increase in licensing of our video authoring and image editing products. Our Knowledge Worker segment achieved 13% revenue growth during fiscal 2011 when compared to fiscal 2010, due to continued strong demand for our Acrobat X product which was released in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. Our Enterprise segment also achieved strong revenue growth of 26% during fiscal 2011 when compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to our acquisition of Day in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010, which contributed strong financial performance in this segment. In our Omniture business, we continued to achieve strong momentum during fiscal 2011 with revenue growth of 20% when compared to fiscal 2010. Driving this success was increased demand for our Adobe Online Marketing Suite as well as maintaining strong bookings performance. Our Print and Publishing business segment revenue decreased 3% during fiscal 2011 when compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to lower Shockwave revenue and the timing of Coldfusion product releases. Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Product $ 3,424.5 $ 3,159.2 $ 2,684.8 8 % 18 % Percentage of total revenue 81 % 83 % 91 % Subscription 450.7 386.8 74.6 17 % * Percentage of total revenue 11 % 10 % 3 % Services and support 341.1 254.0 186.5 34 % 36 % Percentage of total revenue 8 % 7 % 6 % Total revenue $ 4,216.3 $ 3,800.0 $ 2,945.9 11 % 29 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is greater than 100%. As described in Note 19 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements , we have the following segments: Creative and Interactive Solutions, Digital Media Solutions, Knowledge Worker, Enterprise, Omniture and Print and Publishing. 57 Table of Contents Our subscription revenue is comprised primarily of fees we charge for our hosted service offerings including our hosted online business optimization services. We recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of agreements with our customers, beginning on the commencement of the service. Of the $450.7 million , $386.8 million and $74.6 million in subscription revenue for fiscal years 2011 , 2010 and 2009 , respectively, approximately $387.4 million , $340.6 million and $44.4 million , respectively, is from our Omniture segment with the remaining amounts representing our other business offerings. We expect our subscription revenue will increase as a result of our investments in new SaaS and subscription models that will allow us to target new users. Our services and support revenue is comprised of consulting, training and maintenance and support, primarily related to the licensing of our enterprise, developer and platform products and the sale of our hosted online business optimization services. Our support revenue also includes technical support and developer support to partners and developer organizations related to our desktop products. Our maintenance and support offerings, which entitle customers to receive product upgrades and enhancements or technical support, depending on the offering, are recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement. Segments In fiscal 2011 , we categorized our products into the following segments: Creative and Interactive Solutions Our Creative and Interactive Solutions segment focuses on delivering a complete professional line of integrated tools for a full range of design and publishing and developer tasks to an extended set of customers. Digital Media Solutions Our Digital Media Solutions segment contains our professional imaging and video products and focuses on many of the same creative professional customers as our Creative and Interactive Solutions business. Knowledge Worker Our Knowledge Worker segment focuses on the needs of knowledge worker customers, providing essential applications and services to help them share information and collaborate. This segment contains our Acrobat family of products and our on-demand, web-based, electronic signature solutions resulting from our acquisition of EchoSign. Enterprise Our Enterprise segment provides server-based Customer Experience Management Solutions to enterprise and government customers to optimize their information intensive customer-facing processes and improve the overall customer experience of their constituents. This segment contains our Adobe Connect, Day and LiveCycle lines of products. Omniture Our Omniture segment provides web analytics and online business optimization products and services to manage and enhance online, offline and multi-channel marketing initiatives. Print and Publishing Our Print and Publishing segment addresses market opportunities ranging from the diverse publishing needs of technical and business publishing to our legacy type and OEM printing businesses. Segment Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Creative and Interactive Solutions $ 1,713.2 $ 1,577.6 $ 1,331.6 9 % 18 % Percentage of total revenue 41 % 42 % 45 % Digital Media Solutions 625.8 593.5 494.6 5 % 20 % Percentage of total revenue 15 % 16 % 17 % Knowledge Worker 740.2 654.3 557.6 13 % 17 % Percentage of total revenue 18 % 17 % 19 % Enterprise 442.7 351.7 297.9 26 % 18 % Percentage of total revenue 10 % 9 % 10 % Omniture 476.1 396.7 56.5 20 % * Percentage of total revenue 11 % 10 % 2 % Print and Publishing 218.3 226.2 207.7 (3 )% 9 % Percentage of total revenue 5 % 6 % 7 % Total revenue $ 4,216.3 $ 3,800.0 $ 2,945.9 11 % 29 % 58 Table of Contents _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is greater than 100%. Fiscal 2011 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2010 Revenue Revenue from Creative and Interactive Solutions increased $135.6 million during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . The year-over-year increase in revenue was driven by continued licensing of the CS5 product family. During fiscal 2011 , revenue associated with our Creative Suite products increased 7% as compared to fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010, the overall number of units licensed for Creative and Interactive Solutions increased and unit average selling prices remained relatively stable. Revenue from Digital Media Solutions increased $32.3 million during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . The growth was primarily due to an increase in revenue associated with our video authoring products, and to a lesser extent, our digital imaging products. Contributing to the growth was a 27% increase in revenue associated with Adobe Creative Suite Production Premium. Photoshop point product revenue remained relatively stable in fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. Both the overall number of units licensed and unit average selling prices for Digital Media Solutions remained relatively stable during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. Revenue from Knowledge Worker increased $85.9 million during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . We attribute this success to strong adoption of our Acrobat X product, which was released in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 , unit average selling prices for Knowledge Worker increased and the number of units licensed remained relatively stable. Revenue from Enterprise increased $91.0 million during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . The increase was primarily due to our addition of products from the acquisition of Day to our Enterprise offerings and strong customer adoption of Day's WEM solutions. Revenue from Omniture increased $79.4 million during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . This increase was due to continued demand for our Online Marketing Suite. Revenue from Print and Publishing decreased $7.9 million during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 . The decrease was primarily due to lower Shockwave revenue and the release of Coldfusion 9 at the end of fiscal 2009 for which a comparable release did not occur in the current year. Also contributing to the decline was a one-time large deal in Adobe Captivate and our Tech Communications products during fiscal 2010 that did not recur in fiscal 2011. Fiscal 2010 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2009 Revenue (Prior year information below has been updated to reflect our fiscal 2011 segment changes) Revenue from Creative Solutions increased $246.0 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to strong licensing of CS4 during fiscal 2010 until the release of CS5, as well as strong adoption of CS5 beginning in the second quarter of fiscal 2010. The increase was driven largely by a 23% increase in Creative Suite products related revenue as compared to the prior year. Excluding large enterprise license agreement ( ELA ) deals, the overall number of units licensed increased and unit average selling prices remained relatively stable during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 . Revenue from Digital Media Solutions increased $98.9 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 . The increase was primarily due to an increase in revenue associated with our image editing products and to a lesser extent our video authoring products. Contributing to the increase in revenue was growth of 24% in our Photoshop point product revenue coupled with a 27% increase in Creative Suite Production Premium revenue. Excluding ELA deals, the overall number of units licensed increased and unit average selling prices remained relatively stable during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 . Revenue from Knowledge Worker increased $96.7 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 . We attribute this success to strength in enterprise licensing of Acrobat and improved economic conditions in certain markets and geographies where we focus on Acrobat adoption. An increase in the number of units licensed also contributed to the increase in revenue. Unit average selling prices, excluding large ELA deals, have remained relatively stable. Revenue from Enterprise increased $53.8 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 due to increased adoption of our LiveCycle and Adobe Connect products as well as the acquisition of Day, which closed late in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 and contributed $5.4 million in revenue. Revenue from Omniture increased $340.2 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 . We acquired Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and therefore do not have a full fiscal year of revenue for 2009 in which to provide a comparison between fiscal years. 59 Table of Contents Revenue from Print and Publishing increased $18.5 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 due to an improved economic environment in certain markets and geographies, the launch of new products, fees received for engineering services and royalties related to PostScript products. Geographical Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Americas $ 2,044.6 $ 1,835.3 $ 1,382.6 11 % 33 % Percentage of total revenue 49 % 48 % 46 % EMEA 1,317.4 1,191.9 928.9 11 % 28 % Percentage of total revenue 31 % 32 % 32 % Asia 854.3 772.8 634.4 11 % 22 % Percentage of total revenue 20 % 20 % 22 % Total revenue $ 4,216.3 $ 3,800.0 $ 2,945.9 11 % 29 % Fiscal 2011 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2010 Revenue by Geography Overall revenue for fiscal 2011 increased in each of the geographic regions when compared to fiscal 2010. Within each geographic region, every reportable segment contributed to the increase in revenue with the exception of Print and Publishing, which experienced decreases in EMEA and Asia. The increase in revenue during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 in the Americas, EMEA and Asia was attributable to the factors noted above. Fiscal 2010 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2009 Revenue by Geography Overall revenue in each of the geographic regions for fiscal 2010 increased compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to the launch of CS5 in the second quarter of fiscal 2010 as well as additional revenue from Omniture which we acquired in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. Increased revenue in our Knowledge Worker and Enterprise business segments also contributed to the increase as well as an improved economy across all geographies. Included in the overall increase in revenue for fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 and fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 were impacts associated with foreign currency as shown below. Our currency hedging program is used to mitigate a portion of the foreign currency impact to revenue. (in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Revenue impact: Increase/(Decrease) EMEA: Euro $ 16.4 $ (18.4 ) British Pound 6.5 (3.3 ) Other currencies 2.9 0.1 Total EMEA 25.8 (21.6 ) Japanese Yen 38.5 23.7 Other currencies 14.6 12.1 Total revenue impact 78.9 14.2 Hedging impact: EMEA 3.6 19.5 Japanese Yen 0.2 0.6 Total hedging impact 3.8 20.1 Total impact $ 82.7 $ 34.3 During fiscal 2011, the Euro, British Pound and other EMEA currencies were favorably impacted as the U.S. Dollar weakened against these currencies causing revenue in EMEA measured in average U.S. Dollar equivalents to increase compared to fiscal 2010. Revenue measured in both the Japanese Yen and other currencies also were favorably impacted as the U.S. Dollar weakened against these currencies. During fiscal 2011, our EMEA and Japanese Yen currency hedging programs resulted in hedging gains as noted above. 60 Table of Contents During fiscal 2010, the U.S. dollar strengthened against both the Euro and British pound causing revenue in EMEA measured in average U.S. Dollar equivalents to decrease as compared to fiscal 2009. Revenue in Japanese Yen was favorably impacted as the U.S. Dollar weakened against this currency as compared to fiscal 2009. Other currencies in Asia, specifically the Australian Dollar also strengthened against the U.S. Dollar resulting in a favorable impact to revenue during fiscal 2010. We had no comparable impact to revenue from the Australian Dollar during fiscal 2009. During fiscal 2010, our EMEA and Japanese Yen currency hedging programs resulted in hedging gains as noted above. See Note 19 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further geographic information. Product Backlog The actual amount of product backlog at any particular time may not be a meaningful indicator of future business prospects. Shippable backlog is comprised of unfulfilled orders, excluding those associated with new product releases, those pending credit review and those not shipped due to the application of our global inventory policy. Our shippable backlog at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 was approximately 5% of fourth quarter fiscal 2010 revenue. We had minimal shippable backlog at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011. We expect that our shippable backlog will be insignificant in future periods. Cost of Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Product $ 125.7 $ 127.5 $ 180.6 (1 )% (29 )% Percentage of total revenue 3 % 3 % 6 % Subscription 194.0 195.6 48.3 (1 )% * Percentage of total revenue 5 % 5 % 2 % Services and support 118.2 80.4 67.8 47 % 19 % Percentage of total revenue 3 % 2 % 2 % Total cost of revenue $ 437.9 $ 403.5 $ 296.7 9 % 36 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is greater than 100%. Product Cost of product revenue includes product packaging, third-party royalties, excess and obsolete inventory, amortization related to localization costs, purchased intangibles and acquired rights to use technology and the costs associated with the manufacturing of our products. Cost of product revenue decreased due to the following: % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Amortization of purchased intangibles 6 % (23 )% Royalty cost (3 ) (5 ) Localization costs related to our product launches (7 ) Cost of sales 4 Various individually insignificant items (4 ) 2 Total change (1 )% (29 )% Amortization of purchased intangibles increased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to amortization expense associated with intangible assets purchased through recent acquisitions. Amortization of purchased intangibles decreased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 due to a decrease in amortization of $80.0 million associated with certain intangible assets purchased through the Macromedia acquisition which were fully amortized during fiscal 2009. Royalty costs decreased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 and decreased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily due to a decrease in obligations to certain key vendors. The decrease in localization costs during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 was primarily due to capitalized localization costs associated with CS4 products becoming fully amortized at the end of fiscal 2009, offset in part by new localization costs incurred as a result of the launch of CS5 products during fiscal 2010. 61 Table of Contents Cost of sales increased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to the associated increase in shrink-wrap shipments as a result of the launch of our CS5 products during fiscal 2010. Subscription Cost of subscription revenue consists of expenses related to operating our network infrastructure, including depreciation expenses and operating lease payments associated with computer equipment, data center costs, salaries and related expenses of network operations, implementation, account management and technical support personnel, amortization of intangible assets and allocated overhead. We enter into contracts with third-parties for the use of their data center facilities and our data center costs largely consist of the amounts we pay to these third-parties for rack space, power and similar items. Cost of subscription revenue decreased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to a decrease in amortization expense related to certain intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Omniture that were fully amortized at the end of fiscal 2011 offset in part by increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount and increases in data center costs related to higher transaction volumes. Cost of subscription revenue increased in fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 as a result of our acquisition of Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and the addition of its related data center costs. Also included in cost of subscription revenue for fiscal 2010 is $58.4 million of amortization expense related to intangible assets acquired in conjunction with this acquisition. Services and Support Cost of services and support revenue is primarily comprised of employee-related costs and associated costs incurred to provide consulting services, training and product support. Cost of services and support revenue increased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010, primarily due to increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount primarily from the Day acquisition. Cost of services and support revenue increased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009, due to increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount as a result of our acquisition of Omniture. Operating Expenses (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Research and development $ 738.1 $ 680.3 $ 565.1 8 % 20 % Percentage of total revenue 18 % 18 % 19 % Sales and marketing $ 1,385.8 $ 1,244.2 $ 981.9 11 % 27 % Percentage of total revenue 33 % 33 % 33 % General and administrative $ 414.6 $ 383.5 $ 298.7 8 % 28 % Percentage of total revenue 10 % 10 % 10 % Restructuring and other charges $ 97.8 $ 23.3 $ 41.3 * (44 )% Percentage of total revenue 2 % 1 % 1 % Amortization of purchased intangibles and incomplete technology $ 42.8 $ 72.1 $ 71.6 (41 )% 1 % Percentage of total revenue 1 % 2 % 2 % Total operating expenses $ 2,679.1 $ 2,403.4 $ 1,958.6 11 % 23 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is greater than 100%. Research and Development, Sales and Marketing, and General and Administrative Expenses The increase in research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 was primarily driven by higher employee compensation due to additional headcount. The increase in research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 was primarily driven by increases in compensation expense due to additional headcount as a result of our acquisition of Omniture and to higher employee compensation including bonuses based on company performance to date when compared to fiscal 2009. 62 Table of Contents Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses for software developers, contracted development efforts, related facilities costs and expenses associated with computer equipment used in software development. Research and development expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 6 % 2 % Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 16 Various individually insignificant items 2 2 Total change 8 % 20 % We believe that investments in research and development, including the recruiting and hiring of software developers, are critical to remain competitive in the marketplace and are directly related to continued timely development of new and enhanced products. We will continue to focus on long-term opportunities available in our end markets and make significant investments in the development of our application, tool and service offerings. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses, sales commissions, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our sales, marketing, order management and global supply chain management personnel. Sales and marketing expenses also include the costs of programs aimed at increasing revenue, such as advertising, trade shows, public relations and other market development programs. Sales and marketing expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 5 % 3 % Marketing spending related to product launches and overall marketing efforts to further increase revenue 3 3 Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 1 16 Various individually insignificant items 2 5 Total change 11 % 27 % General and Administrative General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefit expenses, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our finance, facilities, human resources, legal, information services and executive personnel. General and administrative expenses also include outside legal and accounting fees, provision for bad debts, expenses associated with computer equipment and software used in the administration of the business, charitable contributions and various forms of insurance. General and administrative expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 3 % 5 % Professional and consulting fees 5 4 Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 2 15 Depreciation and amortization (1 ) 3 Various individually insignificant items (1 ) 1 Total change 8 % 28 % Professional and consulting fees increased during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to increase in fees for various technology projects and increased litigation expense. Professional and consulting fees increased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to increases in information technology services to support our business. 63 Table of Contents Restructuring and Other Related Charges During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. In connection with our recent Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan initiated in November 2011, we accrued $81.9 million for termination benefits and closing redundant facilities as well as $12.7 million related to the write-off of certain assets that were no longer useful to the company based on changes in our business. In connection with our Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan, we accrued $3.7 million during fiscal 2011 for closing redundant facilities. During fiscal 2010, in connection with our Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan we accrued $25.4 million for termination benefits and closing redundant facilities. During fiscal 2009, we accrued $25.5 million for termination benefits related to our Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan and we also accrued $15.2 million for termination benefits and closing redundant facilities related to our Fiscal 2008 Restructuring Plan. In connection with all of our restructuring plans, we recorded minor favorable adjustments for changes in previous estimates during the periods presented. See Note 11 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our restructuring plans. Amortization of Purchased Intangibles and Incomplete Technology During the last several years, we have completed a number of business combinations and asset acquisitions including Macromedia in fiscal 2006, Omniture in fiscal 2009, Day in fiscal 2010 and eight smaller acquisitions in fiscal 2011. As a result of these acquisitions, we purchased intangible assets that are being amortized over their estimated useful lives ranging from one to twelve years. Amortization expense decreased 41% during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 primarily due to amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Macromedia that were fully amortized at the end of fiscal 2010. This decrease was offset in part by an increase in amortization expense as a result of intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Day in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 as well as an increase in intangible assets purchased through our fiscal 2011 acquisitions. Amortization expense increased 1% during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009, primarily as a result of intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. This increase was offset by a decrease in amortization expense associated with certain intangible assets purchased through our Macromedia acquisition that were fully amortized at the end of fiscal 2009. Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Interest and other income (expense), net $ (3.0 ) $ 13.1 $ 31.4 (123 )% (58 )% Percentage of total revenue * * 1 % Interest expense (67.0 ) (56.9 ) (3.4 ) 18 % * Percentage of total revenue (2 )% (1 )% * Investment gains (losses), net 5.9 (6.1 ) (17.0 ) (197 )% (64 )% Percentage of total revenue * * (1 )% Total non-operating income (expense), net $ (64.1 ) $ (49.9 ) $ 11.0 28 % (554 )% _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is not meaningful. Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term fixed income investments. Interest and other income (expense), net also includes foreign exchange gains and losses, including those from hedging revenue transactions primarily denominated in Euro and Yen currencies, and gains and losses on fixed income investments. Interest and other income (expense), net changed from net income in fiscal 2010 to net expense in fiscal 2011 primarily due to increased foreign exchange losses of $17.3 million partially offset by increased interest income of $2.4 million due to higher average interest rates on our investments. Interest and other income (expense), net, decreased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to a reduction in interest earned of $12.8 million resulting from lower average interest rates on our investments and $5.8 million lower realized gains on our investments. During fiscal 2010, we also recorded a $20.8 million gain associated with a forward contract purchased to hedge our economic exposure related to our acquisition of Day, which was offset in part by foreign exchange losses and increased cash flow hedging costs. 64 Table of Contents Interest Expense In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 (the 2015 Notes ) and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 (the 2020 Notes and, together with the 2015 Notes, the Notes ). On February 1, 2010 , we repaid the outstanding balance under our $1.0 billion credit facility with a portion of the proceeds from our Notes. The increase in interest expense during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010 was primarily due to interest associated with higher borrowings resulting from the issuance of the Notes. The increase in interest expense during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 was primarily due to interest associated with higher borrowings resulting from the issuance of the Notes as well as an increase in our average borrowing rate due to the Notes. Interest expense for fiscal 2009 primarily represents interest associated with the then outstanding balance under our credit facility. Interest due on any outstanding balance under the credit facility was paid upon expiration of the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) contract or at a minimum, quarterly. Investment Gains (Losses), Net Investment gains (losses), net consists principally of realized gains or losses from the sale of marketable equity investments, other-than-temporary declines in the value of marketable and non-marketable equity securities and unrealized holding gains and losses associated with our deferred compensation plan assets (classified as trading securities) and gains and losses associated with our direct and indirect investments in privately held companies. Investment gains and (losses), net fluctuated due to the following (in millions): Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Net gains (losses) related to our direct and indirect investments in privately held companies $ 5.3 (11.3 ) (18.7 ) Gains from sale of marketable equity securities 0.8 4.0 Write-downs due to other-than-temporary declines in value of our marketable equity securities (0.2 ) (0.3 ) Net gains related to our trading securities 1.2 2.0 Total investment gains (losses), net $ 5.9 (6.1 ) (17.0 ) During fiscal 2011, total investment gains (losses), net improved to net gains primarily due to unrealized losses related to our indirect investments in privately held companies in fiscal 2010 that did not recur during fiscal 2011. This was offset in part by a decrease in net realized gains from the sale of marketable equity securities during fiscal 2011 due to less sales of these investments. During fiscal 2010, net losses on our investments improved primarily due to a decrease in net unrealized losses incurred on certain of our direct investments in privately held companies during fiscal 2009 offset in part by an increase in net realized losses from our portfolio of indirect investments in privately held companies in fiscal 2010. Provision for Income Taxes (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 % Change 2011-2010 % Change 2010-2009 Provision $ 202.4 $ 168.5 $ 315.0 20 % (47 )% Percentage of total revenue 5 % 4 % 11 % Effective tax rate 20 % 18 % 45 % Our effective tax rate increased by approximately two percentage points during fiscal 2011 as compared to fiscal 2010. The increase was primarily due to the one-time tax costs of licensing acquired company assets to Adobe's trading companies. These costs were partially offset by tax benefits related to a favorable state income tax ruling and the reinstatement of the federal research and development tax credit. Our effective tax rate decreased approximately twenty-seven percentage points during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease was primarily due to tax benefits recognized as a result of the completion in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 of a U.S. income tax examination covering fiscal years 2005 through 2007 and stronger international profits, partially offset by the expiration of the research and development credit on December 31, 2009. 65 Table of Contents We are a United States-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. A significant portion of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the U.S., we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the U.S. While we do not anticipate changing our intention regarding permanently reinvested earnings, if certain foreign earnings previously treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, the related U.S. tax liability may be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on these earnings. Currently, there are a significant amount of foreign earnings upon which U.S. income taxes have not been provided. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at December 2, 2011 was $163.6 million , exclusive of interest and penalties. If the total unrecognized tax benefits at December 2, 2011 were recognized in the future, $145.7 million of unrecognized tax benefits would decrease the effective tax rate, which is net of an estimated $17.9 million federal benefit related to deducting certain payments on future state tax returns. As of December 2, 2011 , the combined amount of accrued interest and penalties related to tax positions taken on our tax returns was approximately $12.3 million . This amount is included in non-current income taxes payable. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $40 million . LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES This data should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. As of (in millions) December 2, 2011 December 3, 2010 Cash and cash equivalents $ 989.5 $ 749.9 Short-term investments $ 1,922.2 $ 1,718.1 Working capital $ 2,520.7 $ 2,148.0 Stockholders equity $ 5,783.1 $ 5,192.4 A summary of our cash flows is as follows: (in millions) Fiscal 2011 Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 1,543.3 $ 1,113.0 $ 1,117.8 Net cash used for investing activities (757.4 ) (1,159.3 ) (1,497.1 ) Net cash (used for) provided by financing activities (550.4 ) (215.3 ) 477.6 Effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents 4.1 12.0 14.7 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents $ 239.6 $ (249.6 ) $ 113.0 Our primary source of cash is receipts from revenue. The primary uses of cash are payroll related expenses, general operating expenses including marketing, travel and office rent, and cost of product revenue. Other sources of cash are proceeds from the exercise of employee options and participation in the ESPP. Another use of cash is our stock repurchase program, which is described below. Cash Flows from Operating Activities For fiscal 2011, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.5 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and accrued restructuring. Increases in deferred revenue related primarily to an overall increase in billing activity for maintenance and support/upgrade plans, hosted and professional services and site and term licenses. Accrued restructuring increased primarily due to recognition of liabilities related to employee termination and facility exit costs associated with the Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan which occurred in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 and the majority of which will be paid in the first quarter 66 Table of Contents of fiscal 2012. See Note 11 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our restructuring charges. The primary working capital uses of cash for fiscal 2011 were increases in trade receivables coupled with decreases in accrued expenses and taxes payable. Trade receivables increased primarily as a result of overall higher sales levels and billing occurring during the latter half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, offset in part by an increased rate of collection for Omniture services. Decreases in accrued expenses were primarily related to lower accrued bonus levels in fiscal 2011. During fiscal 2011, we also made our second and third semi-annual interest payments associated with our Notes totaling $62.3 million . Taxes payable decreased primarily due to the resolution of a Canadian Tax audit offset in part by quarterly increases to the tax provision in excess of taxes paid. For fiscal 2010, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.1 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in accrued expenses and deferred revenue. Accrued expenses increased primarily due to amounts due under our fiscal 2010 annual incentive plan and interest on our Notes both of which were paid in the first quarter of fiscal 2011. During fiscal 2010, we made our first semi-annual interest payment associated with our Notes totaling $31.1 million . Increases in deferred revenue related primarily to activity from our acquisition of Omniture, the related renewal of calendar-year based contracts in addition to increases in maintenance and support orders and royalty revenue deferrals related to changes in customer billing terms. The primary working capital uses of cash for fiscal 2010 were increases in trade receivables, prepaid expenses and other current assets as well as decreases in taxes payable, accrued restructuring and trade payables. Trade receivables increased as a result of products shipped and billed during the latter half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 as a result of the launch of Acrobat X and slower receivable payments pertaining to Omniture services. Increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets related primarily to higher valuations on our cash flow and balance sheet hedges due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar. Income taxes payable decreased primarily due to payments of approximately $200.0 million for tax liabilities associated with the repatriation of undistributed foreign earnings as well as a $20.0 million settlement of an IRS exam in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. Accrued restructuring decreased primarily due to payments made related to the fiscal 2009 restructuring plan that was initiated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 in addition to adjustments made to previously recorded estimates, offset in part by new charges. For fiscal 2009, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.1 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash expenses. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with decreases in trade receivables, prepaid expenses and other current assets and increases in income taxes payable. Trade receivables decreased primarily from CS4 revenue that was shipped in the latter half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 and collected during the first quarter of fiscal 2009, in addition to lower overall gross revenue and improved collections. The primary working capital uses of cash for fiscal 2009 were decreases in accrued expenses, deferred revenue, trade payables and accrued restructuring. Accrued expenses decreased primarily due to payments for employee bonuses and commissions related to fiscal 2008. Decreases in deferred revenue related primarily to deferred revenue that was recognized in the first quarter of fiscal 2009 associated with our free of charge upgrades for CS4 and Photoshop Lightroom products, as well as declines in maintenance and support orders. Accrued restructuring decreased primarily due to payments related to the 2008 restructuring program that was initiated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, offset in part by new charges related to our 2009 restructuring program and acquisition of Omniture. Cash Flows from Investing Activities For fiscal 2011, net cash used for investing activities of $0.8 billion was primarily due to purchases of short-term investments and multiple business acquisitions, offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2011 represented purchases of property, plant and equipment and long-term investments, intangibles and other assets. On January 13, 2012 , we acquired privately held Efficient Frontier, a multi-channel ad buying and optimization company, for approximately $346 million in cash. See Note 2 and Note 21 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding this acquisition. For fiscal 2010, net cash used for investing activities of $1.2 billion was primarily due to purchases of short-term investments, offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2010 represented purchases of property and equipment and long-term investments and other assets and the acquisition of Day. These uses of cash were offset in part by proceeds from the sale of equipment under our sale lease-back transaction and the sale of long-term investments. See Note 16 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our sale lease-back transaction. 67 Table of Contents For fiscal 2009, net cash used for investing activities of $1.5 billion was primarily due to the acquisition of Omniture, purchases of short-term investments and property and equipment, offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Cash Flows from Financing Activities For fiscal 2011, net cash used for financing activities of $550.4 million was primarily due to treasury stock repurchases offset in part by proceeds from our treasury stock issuances. See the section titled Stock Repurchase Program discussed below. In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 . On February 1, 2010 , we paid the outstanding balance on our credit facility, and the entire $1.0 billion credit line under this facility remains available for borrowing. For fiscal 2009, net cash provided by financing activities of $477.6 million was primarily due to additional borrowing under our credit facility and proceeds from treasury stock issuances, offset in part by treasury stock repurchases. See section entitled Stock Repurchase Program discussed below. We expect to continue our investing activities, including short-term and long-term investments, venture capital, facilities expansion and purchases of computer systems for research and development, sales and marketing, product support and administrative staff. Furthermore, cash reserves may be used to repurchase stock under our stock repurchase program and to strategically acquire companies, products or technologies that are complementary to our business. Restructuring During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. Currently, we have the following five active restructuring plans, two of which were the result of large acquisitions: Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan Fiscal 2008 Restructuring Plan Omniture Restructuring Plan Macromedia Restructuring Plan As of December 2, 2011 , we have accrued total restructuring charges of approximately $88.4 million of which approximately $74.4 million relates to ongoing termination benefits and contract terminations that are expected to be paid during fiscal 2012. The remaining $14.0 million relates to the cost of closing redundant facilities and are expected to be paid under contract through fiscal 2021of which approximately 75% will be paid through 2014. During fiscal 2011, we made payments related to the above restructuring plans totaling approximately $13.1 million which consisted of approximately $6.8 million and $6.3 million in payments related to termination benefits and contract terminations and the closing of redundant facilities, respectively. As of December 3, 2010 , we accrued total restructuring charges of approximately $16.4 million of which approximately $2.6 million related to ongoing termination benefits and contract terminations which were paid during the first quarter of fiscal 2011. The remaining $13.8 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities and were expected to be paid under contract through fiscal 2021 of which over 70% will be paid through 2013. During fiscal 2010, we made payments related to the above restructuring plans totaling approximately $49.9 million which consisted of approximately $42.3 million related to termination benefits and contract terminations and approximately $7.6 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet the cash outlays for the restructuring actions described above. See Note 11 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more detailed information regarding our restructuring plans. Other Liquidity and Capital Resources Considerations Our existing cash, cash equivalents and investment balances may fluctuate during fiscal 2012 due to changes in our planned cash outlay, including changes in incremental costs such as direct and integration costs related to our acquisitions. Our cash and investments totaled $2.9 billion as of December 2, 2011 . Of this amount, approximately 75% was held by our foreign subsidiaries and subject to material repatriation tax effects. Our intent is to permanently reinvest a significant portion of our earnings from foreign operations, and current plans do not anticipate that we will need funds generated from foreign operations to fund our domestic operations. In the event funds from foreign operations are needed to fund operations in the United States and if U.S. tax has not already been previously provided, we would provide for and pay additional U.S. taxes in connection with repatriating these funds. 68 Table of Contents Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to the risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled Risk Factors . However, based on our current business plan and revenue prospects, we believe that our existing balances, our anticipated cash flows from operations and our available credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and operating resource expenditure requirements for the next twelve months. As of December 2, 2011 , the amount outstanding under the Notes was $1.5 billion . There is no outstanding balance under our credit facility and the entire $1.0 billion credit line under this facility remains available for borrowing. We use professional investment management firms to manage a large portion of our invested cash. External investment firms managed, on average, 78% of our consolidated invested balances during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011. The fixed income portfolio is primarily invested in corporate bonds and commercial paper, foreign government securities, municipal securities, U.S. agency securities and U.S. Treasury securities. Stock Repurchase Program During the third quarter of fiscal 2010, our Board of Directors approved an amendment to our stock repurchase program authorized in April 2007 from a non-expiring share-based authority to a time-constrained dollar-based authority. As part of this amendment, the Board of Directors granted authority to repurchase up to $1.6 billion in common stock through the end of fiscal 2012. During fiscal 2011 , 2010 and 2009 , we entered into several structured stock repurchase agreements with large financial institutions, whereupon we provided them with prepayments totaling $695.0 million , $850.0 million and $350.0 million , respectively. Of the $850.0 million of prepayments during fiscal 2010, $250.0 million was under the stock repurchase program prior to the program amendment and the remaining $600.0 million was under the amended $1.6 billion time-constrained dollar-based authority. We enter into these agreements in order to take advantage of repurchasing shares at a guaranteed discount to the Volume Weighted Average Price ( VWAP ) of our common stock over a specified period of time. We only enter into such transactions when the discount that we receive is higher than the foregone return on our cash prepayments to the financial institutions. There were no explicit commissions or fees on these structured repurchases. Under the terms of the agreements, there is no requirement for the financial institutions to return any portion of the prepayment to us. The financial institutions agree to deliver shares to us at monthly intervals during the contract term. The parameters used to calculate the number of shares deliverable are: the total notional amount of the contract, the number of trading days in the contract, the number of trading days in the interval and the average VWAP of our stock during the interval less the agreed upon discount. During fiscal 2011, we repurchased approximately 21.8 million shares at an average price of $31.81 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2011. During fiscal 2010, we repurchased approximately 31.2 million shares at an average price of $29.19 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2009, we repurchased approximately 15.2 million shares at an average price per share of $27.89 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2009. For fiscal 2011 , 2010 and 2009 , the prepayments were classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at the payment date, though only shares physically delivered to us by December 2, 2011 , December 3, 2010 and November 27, 2009 were excluded from the computation of earnings per share. As of December 2, 2011 and December 3, 2010 no prepayments remained under the agreements. As of November 27, 2009 , approximately $59.9 million of prepayments remained under the agreements. Subsequent to December 2, 2011 , as part of our $1.6 billion stock repurchase program, we entered into a structured stock repurchase agreement with a large financial institution whereupon we provided them with a prepayment of $80.0 million . This amount will be classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Upon completion of the $80.0 million stock repurchase agreement, $225.0 million remains under our time-constrained dollar-based authority. See Note 14 and 21 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our stock repurchase programs. See Item 5, Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities for share repurchases during the quarter ended December 2, 2011 . 69 Table of Contents Summary of Stock Repurchases for fiscal 2011 , 2010 and 2009 (in thousands, except average amounts) Board Approval Date Repurchases Under the Plan 2011 2010 2009 Shares Average Shares Average Shares Average December 1997 From employees (1) 1 $ 33.57 1 $ 35.66 1 $ 24.00 Open market $ $ $ Structured repurchases (2) $ 9,358 $ 33.11 15,231 $ 27.89 June 2010 Structured repurchases (2) 21,849 $ 31.81 21,807 $ 27.51 $ Total shares 21,850 $ 31.81 31,166 $ 29.19 15,232 $ 27.89 Total cost $ 695,015 $ 909,900 $ 424,851 _________________________________________ (1) The repurchases from employees represent shares cancelled when surrendered in lieu of cash payments for the option exercise price or withholding taxes due. (2) Stock repurchase agreements executed with large financial institutions. See Stock Repurchase Program above. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations Our principal commitments as of December 2, 2011 consist of obligations under operating leases, capital leases, royalty agreements and various service agreements. See Note 16 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our contractual commitments . Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 2, 2011 (in millions): Payment Due by Period Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Notes $ 1,931.7 $ 62.3 $ 124.5 $ 695.3 $ 1,049.6 Operating leases 251.2 56.8 70.6 43.9 79.9 Capital lease obligations 20.7 9.9 10.8 Purchase obligations 296.1 267.3 11.6 4.2 13.0 Total $ 2,499.7 $ 396.3 $ 217.5 $ 743.4 $ 1,142.5 Notes In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 . Interest on the Notes is payable semi-annually, in arrears on February 1 and August 1, commencing on August 1, 2010. During fiscal 2011 interest payments totaled $62.3 million . At December 2, 2011 , our maximum commitment for interest payments under the Notes was $431.7 million . Capital Lease Obligation In June 2010, we entered into a sale-leaseback agreement to sell equipment totaling $32.2 million and leaseback the same equipment over a period of 43 months. This transaction was classified as a capital lease obligation and recorded at fair value. Covenants Our credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us not to exceed a certain maximum leverage ratio. Our leases for the East and West Towers and the Almaden Tower are both subject to standard covenants including certain financial ratios as defined in the lease agreements that are reported to the lessors quarterly. As of December 2, 2011 , we were in compliance with all of our covenants. Our Notes do not contain any financial covenants. We believe these covenants will not impact our credit or cash in the coming fiscal year or restrict our ability to execute our business plan. Under the terms of our credit agreement and lease agreements, we are not prohibited from paying cash dividends unless payment would trigger an event of default or one currently exists. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. 70 Table of Contents Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at December 2, 2011 was $163.6 million , exclusive of interest and penalties. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $40 million . Royalties We have certain royalty commitments associated with the shipment and licensing of certain products. Royalty expense is generally based on a dollar amount per unit shipped or a percentage of the underlying revenue. Guarantees The lease agreements for our corporate headquarters provide for residual value guarantees. The fair value of a residual value guarantee in lease agreements entered into after December 31, 2002, must be recognized as a liability on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. As such, we recognized $5.2 million and $3.0 million in liabilities, related to the extended East and West Towers and Almaden Tower leases, respectively. These liabilities are recorded in other long-term liabilities with the offsetting entry recorded as prepaid rent in other assets. The balance will be amortized to our Consolidated Statements of Income over the life of the leases. As of December 2, 2011 and December 3, 2010 , the unamortized portion of the fair value of the residual value guarantees, for both leases, remaining in other long-term liabilities and prepaid rent was $0.1 million and $0.7 million , respectively. Indemnifications In the normal course of business, we provide indemnifications of varying scope to customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and from time to time, we are subject to claims by our customers under these indemnification provisions. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not been significant and we are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. To the extent permitted under Delaware law, we have agreements whereby we indemnify our directors and officers for certain events or occurrences while the director or officer is or was serving at our request in such capacity. The indemnification period covers all pertinent events and occurrences during the director's or officer's lifetime. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is unlimited; however, we have director and officer insurance coverage that limits our exposure and enables us to recover a portion of any future amounts paid. We believe the estimated fair value of these indemnification agreements in excess of applicable insurance coverage is minimal. 
