CIK: 796343
Company Name: ADOBE SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2014-01-21


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto. ACQUISITIONS During fiscal 2013, we completed our acquisitions of privately held Neolane, a leader in cross-channel campaign management technology for $616.7 million and privately held Behance, an online social media platform to showcase and discover creative work for $111.1 million . During fiscal 2013, we began integrating Neolane and Behance into our Digital Marketing and Digital Media reportable segments, respectively. The impact of these acquisitions were not material to our Consolidated Financial Statements. During fiscal 2012, we completed the acquisition of privately held Efficient Frontier, a multi-channel digital ad buying and optimization company for $374.7 million . During fiscal 2012, we began integrating Efficient Frontier into our Digital Marketing segment. During fiscal 2011, we completed six business combinations and two asset acquisitions with aggregate purchase prices totaling $328.3 million . We have included the financial results of the business combinations in our consolidated results of operations beginning on the respective acquisition dates. See Note 2 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding these acquisitions. CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES In preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, we make assumptions, judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our assumptions, judgments and estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates. We also discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. We believe that the assumptions, judgments and estimates involved in the accounting for revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, business combinations, goodwill impairment and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. These areas are key components of our results of operations and are based on complex rules requiring us to make judgments and estimates, so we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results. Revenue Recognition Our revenue is derived from the licensing of perpetual, time-based and subscription software products, associated software maintenance and support plans, non-software related hosting services, consulting services, training and technical support. We recognize revenue when persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, we have delivered the product or performed the service, the fee is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Determining whether and when some of these criteria have been satisfied often involves assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue we report. We enter into multiple element revenue arrangements in which a customer may purchase a combination of software, upgrades, maintenance and support, hosting services and consulting. For our software and software-related multiple element arrangements, we must: (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine whether undelivered products or services are essential to the functionality of the delivered products and services; (3) determine the fair value of each undelivered element using vendor-specific objective evidence ( VSOE ), and (4) allocate the total price among the various elements. VSOE of fair value is used to allocate a portion of the price to the undelivered elements and the residual method is used to allocate the remaining portion to the delivered elements. Absent VSOE, revenue is deferred until the earlier of the point at which VSOE of fair value exists for any undelivered element or until all elements of the arrangement have been delivered. However, if the only undelivered element is maintenance and support, the entire arrangement fee is recognized ratably over the performance period. Changes in assumptions or judgments or changes to the 35 Table of Contents elements in a software arrangement could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of revenue that we report in a particular period. We determine VSOE for each element based on historical stand-alone sales to third parties or from the stated renewal rate for the elements contained in the initial arrangement. In determining VSOE, we require that a substantial majority of the selling prices for a product or service fall within a reasonably narrow pricing range. We have established VSOE for our software maintenance and support services, custom software development services, con sulting services and training. For multiple-element arrangements containing our non-software services, we must: (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine fair value of each element using the selling price hierarchy of VSOE of selling price, third-party evidence ( TPE ) of selling price or best-estimated selling price ( BESP ), as applicable; and (3) allocate the total price among the various elements based on the relative selling price method. For multiple-element arrangements that contain both software and non-software elements, we allocate revenue to software or software-related elements as a group and any non-software elements separately based on the selling price hierarchy. We determine the selling price for each deliverable using VSOE of selling price, if it exists, or TPE of selling price. If neither VSOE nor TPE of selling price exist for a deliverable, we use BESP. Once revenue is allocated to software or software-related elements as a group, we recognize revenue in conformance with software revenue accounting guidance. Revenue is recognized when revenue recognition criteria are met for each element. We are generally unable to establish VSOE or TPE for non-software elements and as such, we use BESP. BESP is generally used for offerings that are not typically sold on a stand-alone basis or for new or highly customized offerings. We determine BESP for a product or service by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to, major product groupings, geographies, market conditions, competitive landscape, internal costs, gross margin objectives and pricing practices. Pricing practices taken into consideration include historic contractually stated prices, volume discounts where applicable and our price lists. We must estimate certain royalty revenue amounts due to the timing of securing information from our customers. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, our assumptions and judgments regarding future products and services as well as our estimates of royalty revenue could differ from actual events, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. Product revenue is recognized when the above criteria are met. We reduce the revenue recognized for estimated future returns, price protection and rebates at the time the related revenue is recorded. In determining our estimate for returns and in accordance with our internal policy regarding global channel inventory which is used to determine the level of product held by our distributors on which we have recognized revenue, we rely upon historical data, the estimated amount of product inventory in our distribution channel, the rate at which our product sells through to the end user, product plans and other factors. Our estimated provisions for returns can vary from what actually occurs. Product returns may be more or less than what was estimated. The amount of inventory in the channel could be different than what is estimated. Our estimate of the rate of sell-through for product in the channel could be different than what actually occurs. There could be a delay in the release of our products. These factors and unanticipated changes in the economic and industry environment could make our return estimates differ from actual returns, thus impacting our financial position and results of operations. In the future, actual returns and price protection may exceed our estimates as unsold products in the distribution channels are exposed to rapid changes in consumer preferences, market conditions or technological obsolescence due to new platforms, product updates or competing products. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, if our estimates change, our returns and price protection reserves would change, which would impact the total net revenue we report. We recognize revenues for hosting services that are based on a committed number of transactions ratably beginning on the date the customer commences use of our services and continuing through the end of the customer term. Over-usage fees, and fees billed based on the actual number of transactions from which we capture data, are billed in accordance with contract terms as these fees are incurred. We record amounts that have been invoiced in accounts receivable and in deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Our consulting revenue is recognized on a time and materials basis and is measured monthly based on input measures, such as on hours incurred to date compared to total estimated hours to complete, with consideration given to output measures, such as contract milestones, when applicable. 36 Table of Contents Business Combinations We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, assumed equity awards, as well as to in-process research and development based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, deferred revenue obligations and equity assumed. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from software license sales, subscriptions, support agreements, consulting contracts and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed; the acquired company trade name and trademarks as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and trademarks will continue to be used in the combined company product portfolio; and discount rates. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the deferred revenue obligations assumed. The estimated fair value of the support obligations is determined utilizing a cost build-up approach. The cost build-up approach determines fair value by estimating the costs related to fulfilling the obligations plus a normal profit margin. The estimated costs to fulfill the obligations are based on the historical costs related to fulfilling the obligations. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the equity awards assumed. The estimated fair value is determined utilizing a modified binomial option pricing model which assumes employees exercise their stock options when the share price exceeds the strike price by a certain dollar threshold. If the acquired company has significant historical data on their employee exercise behavior, then this threshold is determined based upon the acquired company history. Otherwise, our historical exercise experience is used to determine the exercise threshold. Zero coupon yields implied by U.S. Treasury issuances, implied volatility for our common stock and our historical forfeiture rate are other inputs to the binomial model. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. Goodwill Impairment We complete our goodwill impairment test on an annual basis, during the second quarter of our fiscal year, or more frequently, if changes in facts and circumstances indicate that an impairment in the value of goodwill recorded on our balance sheet may exist. In order to estimate the fair value of goodwill, we typically estimate future revenue, consider market factors and estimate our future cash flows. Based on these key assumptions, judgments and estimates, we determine whether we need to record an impairment charge to reduce the value of the asset carried on our balance sheet to its estimated fair value. Assumptions, judgments and estimates about future values are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy or our internal forecasts. Although we believe the ass umptions, judgme nts and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions, judgments and estimates could materially affect our reported financial results. We completed our annual impairment test in the second quarter of fiscal 2013 and determined there was no impairment. The results of our annual impairment test indicate there is no significant risk of future material goodwill impairment in any of our reporting units. Accounting for Income Taxes We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Management must make assumptions, judgments and estimates 37 Table of Contents to determine our current provision for income taxes and also our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance to be recorded against a deferred tax asset. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the current provision for income taxes take into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of current and future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities. We have established reserves for income taxes to address potential exposures involving tax positions that could be challenged by tax authorities. In addition, we are subject to the continual examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other domestic and foreign tax authorities, including a current examination by the IRS of our fiscal 2010, 2011 and 2012 tax returns. We expect future examinations to focus on our intercompany transfer pricing practices as well as other matters. We regularly assess the likelihood of outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes and have reserved for potential adjustments that may result from the current examinations. We believe such estimates to be reasonable; however, the final determination of any of these examinations could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the value of a deferred tax asset take into account predictions of the amount and category of future taxable income, such as income from operations or capital gains income. Actual operating results and the underlying amount and category of income in future years could render our current assumptions, judgments and estimates of recoverable net deferred taxes inaccurate. Any of the assumptions, judgments and estimates mentioned above could cause our actual income tax obligations to differ from our estimates, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. We are a United States-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. A significant portion of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the U.S., we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries' earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the U.S. While we do not anticipate changing our intention regarding permanently reinvested earnings, if certain foreign earnings previously treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, the related U.S. tax liability may be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on these earnings. Our income tax expense has differed from the tax computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate due primarily to discrete items and to earnings considered as permanently reinvested in foreign operations. Unanticipated changes in our tax rates could affect our future results of operations. Our future effective tax rates could be unfavorably affected by changes in the tax rates in jurisdictions where our income is earned, by changes in, or our interpretation of, tax rules and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we do business, by unanticipated decreases in the amount of earnings in countries with low statutory tax rates, by lapses of the availability of the U.S. research and development tax credit, or by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities. The United States, countries in the European Union and other countries where we do business have been considering changes in relevant tax, accounting and other laws, regulations and interpretations, including changes to tax laws applicable to corporate multinationals such as Adobe. These potential changes could adversely affect our effective tax rates or result in other costs to us. Recent Accounting Pronouncements In December 2011, the FASB amended the accounting standards to increase the prominence of other comprehensive income ( OCI ) by eliminating the option to present components of OCI as part of the statement of changes in shareholders equity and requires the components of OCI to be presented either in a single continuous statement of comprehensive income or in two consecutive statements. We adopted the amended accounting standards at the beginning of our first quarter of fiscal 2013 by electing to present consolidated statements of comprehensive income separate from the consolidated statements of income. In February 2013, the FASB further amended the above accounting standards to improve the presentation of amounts reclassified out of accumulated other comprehensive income in its entirety and by component by presenting the reclassification adjustments on either the face of the statement where net income is presented or in a separate disclosure in the notes to the financial statements. Amounts that are not required to be reclassified in their entirety to net income are required to be cross referenced to related footnote disclosures that provide additional detail. We elected to early adopt the amended accounting standard at the beginning of our second quarter of fiscal 2013 by electing to present the reclassification adjustments and other required disclosures in a separate footnote. The amended accounting standards only impact the financial statement presentation of OCI and do not change the components that are recognized in net income or OCI. The adoption had no impact on the Company financial position or results of operations. 38 Table of Contents Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective There have been no new accounting pronouncements not yet effective that have significance, or potential significance, to our Consolidated Financial Statements. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview of 2013 For fiscal 2013 , we reported financial results consistent with the continued execution of our plans for our two strategic growth areas, Digital Media and Digital Marketing, while continuing to market and license a broad portfolio of products and solutions. We are a market leader in the fast-growing category addressed by our Digital Marketing segment. Our Adobe Marketing Cloud offering includes six solutions addressing the expanding needs of marketers, the newest of which is Adobe Campaign a cross-channel campaign management tool that we added to our portfolio with the acquisition of Neolane during our third quarter of fiscal 2013. Revenue from Adobe Marketing Cloud increased 26% and 35% during fiscal 2013 and 2012 , respectively, compared to the year ago periods. Helping to drive this performance was strong adoption of our Adobe Experience Manager ( AEM ) offering and the addition of Neolane in mid-third quarter of fiscal 2013. AEM, our fastest growing digital marketing solution, has typically been licensed by our customers as an on-premise offering where license revenue is recognized at the time of the transaction. In the past year, we introduced a managed services offering of AEM for which revenue is recognized ratably. We expect continued adoption of the newer managed services offering, which will increasingly migrate AEM revenue to recurring revenue in this segment. Given the comparisons involving more new license revenue being recognized over time versus past license revenue being recognized up front, we anticipate this trend may impact overall Adobe Marketing Cloud revenue in the near term. Within our Digital Media segment, in May 2012 we delivered Adobe Creative Cloud, our subscription-based offering for creating and publishing content and applications. Creative Cloud is our next-generation offering that supersedes our historical model of licensing our creative products with perpetual licenses. We continue to implement strategies that will accelerate awareness, consideration and purchase of subscriptions to the offering. Key aspects of the value Creative Cloud provides include more frequent product updates, storage and access to user files stored in the cloud with syncing of files across users' machines, community-based features and services through our acquisition of Behance in December 2012, digital publishing and app creation capabilities, and lower entry point pricing for cost-sensitive customers. In May 2013 we announced we would exclusively deliver new creative product innovations and features to Creative Cloud subscribers, and that Adobe Creative Suite 6 ( CS6 ), which was released in May 2012, would be the last major update we provide for perpetual licensees. While we continue to offer CS6 on a perpetual licensing basis moving forward, we expect revenue for it to sequentially decline as our customers increasingly migrate to Creative Cloud. We offer Creative Cloud for individuals and for teams, and we enable larger enterprise customers to acquire Creative Cloud capabilities through Enterprise Term License Agreements ( ETLAs ). The three Creative Cloud offerings address the multiple routes to market we use to license our creative software to targeted customers. Adoption of Creative Cloud is transforming our business model and we expect this to drive higher long-term revenue growth through an expansion of our customer base by acquiring new users through a lower cost of entry and delivery of additional features and value, as well as keeping existing customers current on our latest release. This model will drive our revenue to be more recurring and predictable as revenue is recognized ratably. We have implemented, and will continue to implement, strategies that accelerate adoption of our Creative Cloud subscription model, causing our traditional perpetual license revenue to decline. These strategies include increasing the value Creative Cloud users receive, as well as targeted promotions and offers that attract past customers and potential users to try out and ultimately subscribe to Creative Cloud. During fiscal 2013 , adoption of our Creative Cloud subscription offering continued to accelerate, which has and will continue to cause our traditional perpetual license revenue to decline and, in turn, has caused total net revenue in fiscal 2013 to decline compared with fiscal 2012. As anticipated, during this transition expenses did not and are not expected to decline in correlation to the decrease in revenue, which has adversely affected our net income and operating margin throughout fiscal 2013. However, over time we expect this business model transition will significantly increase our long-term revenue growth rate by attracting new 39 Table of Contents users, keeping our end user base current and thereby driving higher revenue. Additionally, our shift to a subscription model will increase the amount of recurring revenue that is ratably recognized, driven by broader Creative Cloud adoption over the next several years. We began to see the impact of this shift in fiscal 2013. To assist with the understanding of this transition and the related shift in revenue described above, we are using certain performance metrics to assess the health and trajectory of our overall Digital Media segment.These metrics include the total number of current paid subscriptions and Annualized Recurring Revenue ( ARR ). We define ARR as the sum of: the number of current paid subscriptions, multiplied by the average subscription price paid per user per month, multiplied by twelve months; plus, twelve months of contract value of ETLAs where the revenue is ratably recognized over the life of the contract. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, deferred revenue and unbilled deferred revenue as ARR is a performance metric and is not intended to be combined with any of these items. We exited fiscal 2013 with 1.4 million paid Creative Cloud subscriptions, up from 0.3 million at the end of fiscal 2012 . Total Creative ARR exiting fiscal 2013 was $768.0 million , up from $155.0 million exiting fiscal 2012 , demonstrating the progress we have made with our transformation in this business. Our Digital Media business also includes our Document Services products and solutions, including Acrobat. In fiscal 2013 we continued to drive solid adoption of our Acrobat family of products primarily through license agreements with enterprise customers. During fiscal 2013, a higher percentage of these agreements were ETLAs, which like ETLAs with our creative customers, cause more revenue to be recognized over time rather than at the time of contract signing. This has caused reported Document Services revenue in fiscal 2013 to decline compared to revenue achieved in fiscal 2012, with the benefit of ETLAs improving our growth potential over time. In addition to Acrobat, we also drove strong adoption of subscription based services including Acrobat cloud services and our EchoSign e-signing solution. Combined, adoption of Acrobat through ETLAs and our Document Services subscription offerings helped grow Document Services ARR to $143.0 million exiting fiscal 2013 , up from $49.0 million at the end of fiscal 2012 . Financial Performance Summary for Fiscal 2013 We continue to derive the majority of our revenue from perpetual licenses. However, consistent with our strategy, during fiscal 2013 , our subscription revenue as a percentage of total revenue increased to 28% from 15% and 11% as compared to fiscal 2012 and 2011 , respectively, as we transition more of our business to a subscription-based model. Total Digital Media ARR of approximately $911.0 million as of November 29, 2013 increased by approximately $707.0 million , or 347% , from approximately $204.0 million as of November 30, 2012 . The increase in our Digital Media ARR is primarily due to increases in the number of paid Creative Cloud individual and team subscriptions and adoption of our enterprise Creative Cloud offering through our ETLAs. Our total deferred revenue of $828.8 million as of November 29, 2013 increased by $209.2 million , or 34% from November 30, 2012 , primarily due to increases in ETLAs and renewals for our Adobe Marketing Cloud services. Cost of revenue of $586.6 million increased by $102.8 million , or 21% , during fiscal 2013 , from $483.8 million in fiscal 2012, and $45.9 million or 10% during fiscal 2012 from $437.9 million in fiscal 2011 . These increases are primarily due to increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount and increased hosting and server costs associated with our subscription and SaaS offerings. Operating expenses of $3,046.0 million increased by $306.3 million or 11% , during fiscal 2013 , from $2,739.7 million in fiscal 2012, and $60.6 million , or 2% in fiscal 2012 from $2,679.1 million in fiscal 2011 . These increases are primarily due to increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount. Net income of $290.0 million decreased by $542.8 million , or 65% , during fiscal 2013 from $832.8 million in fiscal 2012. The decrease is primarily due to the revenue model becoming more ratable as well as the cost and expense increases stated above. Net income during fiscal 2012 remained stable compared to fiscal 2011. 40 Table of Contents Net cash flow from operations of $1,151.7 million during fiscal 2013 decreased by $347.9 million , or 23% , as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to lower net income as discussed above. Net cash flow from operations during fiscal 2012 remained stable compared to fiscal 2011. Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Product $ 2,470.1 $ 3,342.8 $ 3,416.5 (26 )% (2 )% Percentage of total revenue 61 % 76 % 81 % Subscription 1,137.9 673.2 458.6 69 % 47 % Percentage of total revenue 28 % 15 % 11 % Services and support 447.2 387.7 341.2 15 % 14 % Percentage of total revenue 11 % 9 % 8 % Total revenue $ 4,055.2 $ 4,403.7 $ 4,216.3 (8 )% 4 % As described in Note 18 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements , we have the following segments: Digital Media, Digital Marketing and Print and Publishing. Our subscription revenue is comprised primarily of fees we charge for our subscription and hosted service offerings including certain of our Adobe Marketing Cloud services and Creative Cloud. We recognize subscription revenue ratably over the term of agreements with our customers, beginning on the commencement of the service. We expect our subscription revenue will continue to increase as a result of our investments in new SaaS and subscription models. We also expect this to increase the amount of recurring revenue we generate as a percent of our total revenue. Of the $1,137.9 million , $673.2 million and $458.6 million in subscription revenue for fiscal 2013 , 2012 and 2011 , respectively, approximately $663.1 million , $553.2 million and $429.2 million , respectively, is from our Digital Marketing segment, with the remaining amounts substantially representing our Digital Media segment offerings. Our services and support revenue is comprised of consulting, training and maintenance and support, primarily related to the licensing of our enterprise, developer and platform products and the sale of our Adobe Marketing Cloud services. Our support revenue also includes technical support and developer support to partners and developer organizations related to our desktop products. Our maintenance and support offerings, which entitle customers to receive product upgrades and enhancements or technical support, depending on the offering, are generally recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement. Segments In fiscal 2013 , we categorized our products into the following segments: Digital Media Our Digital Media segment provides tools and solutions that enable individuals, small businesses and enterprises to create, publish, promote and monetize their digital content anywhere. Our customers include traditional content creators, web application developers and digital media professionals, as well as their management in marketing departments and agencies, companies and publishers. Digital Marketing Our Digital Marketing segment provides solutions and services for how digital advertising and marketing are created, managed, executed, measured and optimized. Our customers include digital marketers, advertisers, publishers, merchandisers, web analysts, chief marketing officers, chief information officers and chief revenue officers. Print and Publishing Our Print and Publishing segment addresses market opportunities ranging from the diverse authoring and publishing needs of technical and business publishing to our legacy type and OEM printing businesses. 41 Table of Contents Segment Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Digital Media $ 2,625.9 $ 3,101.9 $ 3,070.2 (15 )% 1 % Percentage of total revenue 65 % 70 % 73 % Digital Marketing 1,228.8 1,085.0 927.8 13 % 17 % Percentage of total revenue 30 % 25 % 22 % Print and Publishing 200.5 216.8 218.3 (8 )% (1 )% Percentage of total revenue 5 % 5 % 5 % Total revenue $ 4,055.2 $ 4,403.7 $ 4,216.3 (8 )% 4 % Fiscal 2013 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2012 Revenue Digital Media Revenue from Digital Media decreased $476.0 million during fiscal year 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 , primarily due to continued strong adoption of Creative Cloud and ETLAs as we continue to transition more of our business to a subscription-based model. Revenue related to our creative professional products, which include our Creative Suite editions and CS point products as well as Creative Cloud, decreased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 due to continued customer adoption of Creative Cloud subscription offerings, released in May 2012. We continue to anticipate accelerated adoption of Creative Cloud for individuals, teams and enterprises, for which revenue is recognized over time, and that this adoption has and will continue to cause our traditional perpetual license revenue to decline. Revenue associated with our other creative products increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 , primarily due to increases associated with distribution of third-party software via Flash Player downloads and our Digital Publishing Suite. These increases were partially offset by decreases in revenue associated with our Photoshop Elements family of products. For our creative offerings, the total number of perpetual units licensed decreased while the number of subscription units licensed increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . Unit average selling prices for our perpetual units licensed decreased during the year ended fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . Document Services revenue, which includes our Acrobat product family, decreased slightly during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 , primarily due to the continued shift to ETLAs offset by increased Document Exchange Services revenue including revenue generated from our EchoSign e-signing service. Within Document Services, excluding large enterprise license agreement deals, the number of units licensed decreased while the unit average selling prices increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . Digital Marketing Revenue from Digital Marketing increased $143.8 million during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . The increase was primarily due to continued revenue growth associated with our Adobe Marketing Cloud, which increased 26% during fiscal 2013 , as compared to the year ago period and includes Adobe Campaign revenue from our recent acquisition of Neolane. The increase noted above was partially offset by expected declines in revenue associated with our legacy products during fiscal 2013 . Print and Publishing Revenue from Print and Publishing decreased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 , primarily due to increased ETLAs for some products in this group. Fiscal 2012 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2011 Revenue Digital Media Revenue from Digital Media remained relatively stable during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011, due to solid demand for our Acrobat family of products as well as the continued momentum of the CS6 launch in the second quarter of fiscal 2012 , offset by better than expected growth associated with our subscription offerings. 42 Table of Contents Revenue related to our creative professional products, which included our Creative Suite editions and CS point products as well as Creative Cloud, decreased slightly during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 due to higher than expected customer adoption of Creative Cloud and point product subscriptions. The decreases in revenue associated with our creative professional products were offset in part by growth associated with the May 2012 release of new Photoshop point products for which the previous release occurred in fiscal 2010. Revenue associated with our other creative products increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to increases associated with third-party toolbar distribution via Flash Player downloads as well as continued demand related to the May 2012 release of Adobe Lightroom 4. For our creative offerings, the total number of perpetual units licensed remained relatively stable while the number of subscription units licensed increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. Unit average selling prices for our perpetual units licensed decreased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. Document Services revenue, which includes our Acrobat product family, also increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to increased Document Exchange Services revenue including revenue generated from our EchoSign e-signing service and the launch of Adobe Acrobat XI in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012 . Within Document Services, excluding large enterprise license agreement deals, the number of units licensed remained relatively stable while the unit average selling prices increased for our Acrobat offerings for fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. Digital Marketing Revenue from Digital Marketing increased $157.2 million , or 17% during fiscal 2012 when compared to fiscal 2011, primarily due to continued growth of our Adobe Marketing Cloud, which increased 35% year-over-year and includes revenue generated from products associated with our fiscal 2012 acquisition of Efficient Frontier. Also contributing to the growth in revenue was our Adobe Connect hosted offering. As expected, increases in these areas were offset in part by a decrease in revenue associated with Adobe LiveCycle product offerings as we continued to shift our focus to our Adobe Marketing Cloud. Print and Publishing Revenue from Print and Publishing remained relatively stable during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to decreases in legacy product revenue, offset by increases in fees received for consulting services and royalties related to PostScript products. Geographical Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Americas $ 2,134.4 $ 2,196.4 $ 2,044.6 (3 )% 7 % Percentage of total revenue 53 % 50 % 49 % EMEA 1,129.2 1,294.6 1,317.4 (13 )% (2 )% Percentage of total revenue 28 % 29 % 31 % APAC 791.6 912.7 854.3 (13 )% 7 % Percentage of total revenue 19 % 21 % 20 % Total revenue $ 4,055.2 $ 4,403.7 $ 4,216.3 (8 )% 4 % Fiscal 2013 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2012 Revenue by Geography Revenue declined across all geographies during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 . Revenue in the Americas and APAC decreased during fiscal 2013 due to decreases in Digital Media and Print and Publishing revenue, offset in part by increases in Digital Marketing revenue. Revenue in EMEA decreased during fiscal 2013 due to decreases in Digital Media revenue, offset in part by increases in Digital Marketing and Print and Publishing revenue. Within each geographical region, the fluctuations in revenue by reportable segment were attributable to the factors noted in the segment information above. Fiscal 2012 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2011 Revenue by Geography Overall revenue for fiscal 2012 increased in the Americas and APAC and declined slightly in EMEA when compared to fiscal 2011. Revenue in the Americas increased during fiscal 2012 primarily due to revenue increases in Digital Media and Digital Marketing, offset slightly by a decline in Print and Publishing revenue. Despite the launch of CS6 in May 2012, the economic 43 Table of Contents conditions in Europe and the weakening of the Euro and British Pound against the U.S. Dollar caused revenue in EMEA to decline slightly during fiscal 2012 compared with fiscal 2011. Revenue in APAC increased across all reportable segments during fiscal 2012 as compared with fiscal 2011. Within each geographical region, the fluctuations in revenue by reportable segment were attributable to the factors noted in the segment information above. Included in the overall change in revenue for fiscal 2013 and fiscal 2012 were impacts associated with foreign currency as shown below. Our currency hedging program is used to mitigate a portion of the foreign currency impact to revenue. (in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Revenue impact: Increase/(Decrease) EMEA: Euro $ 9.1 $ (46.9 ) British Pound (3.9 ) (1.8 ) Other currencies 0.6 (1.1 ) Total EMEA 5.8 (49.8 ) Japanese Yen (63.6 ) 6.0 Other currencies (5.6 ) 1.5 Total revenue impact (63.4 ) (42.3 ) Hedging impact: EMEA 3.7 23.4 Japanese Yen 32.3 7.3 Total hedging impact 36.0 30.7 Total impact $ (27.4 ) $ (11.6 ) During fiscal 2013, the U.S. Dollar generally strengthened against the Japanese Yen and other Asian currencies causing revenue in APAC measured in U.S. Dollar equivalents to decrease compared with the same reporting period last year. This decrease was partially offset by the favorable impact to revenue measured in EMEA currencies as the U.S. Dollar generally weakened against these currencies. Our EMEA and Yen currency hedging programs resulted in hedging gains during fiscal 2013 as noted in the table above. During fiscal 2012 , the U.S. Dollar strengthened against the Euro, British Pound and other EMEA currencies causing revenue in EMEA measured in U.S. Dollar equivalents to decrease compared with the same reporting period last year. This decrease was offset in part by the favorable impact to revenue measured in Japanese Yen and other Asian currencies as the U.S. Dollar weakened against these currencies. Our EMEA and Yen currency hedging programs resulted in hedging gains during fiscal 2012 as noted in the table above. See Note 18 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further geographic information. Product Backlog The actual amount of product backlog at any particular time may not be a meaningful indicator of future business prospects. Shippable backlog is comprised of unfulfilled orders, excluding those associated with new product releases, those pending credit review and those not shipped due to the application of our global inventory policy. We had minimal shippable backlog at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013 and fiscal 2012 . We expect that our shippable backlog will continue to be insignificant in future periods. The deferred revenue balance on our consolidated balance sheet does not represent the total contract value of annual or multi-year, non-cancellable subscription agreements. Unbilled deferred revenue represents expected future billings which are contractually committed under our existing subscription, SaaS and managed services agreements that have not been invoiced and are not recorded in deferred revenue within our financial statements. Our presentation of unbilled deferred revenue backlog may differ from that of other companies in the industry. As of November 29, 2013, we had unbilled deferred revenue backlog of approximately $1.0 billion . We expect that the amount of unbilled deferred revenue backlog will change period over period due to certain factors, including the timing and duration of large customer subscription, SaaS and managed service agreements, varying billing cycles of these agreements, the timing of customer renewals, the timing of when unbilled deferred revenue backlog is to be billed, changes 44 Table of Contents in customer financial circumstances and foreign currency fluctuations. Additionally, the unbilled deferred revenue backlog for multi-year subscription agreements that are billed annually is typically higher at the beginning of the contract period, lower prior to renewal and increases when the agreement is renewed. Accordingly, fluctuations in unbilled deferred revenue backlog may not be a reliable indicator of future business prospects and the related revenue associated with these contractual commitments. Cost of Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Product $ 138.2 $ 121.7 $ 125.7 14 % (3 )% Percentage of total revenue 3 % 3 % 3 % Subscription 278.1 219.1 194.0 27 % 13 % Percentage of total revenue 7 % 5 % 5 % Services and support 170.3 143.0 118.2 19 % 21 % Percentage of total revenue 4 % 3 % 3 % Total cost of revenue $ 586.6 $ 483.8 $ 437.9 21 % 10 % Product Cost of product revenue includes product packaging, third-party royalties, excess and obsolete inventory, amortization related to localization costs, purchased intangibles and acquired rights to use technology and the costs associated with the manufacturing of our products. Fluctuations in cost of product revenue are due to the following: % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Amortization of purchased intangibles and technology license arrangements 27 % (1 )% Cost of sales (8 ) (6 ) Excess and obsolete inventory (4 ) 2 Various individually insignificant items (1 ) 2 Total change 14 % (3 )% Cost of product revenue increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to an increase in amortization of purchased intangibles and technology license arrangements offset by decreases in cost of sales and excess and obsolete inventory. Amortization of purchased intangibles and technology license arrangements increased as we entered into certain technology licensing arrangements totaling $51.8 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2013. Of this cost, an estimated $25.3 million was related to future licensing rights and has been capitalized and will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives ranging from five to ten years. We estimated that the remaining cost of approximately $26.5 million was related to historical use of licensing rights and was expensed as cost of product revenue in fiscal 2013. In connection with certain of these licensing arrangements, we have the ability to acquire additional rights to use technology in the future. Cost of sales primarily decreased due to the decrease in the number of perpetual units sold and packaging costs associated with our CS6 products. During May 2013, we announced that, while we will continue to offer and support CS6 products, we plan to focus our future creative development efforts on our Creative Cloud offering. Excess and obsolete inventory decreased due to decreased reserve requirements for CS6 as we continue to transition to more of a subscription based model. Cost of product revenue decreased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to decrease in cost of sales and amortization of purchase intangibles, offset by increases in excess and obsolete inventory. Cost of sales decreased primarily due to a decrease in packaging costs associated with our CS6 products. Amortization of purchased intangibles decreased primarily due to certain intangible assets purchased through our acquisitions in prior years that were fully amortized in fiscal 2012. Excess and obsolete inventory increased primarily due to increased reserve requirements for Adobe Creative Suite 5 and Adobe Creative Suite 5.5 products necessitated by the launch of CS6 in the second quarter of fiscal 2012. Subscription Cost of subscription revenue consists of expenses related to operating our network infrastructure, including depreciation expenses and operating lease payments associated with computer equipment, data center costs, salaries and related expenses of network operations, implementation, account management and technical support personnel, amortization of intangible assets and allocated overhead. We enter into contracts with third-parties for the use of their data center facilities and our data center costs largely consist of the amounts we pay to these third-parties for rack space, power and similar items. 45 Table of Contents Cost of subscription revenue increased due to the following: % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Hosted server costs 23 % 7 % Amortization of purchased intangibles 4 6 Total change 27 % 13 % Cost of subscription revenue increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to increased hosted server costs and amortization of purchased intangibles. Hosted server costs increased primarily due to increases in data center costs related to higher transaction volumes in our Adobe Marketing Cloud and Creative Cloud services, depreciation expense from higher capital expenditures in prior years and compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount, including from our acquisition of Neolane in fiscal 2013. Amortization of purchased intangibles increased primarily due to increased amortization of intangible assets purchased associated with our acquisitions of Behance and Neolane in fiscal 2013. Cost of subscription revenue increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to increased hosted server costs and amortization of purchased intangibles. Hosted server costs increased primarily due to increases in compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount and hosting expenses associated with the launch of our Creative Cloud services in the second quarter of fiscal 2012. Also contributing to the increase in hosted server costs is the increase in depreciation expense from higher capital expenditures in prior years and data center costs related to higher transaction volumes in our Adobe Marketing Cloud and Creative Cloud services. Amortization of purchased intangibles increased primarily due to increased amortization of intangible assets associated with our acquisition of Efficient Frontier in the first quarter of fiscal 2012. Services and Support Cost of services and support revenue is primarily comprised of employee-related costs and associated costs incurred to provide consulting services, training and product support. Cost of services and support revenue increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to increases in third-party fees related to training and consulting services provided to our customers and compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount, including headcount from our acquisition of Neolane in fiscal 2013. Cost of services and support revenue increased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to increases in costs associated with compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount, including headcount from our acquisition of Efficient Frontier. Operating Expenses (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Research and development $ 826.6 $ 742.8 $ 738.1 11 % 1 % Percentage of total revenue 20 % 17 % 18 % Sales and marketing 1,620.5 1,516.1 1,385.8 7 % 9 % Percentage of total revenue 40 % 34 % 33 % General and administrative 520.1 435.0 414.6 20 % 5 % Percentage of total revenue 13 % 10 % 10 % Restructuring and other related charges (credits) 26.5 (2.9 ) 97.8 * * Percentage of total revenue 1 % % 2 % Amortization of purchased intangibles 52.3 48.7 42.8 7 % 14 % Percentage of total revenue 1 % 1 % 1 % Total operating expenses $ 3,046.0 $ 2,739.7 $ 2,679.1 11 % 2 % _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is greater than 100%. 46 Table of Contents Research and Development, Sales and Marketing and General and Administrative Expenses The increase in research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 is primarily due to higher incentive compensation program achievement in fiscal 2013, increases in stock-based compensation expense due to higher share prices during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 as well as a shorter vesting term, which decreased from four years to three years, for stock awards granted as part of our annual review process during the first quarter of fiscal 2013. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses for software developers, contracted development efforts, related facilities costs and expenses associated with computer equipment used in software development. Research and development expenses increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 due to the following: % Change 2013-2012 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount 3 % Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 7 Various individually insignificant items 1 Total change 11 % Research and development expenses remained relatively stable during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. We believe that investments in research and development, including the recruiting and hiring of software developers, are critical to remain competitive in the marketplace and are directly related to continued timely development of new and enhanced products. We will continue to focus on long-term opportunities available in our end markets and make significant investments in the development of our application, tool and service offerings. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses, sales commissions, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our sales, marketing, order management and global supply chain management personnel. Sales and marketing expenses also include the costs of programs aimed at increasing revenue, such as advertising, trade shows, public relations and other market development programs. Sales and marketing expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount 4 % 2 % Marketing spending related to product launches and overall marketing efforts to further increase revenue 2 Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 4 3 Various individually insignificant items (1 ) 2 Total change 7 % 9 % General and Administrative General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefit expenses, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our finance, facilities, human resources, legal, information services and executive personnel. General and administrative expenses also include outside legal and accounting fees, provision for bad debts, expenses associated with computer equipment and software used in the administration of the business, charitable contributions and various forms of insurance. 47 Table of Contents General and administrative expenses increased due to the following: % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 4 % 4 % Professional and consulting fees 7 (3 ) Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 4 1 Charitable contributions 2 (1 ) Various individually insignificant items 3 4 Total change 20 % 5 % Professional and consulting fees increased during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to increased professional and legal fees including those associated with the attacks on our network discovered in September 2013. Professional and consulting fees decreased during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to decreased litigation expense. Restructuring and Other Charges During May 2013 , we began to actively market the Waltham property assets and we expected to sell the property within one year from management's approval of the plan. We classified the Waltham property assets with a total carrying amount of $47.4 million as held for sale at $23.6 million representing their fair value, net of estimated costs to sell which was the lesser of the fair value less cost to sell or carrying amount of the assets. We recorded a write-down of $23.8 million during the second quarter of fiscal 2013. We ceased recognizing depreciation expense on the Waltham property assets upon reclassification which would have been minimal for fiscal 2013. In September 2013, we finalized the sale of the Waltham property assets for net proceeds of $24.3 million which approximated the carrying value of the assets at the time of sale. During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. During fiscal 2013, in connection with our Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan and Other Restructuring Plans, we recorded $6.3 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities. We also recorded $3.0 million in net favorable employee termination and facility related adjustments for changes in previous estimates during the fiscal year. During fiscal 2012, in connection with our Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan and Other Restructuring Plans, we recorded $17.4 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities. We also recorded $20.3 million in net favorable employee termination and facility related adjustments for changes in previous estimates during the fiscal year. During fiscal 2011, in connection with our 2011 Restructuring Plan and Other Restructuring Plans, we recorded $85.6 million associated with termination benefits and closing redundant facilities as well as $12.7 million related to the write-off of certain assets that were no longer useful to the company based on changes in our business. We also recorded minor favorable adjustments for changes in previous estimates. See Note 10 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our restructuring plans. Amortization of Purchased Intangibles During the last several years, we have completed a number of business combinations and asset acquisitions including Omniture in fiscal 2009, Day in fiscal 2010, Efficient Frontier in fiscal 2012, and Behance and Neolane in fiscal 2013. As a result of these acquisitions, we purchased intangible assets that are being amortized over their estimated useful lives ranging from one to fourteen years. Amortization expense increased 7% during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to amortization expense associated with intangible assets purchased through our acquisitions of Behance and Neolane in fiscal 2013. Amortization expense increased 14% during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to amortization expense associated with intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Efficient Frontier in fiscal 2012. 48 Table of Contents Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Interest and other income (expense), net $ 4.9 $ (3.4 ) $ (3.0 ) * 13 % Percentage of total revenue ** ** ** Interest expense (67.5 ) (67.5 ) (67.0 ) % 1 % Percentage of total revenue (2 )% (2 )% (2 )% Investment gains (losses), net (4.0 ) 9.5 5.9 (142 )% 61 % Percentage of total revenue ** ** ** Total non-operating income (expense), net $ (66.6 ) $ (61.4 ) $ (64.1 ) 8 % (4 )% _________________________________________ (*) Percentage is not meaningful. (**) Percentage is less than 1%. Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term fixed income investments. Interest and other income (expense), net also includes gains and losses on fixed income investments and foreign exchange gains and losses other than any gains recorded to revenue from hedging Euro, British Pounds and Yen currencies. Interest and other income (expense), net increased in net income in fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012 primarily due to decreased foreign exchange losses. Interest and other income (expense), net increased in net expense in fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011 primarily due to lower average interest rates on our investments. Interest Expense Interest expense primarily represents interest associated with our senior notes. Interest is payable semi-annually, in arrears, on February 1 and August 1. Interest expense has remained relatively stable for all fiscal years presented. Investment Gains (Losses), Net Investment gains (losses), net consists principally of realized gains or losses from the sale of marketable equity investments, other-than-temporary declines in the value of marketable and non-marketable equity securities and unrealized holding gains and losses associated with our deferred compensation plan assets (classified as trading securities) and gains and losses associated with our direct and indirect investments in privately held companies. Investment gains (losses), net fluctuated due to the following (in millions): Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Write-downs due to other-than-temporary declines in value of our marketable and non-marketable equity securities $ (7.0 ) $ (0.1 ) $ (0.2 ) Net gains related to our trading securities 3.0 1.6 Net gains (losses) related to our direct and indirect investments in privately held companies (0.2 ) 5.3 Gains from sale of marketable equity securities 8.2 0.8 Total investment gains (losses), net $ (4.0 ) $ 9.5 $ 5.9 During fiscal 2013, total investment gains (losses), net decreased to net losses primarily due to a decrease in net realized gains from the sale of marketable equity securities and an increase in write-downs for other-than-temporary declines in value of our direct investments in privately held companies. During fiscal 2012, total investment gains (losses), net improved primarily due to an increase in net realized gains from the sale of marketable equity securities. This was offset in part by a decrease in realized gains related to our direct investments in privately held companies in fiscal 2011 that did not recur during fiscal 2012. 49 Table of Contents Provision for Income Taxes (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 % Change 2013-2012 % Change 2012-2011 Provision $ 66.2 $ 286.0 $ 202.4 (77 )% 41 % Percentage of total revenue 2 % 6 % 5 % Effective tax rate 19 % 26 % 20 % Our effective tax rate decreased by approximately seven percentage points during fiscal 2013 as compared to fiscal 2012. The decrease is primarily related to the retroactive reinstatement of the U.S. research and development credit which resulted in the credits for both fiscal 2012 and 2013 being reflected in the fiscal 2013 results. Our effective tax rate increased by approximately six percentage points during fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. The rate increase in fiscal 2012 was primarily related to the expiration of the U.S. research and development credit in fiscal 2011, as well as items in fiscal 2011 including tax benefits associated with a favorable state income tax ruling and tax costs associated with licensing acquired company assets to Adobe's trading companies that were not present in fiscal 2012. We are a United States-based multinational company subject to tax in multiple U.S. and foreign tax jurisdictions. A significant portion of our foreign earnings for the current fiscal year were earned by our Irish subsidiaries. In addition to providing for U.S. income taxes on earnings from the U.S., we provide for U.S. income taxes on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries' earnings are considered permanently reinvested outside the U.S. While we do not anticipate changing our intention regarding permanently reinvested earnings, if certain foreign earnings previously treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, the related U.S. tax liability may be reduced by any foreign income taxes paid on these earnings. Currently, there are a significant amount of foreign earnings upon which U.S. income taxes have not been provided. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at November 29, 2013 was $136.1 million , exclusive of interest and penalties. If the total unrecognized tax benefits at November 29, 2013 were recognized in the future, $125.6 million of unrecognized tax benefits would decrease the effective tax rate, which is net of an estimated $10.5 million federal benefit related to deducting certain payments on future state tax returns. As of November 29, 2013 , the combined amount of accrued interest and penalties related to tax positions taken on our tax returns was approximately $11.4 million . This amount is included in non-current income taxes payable. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $5 million . In July 2013 , a U.S. income tax examination covering our fiscal years 2008 and 2009 was completed. Our accrued tax and interest related to these years was $48.4 million and was previously reported in long-term income taxes payable. We settled the tax obligation resulting from this examination with cash and income tax assets totaling $41.2 million , and the resulting $7.2 million income tax benefit was recorded in the third quarter of fiscal 2013. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES This data should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. As of (in millions) November 29, 2013 November 30, 2012 Cash and cash equivalents $ 834.6 $ 1,425.1 Short-term investments $ 2,339.2 $ 2,113.3 Working capital $ 2,520.3 $ 3,125.3 Stockholders equity $ 6,724.6 $ 6,665.2 50 Table of Contents A summary of our cash flows is as follows: (in millions) Fiscal 2013 Fiscal 2012 Fiscal 2011 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 1,151.7 $ 1,499.6 $ 1,543.3 Net cash used for investing activities (1,177.8 ) (834.7 ) (757.4 ) Net cash used for financing activities (559.1 ) (234.7 ) (550.4 ) Effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents (5.2 ) 5.4 4.1 Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents $ (590.4 ) $ 435.6 $ 239.6 Our primary source of cash is receipts from revenue. The primary uses of cash are payroll related expenses, general operating expenses including marketing, travel and office rent, and cost of revenue. Other sources of cash are proceeds from the exercise of employee options and participation in the employee stock purchase plan. Other uses of cash include our stock repurchase program, which is described below, business acquisitions and purchases of property and equipment. Cash Flows from Operating Activities For fiscal 2013, net cash provided by operating activities of $1,151.7 million was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and accrued expenses and decreases in trade receivables. Deferred revenue increased primarily due to increased subscription and ETLA activity for our Creative Cloud offering and increases in Digital Marketing hosted services, offset in part by decreases in billings for our maintenance and Creative product software upgrade plans which we discontinued in January 2013. Accrued expenses increased primarily due to amounts due under our fiscal 2013 annual incentive plan and sales commission accruals associated with higher achievement levels. Trade receivables declined primarily due to lower perpetual license revenue levels and improved collections compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2012. The primary working capital uses of cash were decreases in taxes payable and increases in prepaid expenses and other assets. The decrease in taxes payable is largely attributed to tax payments made combined with audit settlement adjustments, offset in part by tax expense and other adjustments during fiscal 2013. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased primarily due to increases in short-term income tax receivables related to the carryback of R&D and foreign tax credits in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2013. For fiscal 2012, net cash provided by operating activities of $1,499.6 million was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and decreases in trade receivables. Deferred revenue increased primarily due to an increase in activity for both upgrade plans with support and site and term licenses largely associated with our Digital Media and Digital Marketing enterprise license agreements. The decrease in trade receivables is primarily related to an increase in revenue linearity and improved collections in our Digital Marketing portfolio offset in part by higher revenue levels due to the CS6 product release which occurred late in the second quarter of fiscal 2012. The primary working capital uses of cash were decreases in accrued restructuring and trade payables. Decreases in accrued restructuring primarily related to payments and adjustments for employee terminations and facility exit costs associated with the Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan, a significant portion of which were paid and adjusted in the first and second quarters of fiscal 2012. Trade payables decreased primarily due to the timing of payments as a greater number of invoices were paid prior to the fiscal year end in fiscal 2012 as compared to fiscal 2011. For fiscal 2011, net cash provided by operating activities of $1,543.3 million was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in deferred revenue and accrued restructuring. Increases in deferred revenue related primarily to an overall increase in billing activity for maintenance and support/upgrade plans, hosted and professional services and site and term licenses. Accrued restructuring increased primarily due to recognition of liabilities related to employee termination and facility exit costs associated with the Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan which occurred in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011 for which a majority was paid and adjusted in the first and second quarters of fiscal 2012. The primary working capital uses of cash for fiscal 2011 were increases in trade receivables coupled with decreases in accrued expenses and taxes payable. Trade receivables increased primarily as a result of overall higher sales levels and billing occurring during the latter half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2011, offset in part by an increased rate of collection for Digital Marketing services. Decreases in accrued expenses were primarily related to lower accrued bonus levels in fiscal 2011, coupled with payment of our second and third semi-annual interest payments associated with our Notes totaling $62.3 million . The resulting reduction in accrued interest was partially offset by additional interest accruals made during the period. Taxes payable decreased 51 Table of Contents primarily due to the resolution of a Canadian Tax audit offset in part by quarterly increases to the tax provision in excess of taxes paid. Cash Flows from Investing Activities For fiscal 2013, net cash used for investing activities of $1,177.8 million was primarily due to our acquisitions of Neolane and Behance. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2013 represented purchases of short-term investments, purchases of property and equipment associated with our construction projects in Oregon and India and purchases of long-term technology licenses. These cash outflows were offset in part by sales and maturities of short-term investments and the sale of the Waltham Property. See Note 2 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our acquisitions of Neolane and Behance. For fiscal 2012, net cash used for investing activities of $834.7 million was primarily due to our acquisition of Efficient Frontier in the first quarter of fiscal 2012. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2012 represented purchases of short-term investments and property and equipment, offset in part by sales and maturities of short-term investments. See Note 2 of our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our acquisition of Efficient Frontier. For fiscal 2011, net cash used for investing activities of $757.4 million was primarily due to purchases of short-term investments and multiple business acquisitions, offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2011 represented purchases of property, plant and equipment and long-term investments, intangibles and other assets. Cash Flows from Financing Activities For fiscal 2013, fiscal 2012 and fiscal 2011, net cash used for financing activities of $559.1 million , $234.7 million and $550.4 million , respectively, was primarily due to treasury stock repurchases offset in part by proceeds from our treasury stock issuances. See the section titled Stock Repurchase Program discussed below. We expect to continue our investing activities, including short-term and long-term investments, venture capital, facilities expansion and purchases of computer systems for research and development, sales and marketing, product support and administrative staff. Furthermore, cash reserves may be used to repurchase stock under our stock repurchase program and to strategically acquire companies, products or technologies that are complementary to our business. Restructuring During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. Currently, we have two active restructuring plans that were of significance to us: Fiscal 2011 Restructuring Plan Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan As of November 29, 2013 , we have accrued total restructuring charges of $13.9 million of which approximately $11.7 million relates to cost of closing redundant facilities and are expected to be paid under contract through fiscal 2021. Approximately 54% of these facility closing costs will be paid through 2015. During fiscal 2013, we made payments related to the above restructuring plans totaling $10.3 million which consisted of $1.3 million and $9.0 million in payments related to termination benefits and contract terminations and the closing of redundant facilities, respectively. As of November 30, 2012 , we accrued total restructuring charges of $21.6 million of which $2.3 million related to ongoing termination benefits and contract terminations. The remaining accrued restructuring charges of $19.3 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities. During fiscal 2012, we made payments related to restructuring plans totaling $63.1 million which consisted of $50.5 million and $12.6 million in payments related to termination benefits and contract terminations and the closing of redundant facilities, respectively. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet the cash outlays for the restructuring actions described above. See Note 10 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our restructuring plans. Other Liquidity and Capital Resources Considerations Our existing cash, cash equivalents and investment balances may fluctuate during fiscal 2014 due to changes in our planned cash outlay, including changes in incremental costs such as direct and integration costs related to our business acquisitions. Our cash and investments totaled $3.2 billion as of November 29, 2013 . Of this amount, approximately 80% was held by our foreign 52 Table of Contents subsidiaries and subject to material repatriation tax effects. Our intent is to permanently reinvest a significant portion of our earnings from foreign operations, and current plans do not anticipate that we will need funds generated from foreign operations to fund our domestic operations. In the event funds from foreign operations are needed to fund operations in the United States and if U.S. tax has not already been previously provided, we would provide for and pay additional U.S. taxes in connection with repatriating these funds. Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to the risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled Risk Factors . However, based on our current business plan and revenue prospects, we believe that our existing balances, our anticipated cash flows from operations and our available credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and operating resource expenditure requirements for the next twelve months. As of November 29, 2013 , the amount outstanding under our senior notes was $1.5 billion . On March 2, 2012, we entered into a five-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit agreement (the Credit Agreement ), providing for loans to us and certain of our subsidiaries. On March 1, 2013, we exercised our option under the Credit Agreement to extend the maturity date of the Credit Agreement by one year to March 2, 2018. As of November 29, 2013 , there were no outstanding borrowings under this Credit Agreement and the entire $1.0 billion credit line remains available for borrowing. We use professional investment management firms to manage a large portion of our invested cash. External investment firms managed, on average, 77% of our consolidated invested balances during fiscal 2013 . The fixed income portfolio is primarily invested in corporate bonds and commercial paper, U.S. agency securities and U.S. Treasury securities, municipal securities and foreign government securities. In September 2013, we finalized the sale of the Waltham property assets for net proceeds of $24.3 million . The sale price, net of costs to sell, approximated the carrying value of the assets at the time of sale. See Note 6 for further details regarding our assets held for sale. Stock Repurchase Program We currently have authority granted by our Board of Directors to repurchase up to $2.0 billion in common stock through the end of fiscal 2015. The new stock repurchase program approved by our Board of Directors is similar to our previous $1.6 billion stock repurchase program authorized by the Board of Directors in fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2013 , 2012 and 2011 , we entered into several structured stock repurchase agreements with large financial institutions, whereupon we provided them with prepayments totaling $1.1 billion , $405.0 million and $695.0 million , respectively. The $1.1 billion prepayments during fiscal 2013 were under the $2.0 billion stock repurchase authority. Of the $405.0 million of prepayments during fiscal 2012 , $100.0 million were under the $2.0 billion stock repurchase program and the remaining $305.0 million were under our previous $1.6 billion stock repurchase authority. The $695.0 million of prepayments during fiscal 2011 were under the $1.6 billion stock repurchase authority. We enter into these agreements in order to take advantage of repurchasing shares at a guaranteed discount to the Volume Weighted Average Price ( VWAP ) of our common stock over a specified period of time. We only enter into such transactions when the discount that we receive is higher than the foregone return on our cash prepayments to the financial institutions. There were no explicit commissions or fees on these structured repurchases. Under the terms of the agreements, there is no requirement for the financial institutions to return any portion of the prepayment to us. The financial institutions agree to deliver shares to us at monthly intervals during the contract term. The parameters used to calculate the number of shares deliverable are: the total notional amount of the contract, the number of trading days in the contract, the number of trading days in the interval and the average VWAP of our stock during the interval less the agreed upon discount. During fiscal 2013 , we repurchased approximately 21.6 million shares at an average price of $46.47 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2013 and fiscal 2012. During fiscal 2012 , we repurchased approximately 11.5 million shares at an average price of $32.29 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2012. During fiscal 2011 , we repurchased approximately 21.8 million shares at an average price per share of $31.81 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2011. For fiscal 2013 , 2012 and 2011 , the prepayments were classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at the payment date, though only shares physically delivered to us by November 29, 2013 , November 30, 2012 and December 2, 2011 were excluded from the computation of earnings per share. As of November 29, 2013 , $129.2 million of prepayments remained under the agreement. Subsequent to November 29, 2013 , as part of our $2.0 billion stock repurchase program, we entered into a structured stock repurchase agreement with a large financial institution whereupon we provided them with a prepayment of $200.0 million . This amount will be classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Upon completion of the $200.0 million stock 53 Table of Contents repurchase agreement, $600.0 million remains under our current authority. See Note 13 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our stock repurchase programs. See Item 5, Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities for share repurchases during the quarter ended November 29, 2013 . Summary of Stock Repurchases for Fiscal 2013 , 2012 and 2011 (in thousands, except average amounts) Board Approval Date Repurchases Under the Plan 2013 2012 2011 Shares Average Shares Average Shares Average December 1997 From employees (1) $ 1 $ 33.57 Structured repurchases (2) $ $ $ June 2010 Structured repurchases (2) $ 9,482 $ 32.17 21,849 $ 31.81 April 2012 Structured repurchases (2) 21,603 $ 46.47 2,038 $ 32.87 $ Total shares 21,603 $ 46.47 11,520 $ 32.29 21,850 $ 31.81 Total cost $ 1,003,794 $ 371,995 $ 695,015 _________________________________________ (1) The repurchases from employees represent shares canceled when surrendered in lieu of cash payments for the option exercise price or withholding taxes due. (2) Stock repurchase agreements executed with large financial institutions. See Stock Repurchase Program above. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations Our principal commitments as of November 29, 2013 consist of obligations under operating leases, capital leases, royalty agreements and various service agreements. See Note 15 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our contractual commitments . Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of November 29, 2013 (in millions): Payment Due by Period Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Notes $ 1,807.2 $ 62.3 $ 695.3 $ 85.5 $ 964.1 Operating lease obligations 214.1 47.2 62.8 43.7 60.4 Capital lease obligations 18.2 14.9 3.3 Purchase obligations 498.3 390.8 80.8 16.7 10.0 Total $ 2,537.8 $ 515.2 $ 842.2 $ 145.9 $ 1,034.5 Senior Notes In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 . Interest on the Notes is payable semi-annually, in arrears on February 1 and August 1, commencing on August 1, 2010. During fiscal 2013 interest payments totaled $62.3 million . At November 29, 2013 , our maximum commitment for interest payments under the Notes was $307.1 million . Capital Lease Obligation In the first quarter of fiscal 2013, we entered into a sale-leaseback agreement totaling $25.7 million over a period of 24 months. This transaction was classified as a capital lease obligation and was recorded at fair value. Covenants Our credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us not to exceed a maximum leverage ratio. Our Almaden Tower lease includes certain financial ratios as defined in the lease agreements that are reported to the lessors quarterly. As of November 29, 2013 , we were in compliance with all of our covenants. We believe these covenants will not impact our credit or cash in the coming fiscal year or restrict our ability to execute our business plan. Our Notes do not contain any financial covenants. 54 Table of Contents Under the terms of our credit agreement and lease agreements, we are not prohibited from paying cash dividends unless payment would trigger an event of default or one currently exists. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at November 29, 2013 was $136.1 million , exclusive of interest and penalties. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that within the next 12 months, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $5 million . Royalties We have certain royalty commitments associated with the shipment and licensing of certain products. Royalty expense is generally based on a dollar amount per unit shipped or a percentage of the underlying revenue. Indemnifications In the normal course of business, we provide indemnifications of varying scope to customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products and from time to time, we are subject to claims by our customers under these indemnification provisions. Historically, costs related to these indemnification provisions have not been significant and we are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. To the extent permitted under Delaware law, we have agreements whereby we indemnify our directors and officers for certain events or occurrences while the director or officer is or was serving at our request in such capacity. The indemnification period covers all pertinent events and occurrences during the director's or officer's lifetime. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is unlimited; however, we have director and officer insurance coverage that limits our exposure and enables us to recover a portion of any future amounts paid. 
