CIK: 796343
Company Name: ADOBE SYSTEMS INC
Section: MD&A
Filing Date: 2011-01-27


ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto. In addition to historical information, this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements, including statements regarding product plans, future growth and market opportunities which involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled Risk Factors in Part 1, Item 1A of this report. You should carefully review the risks described herein and in other documents we file from time to time with the SEC, including our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q to be filed in fiscal 2011. When used in this report, the words expects, could, would, ma y, anticipates, intends, plans, believes, seeks, targets, estimates, looks for, looks to and similar expressions, as well as statements regarding our focus for the future, are generally intended to identify forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements which speak only as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to publicly release any revisions to the forward-looking statements or reflect events or circumstances after the date of this document. BUSINESS OVERVIEW Founded in 1982, Adobe Systems Incorporated is one of the largest and most diversified software companies in the world. We offer a line of creative, business, Web and mobile software and services used by creative professionals, knowledge workers, developers, marketers, enterprises and consumers for creating, managing, delivering, optimizing and engaging with compelling content and experiences across multiple operating systems, devices and media. We distribute our products through a network of distributors, VARs, systems integrators, ISVs and OEMs. We also market and license our software directly to enterprise customers through our sales force and to end users and through our own Website at www.adobe.com. In addition, we license our technology to hardware manufacturers, software developers and service providers, and provide some of our solutions via SaaS, also known as hosted or cloud-based offerings. Our software runs on PCs and server-based computers, as well as various non-PC and mobile devices, depending on the product. We have operations in the Americas, EMEA and Asia. ACQUISITIONS On October 28, 2010, we completed the acquisition of Day, a provider of WCM, digital asset management and social collaboration solutions based in Basel, Switzerland and Boston, Massachusetts for approximately $248.3 million. Day Web solutions combined with our existing enterprise portfolio will enable customers to better integrate their global Web presence and business applications in support of acquiring, servicing and retaining customers. We have included the financial results of Day in our consolidated results of operations beginning on the acquisition date however the impact of this acquisition was not material to our consolidated balance sheets and results of operations. Following the closing, we integrated Day as a product line within our Enterprise segment for financial reporting purposes. On October 23, 2009, we completed the acquisition of Omniture, an industry leader in Web analytics and online business optimization based in Orem, Utah, for approximately $1.8 billion. Accordingly, we have included the results of the business operations acquired from Omniture in our consolidated results of operations beginning on October 24, 2009. Coinciding with the integration of Omniture, we created a new reportable segment for financial reporting purposes. See Note 2 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding these acquisitions . CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, we make assumptions, judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our assumptions, judgments and estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates. We also discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. We believe that the assumptions, judgments and estimates involved in the accounting for revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, business combinations, goodwill impairment and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. These areas are key components of our results of operations and are based on complex rules which require us to make judgments and estimates, so we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. 57 TABLE OF CONTENTS Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting policies have not differed materially from actual results. Revenue Recognition Our revenue is derived from the licensing of software products, associated software maintenance and support plans, custom software development and consulting services and training. To a lesser extent our revenue includes non-software related hosting services, custom hosting development and consulting services, and technical support and training for hosting services. We recognize revenue when all four revenue recognition criteria have been met: persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, we have delivered the product or performed the service, the fee is fixed or determinable and collection is probable. Determining whether and when some of these criteria have been satisfied often involves assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on the timing and amount of revenue we report. We enter into multiple element revenue arrangements in which a customer may purchase a combination of software, upgrades, maintenance and support, hosting services, and consulting. For our software and software related multiple element arrangements, we must: (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine whether undelivered products or services are essential to the functionality of the delivered products and services; (3) determine the fair value of each element using VSOE, and (4) allocate the total price among the various elements. VSOE of fair value is used to allocate a portion of the price to the undelivered elements and the residual method is used to allocate the remaining portion to the delivered elements. Absent VSOE, revenue is deferred until the earlier of the point at which VSOE of fair value exists for any undelivered element or until all elements of the arrangement have been delivered. However, if the only undelivered element is maintenance and support, the entire arra ngement fee is recognized ratably over the performance period. Changes in assumptions or judgments or changes to the elements in a software arrangement could cause a material increase or decrease in the amount of revenue that we report in a particular period. In October 2009, the FASB amended the accounting standards for certain multiple deliverable revenue arrangements to: provide updated guidance on whether multiple deliverables exist, how the deliverables in an arrangement should be separated, and how the consideration should be allocated; require an entity to allocate revenue in an arrangement using BESP of deliverables if a vendor does not have VSOE of selling price or TPE of selling price; and eliminate the use of the residual method and require an entity to allocate revenue using the relative selling price method. We elected to early adopt this accounting guidance at the beginning of our fiscal quarter of 2010 on a prospective basis for applicable transactions originating or materially modified after November 27, 2009. Our revenue from sales containing non-software related hosting services, custom hosting development and consulting services, and related technical support and training are those impacted. For multiple element arrangements containing our non-software services, we must (1) determine whether and when each element has been delivered; (2) determine fair value of each element using the selling price hierarchy of VSOE of fair value, TPE or BESP, as applicable, and (3) allocate the total price among the various elements based on the relative selling price method. This guidance does not generally change the units of accounting for our revenue transactions. For multiple-element arrangements that contain software and non-software elements such as our hosted offerings, we allocate revenue to software or software related elements as a group and any non-software elements separately based on the selling price hierarchy. We determine the selling price for each deliverable using VSOE of selling price, if it exists, or TPE of selling price. If neither VSOE nor TPE of selling price exist for a deliverable, we use its BESP for that deliverable. Once revenue is allocated to software or software related elements as a group, it follows historic software accounting guidance. Revenue is then recognized when the basic revenue recognition criteria are met for each element. Consistent with our methodology under previous accounting guidance, we determine VSOE for each element based on historical stand-alone sales to third-parties or from the stated renewal rate for the elements contained in the initial arrangement. In determining VSOE, we require that a substantial majority of the selling prices for a product or service fall within a reasonably narrow pricing range. 58 TABLE OF CONTENTS In certain instances, we are not able to establish VSOE for all deliverables in an arrangement with multiple elements. This may be due to infrequently selling each element separately, not pricing products or services within a narrow range, or only having a limited sales history. When VSOE cannot be established, we attempt to establish the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is determined based on competitor prices for similar deliverables when sold separately. Generally, our offerings contain significant differentiation such that the comparable pricing of products with similar functionality cannot be obtained. Furthermore, we are unable to reliably determine what similar competitor products selling prices are on a stand-alone basis. Therefore, we typically are not able to obtain TPE of selling price. When we are unable to establish selling prices using VSOE or TPE, we use BESP in our allocation of arrangement consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price at which we would transact a sale if the product or service were sold on a stand-alone basis. BESP is generally used for offerings that are not typically sold on a stand-alone basis or for new or highly customized offerings. We determine BESP for a product or service by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to major product groupings, geographies, market conditions, competitive landscape, internal costs, gross margin objectives and pricing practices. Significant pricing practices taken into consideration include historic contractually stated prices, volume discounts where applicable and our price lists. The most common fact pattern that emerged through analyzing these factors supports a BESP closely tied to Adobe list prices. The determination of BESP is made through consultation with and formal approval by our management, taking into consideration our go-to-market strategy. We regularly review VSOE and have established a review process for TPE and BESP and maintain internal controls over the establishment and updates of these estimates. There was no material impact to revenue during the year ended December 3, 2010 resulting from changes in VSOE, TPE or BESP, nor do we expect a material impact from such changes in the near term. We have established VSOE for our software maintenance and support services, custom software development services, and training. We have established BESP for all other offerings, including software products, non-software related hosting services, custom hosting development and consulting services, and technical support and training for hosting services. Given the nature of our transactions, which are primarily software and software-related, our go-to-market strategies and our pricing practices, total net revenue as reported during the year ended December 3, 2010 is materially consistent with total net revenue that would have been reported if the transactions entered into or materially modified after November 27, 2009 were subject to previous accounting guidance. Additionally, the new accounting standards for revenue recognition, if applied in the same manner to the year ended November 27, 2009, would not have had a material impact on total net revenues for that fiscal year. We do expect that this new accounting guidance will facilitate our efforts to optimize our offerings due to better alignment between the economics of an arrangement and the accounting. This may lead us to engage in new go-to-market practices in the future. In particular, we expect that the new accounting standards will enable us to better integrate products and services without VSOE into existing offerings and solutions. As these go-to-market strategies evolve, we may modify our pricing practices in the future, which could result in changes in selling prices, including both VSOE and BESP. As a result, our future revenue recognition for multiple element arrangements could differ materially from the results in the current period. Changes in the allocation of the sales price between elements may impact the timing of revenue recognition, but will not change the total revenue recognized on the contract. We are currently unable to determine the impact that the newly adopted accounting principles could have on our revenue as these go-to-market strategies evolve. In addition to multiple element arrangements, we must estimate certain royalty revenue amounts due to the timing of securing information from our customers. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, our assumptions and judgments regarding future products and services as well as our estimates of royalty revenue could differ from actual events, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. Product revenue is recognized when the above criteria are met. We reduce the revenue recognized for estimated future returns, price protection and rebates at the time the related revenue is recorded. In determining our estimate for returns and in accordance with our internal policy regarding global channel inventory which is used to determine the level of product held by our distributors on which we have recognized revenue, we rely upon historical data, the estimated amount of product inventory in our distribution channel, the rate at which our product sells through to the end user, product plans and other factors. Our estimated provisions for returns can vary from what actually occurs. Product returns may be more or less than what was estimated. The amount of inventory in the channel could be different than what is estimated. Our est imate of the rate of sell through for product in the channel could be different than what actually occurs. There could be a delay in the 59 TABLE OF CONTENTS release of our products. These factors and unanticipated changes in the economic and industry environment could make our return estimates differ from actual returns, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. We offer price protection to our distributors that allows for the right to a credit if we permanently reduce the price of a software product. When evaluating the adequacy of the price protection allowance, we analyze historical returns, current sell-through of distributor and retailer inventory of our products, changes in customer demand and acceptance of our products and other related factors. In addition, we monitor the volume of sales to our channel partners and their inventories. Changes to these assumptions or in the economic environment could result in higher returns or higher price protection costs in subsequent periods. In the future, actual returns and price protection may materially exceed our estimates as unsold products in the distribution channels are exposed to rapid changes in consumer preferences, market conditions or technological obsolescence due to new platforms, product updates or competing products. While we believe we can make reliable estimates regarding these matters, these estimates are inherently subjective. Accordingly, if our estimates change, our returns and price protection reserves would change, which would impact the total net revenue we report. We recognize revenues for hosting services that are based on a committed number of transactions ratably beginning on the date the customer commences use of our services and continuing through the end of the customer term. Over-usage fees, and fees billed based on the actual number of transactions from which we capture data, are billed in accordance with contract terms as these fees are incurred. We record amounts that have been invoiced in accounts receivable and in deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Our consulting revenue is recognized on a time and materials basis and is measured monthly based on input measures, such as on hours incurred to date compared to total estimated hours to complete, with consideration given to output measures, such as contract milestones, when applicable. Stock-based Compensation Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. For our on-going traditional employee equity awards, we currently use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options and employee stock purchase plan ( ESPP ) shares. The determination of the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant using an option pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include our expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, the risk-free interest rate, estimated forfeitures and expected dividends. We estimate the expected term of options granted by calculating the average term from our historical stock option exercise experience. We estimate the volatility of our common stock by using implied volatility in market traded options. Our decision to use implied volatility was based upon the availability of actively traded options on our common stock and our assessment that implied volatility is more representative of future stock price trends than historical volatility. We base the risk-free interest rate on zero-coupon yields implied from U.S. Treasury issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future and therefore use an expected dividend yield of zero in the option pricing model. We are required to estimate forfeitures at the time of g rant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting option forfeitures and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. If we use different assumptions for estimating stock-based compensation expense in future periods or if actual forfeitures differ materially from our estimated forfeitures, the change in our stock-based compensation expense could materially affect our operating income, net income and net income per share. Business Combinations We allocate the purchase price of acquired companies to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, assumed equity awards, as well as to in-process research and development based upon their estimated fair values at the acquisition date. The purchase price allocation process requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at acquisition date with respect to intangible assets, deferred revenue obligations and equity assumed. 60 TABLE OF CONTENTS Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made are reasonable, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Examples of critical estimates in valuing certain of the intangible assets we have acquired or may acquire in the future include but are not limited to: future expected cash flows from software license sales, subscriptions, support agreements, consulting contracts and acquired developed technologies and patents; expected costs to develop the in-process research and development into commercially viable products and estimated cash flows from the projects when completed; the acquired company trade name and trademarks as well as assumptions about the period of time the acquired trade name and trademarks will continue to be used in the combined company product portfolio; and discount rates. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the deferred revenue obligations assumed. The estimated fair value of the support obligations is determined utilizing a cost build-up approach. The cost build-up approach determines fair value by estimating the costs related to fulfilling the obligations plus a normal profit margin. The estimated costs to fulfill the obligations are based on the historical costs related to fulfilling the obligations. In connection with the purchase price allocations for our acquisitions, we estimate the fair value of the equity awards assumed. The estimated fair value is determined utilizing a modified binomial option pricing model which assumes employees exercise their stock options when the share price exceeds the strike price by a certain dollar threshold. If the acquired company has significant historical data on their employee exercise behavior, then this threshold is determined based upon the acquired company history. Otherwise, our historical exercise experience is used to determine the exercise threshold. Zero coupon yields implied by U.S. Treasury issues, implied volatility for our common stock and our historical forfeiture rate are other inputs to the binomial model. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur which may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results. Goodwill Impairment We complete our goodwill impairment test on an annual basis, during the second quarter of our fiscal year, or more frequently, if changes in facts and circumstances indicate that an impairment in the value of goodwill recorded on our balance sheet may exist. In order to estimate the fair value of goodwill, we typically estimate future revenue, consider market factors and estimate our future cash flows. Based on these key assumptions, judgments and estimates, we determine whether we need to record an impairment charge to reduce the value of the asset carried on our balance sheet to its estimated fair value. Assumptions, judgments and estimates about future values are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as c hanges in our business strategy or our internal forecasts. Although we believe the assumptions, judgments and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions, judgments and estimates could materially affect our reported financial results. We completed our annual impairment test in the second quarter of fiscal 2010 and determined there was no impairment. We currently believe that there is no significant risk of future material goodwill impairment in any of our reporting units. Accounting for Income Taxes We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, income tax expense is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Management must make assumptions, judgments and estimates to determine our current provision for income taxes and also our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance to be recorded against a deferred tax asset. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the current provision for income taxes take into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws and possible outcomes of current and future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities. We have established reserves for income taxes to address potential exposures involving tax positions that could be challenged by tax authorities. In addition, we are subject to the continual examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other domestic and foreign tax authorities, including a current examination by the IRS for our 61 TABLE OF CONTENTS fiscal 2008 and 2009 tax returns. These examinations are expected to focus on our intercompany transfer pricing practices as well as other matters. Although we believe our assumptions, judgments and estimates are reasonable, changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of the current and any future tax audits could significantly impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements. Our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to the value of a deferred tax asset take into account predictions of the amount and category of future taxable income, such as income from operations or capital gains income. Actual operating results and the underlying amount and category of income in future years could render our current assumptions, judgments and estimates of recoverable net deferred taxes inaccurate. Any of the assumptions, judgments and estimates mentioned above could cause our actual income tax obligations to differ from our estimates, thus materially impacting our financial position and results of operations. Recent Accounting Pronouncements See Note 1 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the effect of new accounting pronouncements on our financial statements. Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Effective In December 2010, the FASB issued updated accounting guidance related to the calculation of the carrying amount of a reporting unit when performing the first step of a goodwill impairment test. More specifically, this update will require an entity to use an equity premise when performing the first step of a goodwill impairment test and if a reporting unit has a zero or negative carrying amount, the entity must assess and consider qualitative factors and whether it is more likely than not that a goodwill impairment exists. The new accounting guidance is effective for public entities, for impairment tests performed during entities fiscal years (and interim periods within those years) that begin after December 15, 2010. Early application is not permitted. We will adopt the new disclosures in the first quarter of fiscal 2012, howev er as we currently do not have any reporting units with a zero or negative carrying amount, we do not expect the adoption of this guidance to have an impact on our consolidated financial statements. In December 2010, the FASB issued updated accounting guidance to clarify that pro forma disclosures should be presented as if a business combination occurred at the beginning of the prior annual period for purposes of preparing both the current reporting period and the prior reporting period pro forma financial information. These disclosures should be accompanied by a narrative description about the nature and amount of material, nonrecurring pro forma adjustments. The new accounting guidance is effective for business combinations consummated in periods beginning after December 15, 2010, and should be applied prospectively as of the date of adoption. Early adoption is permitted. We will adopt the new disclosures in the second quarter of fiscal 2011. We do not believe that the adoption of this guidance will have a material impact to ou r consolidated financial statements. RESULTS OF OPERATIONS Overview of 2010 Effective in the first quarter of fiscal 2010, to better align our marketing efforts and go-to-market strategies, we moved management responsibility for the Connect Solutions product line from our Knowledge Worker segment to our Enterprise segment. Prior year information has been updated to reflect this change. For fiscal 2010, we reported record revenue with strong financial results including exceeding $1 billion in quarterly revenue for the first time in company history. Our performance was driven by continued adoption of CS5, which is our flagship product family that began shipping in the second quarter of fiscal 2010. Our fiscal 2010 performance also benefitted from strength in other key business segments including our Knowledge Worker, Omniture, Enterprise and Print and Publishing segments. Fiscal 2010 financial results also benefitted from an extra week in the first quarter of fiscal 2010 due to our 52/53 week financial calendar whereby fiscal 2010 is a 53-week year compared with fiscal 2009 which was a 52-week year. In our Creative Solutions segment, broad adoption of CS5 continued to drive the overall performance of our creative business and contributed to strong revenue growth in fiscal 2010 as compared with fiscal 2009. Since its release, CS5 revenue has grown approximately 21% when compared to a comparable period of time for CS4 products. The successful launch of Adobe Lightroom version 3 also contributed to our success in our creative business. 62 TABLE OF CONTENTS Our Knowledge Worker segment achieved 17% growth in fiscal 2010 when compared to fiscal 2009 due to continued solid demand for our Acrobat product family. We attribute this performance to strength in enterprise licensing of Acrobat across all geographies as well as the improved economic conditions in certain markets and geographies where we focus on Acrobat adoption. We achieved strong growth in fiscal 2010 with our Enterprise segment, which grew 18% when compared to fiscal 2009. We believe our increased investment in this business over the past several years is beginning to result in improved financial performance in the segment. Further, we believe the CEM value proposition of our enterprise products is resonating with industry analysts and customers, including Adobe Connect for efficient Web-conferencing, and Adobe LiveCycle which makes it easier for people to interact with information from enterprise systems through intuitive user experiences, improve efficiencies through business process automation, and enhance customer service through personalized communications management. In our Omniture business, we maintained strong momentum in fiscal 2010. Driving this success was increased awareness of our Online Marketing Suite value proposition in the marketplace as well as strong bookings performance. The number of Omniture user transactions in fiscal 2010 was 5.07 trillion, an increase of 12% when compared to fiscal 2009. Our Platform business declined slightly in fiscal 2010 as compared with fiscal 2009 primarily due to lower revenue from OEM relationships. Our Print and Publishing business segment grew in fiscal 2010 as compared with fiscal 2009 primarily due to a non-recurring revenue deal as well as the launch of new products, including Adobe eLearning Suite version 2 and Adobe Captivate version 5. Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Fiscal 2008 % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Product $ 3,159.2 $ 2,684.8 $ 3,354.6 18 % (20 )% Percentage of total revenue 83 % 91 % 94 % Subscription 386.8 74.6 41.9 * 78 % Percentage of total revenue 10 % 3 % 1 % Services and support 254.0 186.5 183.4 36 % 2 % Percentage of total revenue 7 % 6 % 5 % Total revenue $ 3,800.0 $ 2,945.9 $ 3,579.9 29 % (18 )% _________________________________________ * Percentage is greater than 100%. Our subscription revenue is comprised primarily of fees we charge for our hosted service offerings including our hosted online business optimization services. We recognize subscription revenues ratably over the term of agreements with our customers, beginning on the commencement of the service. Of the $386.8 million and $74.6 million in subscription revenue for the fiscal years 2010 and 2009, respectively, approximately $309.1 million and $22.2 million, respectively, is from our Omniture segment with the remaining amounts representing our other business offerings. Our services and support revenue is comprised of consulting, training and maintenance and support, primarily related to the licensing of our enterprise, developer and platform products and the sale of our hosted online business optimization services. Our support revenue also includes technical support and developer support to partners and developer organizations related to our desktop products. Our maintenance and support offerings which entitle customers to receive product upgrades and enhancements or technical support, depending on the offering, are recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement. Segments In fiscal 2010, we categorized our products into the following segments: Creative Solutions, Knowledge Worker, Enterprise, Omniture, Platform, and Print and Publishing products. Effective in the first quarter of fiscal 2010, to better align our marketing efforts and go-to-market strategies, we moved management responsibility for the Adobe Connect product line from our Knowledge Worker segment to our Enterprise segment. Creative Solutions Our Creative Solutions segment focuses on delivering a complete professional line of integrated tools for a full range of creative and developer tasks to an extended set of customers. 63 TABLE OF CONTENTS Knowledge Worker O ur Knowledge Worker segment focuses on the needs of knowledge worker customers, providing essential applications and services to help them share information and collaborate. This segment contains our Adobe Acrobat family of products. Enterprise Our Enterprise segment provides server-based CEM solutions to enterprise and government customers to optimize their information intensive customer-facing processes and improve the overall customer experience of their constituents. This segment contains our Adobe LiveCycle and Adobe Connect product lines. Omniture Our Omniture segment provides Web analytics and online business optimization products and services to manage and enhance online, offline and multi-channel business initiatives. Platform Our Platform segment includes client and developer technologies, such as Adobe Flash Player, Adobe Flash Lite, Adobe AIR, Adobe Flex, Adobe Flash Builder, ColdFusion, and also encompasses products and technologies created and managed in other Adobe segments. Print and Publishing Our Print and Publishing segment addresses market opportunities ranging from the diverse publishing needs of technical and business publishing to our legacy type and OEM printing businesses. Segment Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Fiscal 2008 % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Creative Solutions $ 2,056.5 $ 1,702.1 $ 2,072.8 21 % (18 )% Percentage of total revenue 54 % 58 % 58 % Knowledge Worker 654.4 557.6 757.7 17 % (26 )% Percentage of total revenue 18 % 19 % 21 % Enterprise 355.0 300.9 306.2 18 % (2 )% Percentage of total revenue 9 % 10 % 9 % Omniture 360.6 26.3 * * Percentage of total revenue 9 % 1 % % Platform 178.9 181.0 231.6 (1 )% (22 )% Percentage of total revenue 5 % 6 % 6 % Print and Publishing 194.6 178.0 211.6 9 % (16 )% Percentage of total revenue 5 % 6 % 6 % Total revenue $ 3,800.0 $ 2,945.9 $ 3,579.9 29 % (18 )% _________________________________________ * Percentage is greater than 100%. Fiscal 2010 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2009 Revenue Revenue from Creative Solutions increased $354.4 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to strong licensing of CS4 during fiscal 2010 until the release of CS5, as well as strong adoption of CS5 beginning in the second quarter of the fiscal year. The increase was driven largely by a 23% increase in both Creative Suites and Photoshop point product revenue as compared to the prior year. The overall number of units licensed increased 23% when compared to fiscal 2009. Unit average selling prices, excluding large enterprise license agreement ( ELA ) deals, remained relatively stable during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. Revenue from Knowledge Worker increased $96.8 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. We attribute this success to strength in enterprise licensing of Acrobat and improved economic conditions in certain markets and geographies where we focus on Acrobat adoption. A 19% increase in the number of units licensed also contributed to the increase in revenue. Unit average selling prices, excluding large ELA deals, have remained relatively stable. Revenue from Enterprise increased $54.1 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 due to increased adoption of our LiveCycle and Connect products as well as the acquisition of Day, which closed late in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 and contributed $5.4 million in revenue. Revenue from Omniture increased $334.3 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. We acquired Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and therefore do not have a full fiscal year of revenue for 2009 in which to provide a comparison between fiscal years. 64 TABLE OF CONTENTS Revenue from Platform decreased $2.1 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease was due to lower developer tool revenue based on the inclusion of developer tools within some CS5 suites, offset in part by an increase in distribution revenue from OEM relationships with companies such as Google, where we offer their technologies as part of the download of Flash Player, Shockwave Player and Reader and generate revenue through successful installations of these technologies. Revenue from Print and Publishing increased $16.6 million during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 due to an improved economic environment in certain markets and geographies, the launch of new products, fees received for engineering services and royalties related to PostScript products. Fiscal 2009 Revenue Compared to Fiscal 2008 Revenue Revenue from Creative Solutions decreased $370.7 million during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 primarily due to reduced adoption of our CS family of products because of the global recession and generally weak macro-economic environment in fiscal 2009. The decrease was driven largely by a 15% decline in Creative Suites related revenue and a decline of 27% in Photoshop point product revenue. Also contributing to the decrease was an overall decline in the number of units licensed. Average unit selling prices remained relatively consistent. Revenue in Knowledge Worker decreased $200.1 million during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 for similar reasons as Creative Solutions in addition to a decrease in the licensing of our Acrobat family of products. We attribute the decline in revenue to lower volume licensing by our enterprise customers, as well as a decrease in the number of units sold through our shrink-wrap distribution channel. Average unit selling prices remained relatively consistent. Revenue from Enterprise decreased $5.3 million during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 primarily due to the economic slowdown in fiscal 2009 which resulted in reduced spending by our enterprise customers. We acquired Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, and as such, there is no prior fiscal 2008 period with which to compare Omniture fiscal 2009 revenue. Revenue from Platform decreased $50.6 million during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 due to the impact of the OSP which we announced on May 1, 2008, and involves the removal of certain licensing fees of our Flash Lite client with OEMs. Revenue in Print and Publishing decreased $33.6 million during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 due to reduced demand because of the global macro-economic downturn in fiscal 2009. Geographic Information (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Fiscal 2008 % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Americas $ 1,859.0 $ 1,382.6 $ 1,632.8 34 % (15 )% Percentage of total revenue 49 % 46 % 46 % EMEA 1,168.2 928.9 1,229.2 26 % (24 )% Percentage of total revenue 31 % 32 % 34 % Asia 772.8 634.4 717.9 22 % (12 )% Percentage of total revenue 20 % 22 % 20 % Total revenue $ 3,800.0 $ 2,945.9 $ 3,579.9 29 % (18 )% Fiscal 2010 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2009 Revenue by Geography Overall revenue in each of the geographic segments for fiscal 2010 increased compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to the launch of CS5 in the second quarter of fiscal 2010 as well as additional revenue from Omniture which we acquired in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. Increased revenue in our Knowledge Worker and Enterprise business segments also contributed to the increase as well as an improved economy across all geographies. Included in the overall increase in revenue were impacts associated with foreign currency. The U.S. dollar strengthened against both the Euro and British pound causing revenue in EMEA measured in U.S. dollars to decrease by approximately $18.4 million and $3.3 million, respectively, as compared to fiscal 2009. Revenue in Japan measured in U.S. dollars was favorably impacted by approximately $23.7 million due to the strength of the Yen against the U.S. dollar as compared to fiscal 2009. The Australian dollar also strengthened against the U.S. dollar resulting in a favorable impact to revenue of approximately $12.1 million during fiscal 2010. We had no comparable impact to revenue from the Australian dollar during fiscal 2009. Our currency hedging program is used to mitigate a portion of the foreign currency impact to rev enue. During 65 TABLE OF CONTENTS fiscal 2010, our currency hedging program related to EMEA and Japan resulted in hedging gains of $19.5 million and $0.6 million, respectively. Fiscal 2009 Revenue by Geography Compared to Fiscal 2008 Revenue by Geography Overall revenue in each of the geographic segments for fiscal 2009 decreased compared to fiscal 2008 primarily due to the global economic recession, which resulted in reduced adoption of many of our major products. Included in the overall decrease in revenue were impacts associated with foreign currency. Revenue in EMEA measured in U.S. dollars decreased approximately $47.1 million, due to the strength of the U.S. dollar against the Euro, as compared to fiscal 2008. Our currency hedging program is used to mitigate a portion of the foreign currency impact to revenue. Revenue in Asia measured in U.S. dollars was favorably impacted by approximately $32.8 million due to the strength of the Yen against the U.S. dollar as compared to fiscal 2008. During fiscal 2009, our currency hedging program related to the Euro and Yen resulted in hedging gains of $25.8 million and $1.2 million, respectively. See Item 7A, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk regarding foreign currency risks. Product Backlog The amount of product backlog at any particular time may not be a meaningful indicator of future business prospects. Shippable backlog is comprised of unfulfilled orders, excluding those associated with new product releases, those pending credit review and those not shipped due to the application of our global inventory policy. Our shippable backlog at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 was approximately 5% of fourth quarter fiscal 2010 revenue. We had minimal shippable backlog at the end of the third quarter of fiscal 2010. Our shippable backlog at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 was approximately 9% of fourth quarter fiscal 2009 revenue. Cost of Revenue (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Fiscal 2008 % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Product $ 127.5 $ 180.6 $ 243.2 (29 )% (26 )% Percentage of total revenue 3 % 6 % 7 % Subscription 195.6 48.3 23.2 * * Percentage of total revenue 5 % 2 % 1 % Services and support 80.4 67.8 96.2 19 % (30 )% Percentage of total revenue 2 % 2 % 3 % Total cost of revenue $ 403.5 $ 296.7 $ 362.6 36 % (18 )% _________________________________________ * Percentage is greater than 100%. Product Cost of product revenue includes product packaging, third-party royalties, excess and obsolete inventory, amortization related to localization costs, purchased intangibles and acquired rights to use technology and the costs associated with the manufacturing of our products. Cost of product revenue decreased due to the following: % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Amortization of purchased intangibles (23 )% (12 )% Amortization of acquired rights to use technology 1 (8 ) Localization costs related to our product launches (7 ) (1 ) Royalty cost (5 ) (1 ) Cost of sales 4 (2 ) Various individually insignificant items 1 (2 ) Total change (29 )% (26 )% Amortization of purchased intangibles decreased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 and decreased during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008, due to decreases in amortization of $46.4 million and $80.0 million, respectively, associated with intangible assets purchased through the Macromedia acquisition which were fully amortized during fiscal 2009. 66 TABLE OF CONTENTS The decrease in amortization of acquired rights to use technology during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 primarily related to a charge for historical use of licensing rights associated with certain technology licensing arrangements entered into in fiscal 2008 that did not recur in fiscal 2009. In fiscal 2008 we entered into certain technology licensing arrangements totaling $100.4 million. Of this cost, an estimated $56.4 million was related to future licensing rights that were capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives up to fifteen years. Of the remaining costs, we estimated that approximately $27.2 million was related to historical use of licensing rights which was expensed as cost of sales and the residual of $16.8 million for fiscal 2008 was expensed as general and administrativ e costs. In connection with these licensing arrangements, we have the ability to acquire additional rights to use technology in the future. The decrease in localization costs during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 was primarily due to CS4 products becoming fully amortized at the end of fiscal 2009, offset in part by the launch of CS5 products during fiscal 2010. The decrease in royalty costs during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily related to obligations to certain key vendors that were incurred during fiscal 2009 and did not recur during fiscal 2010. Cost of sales increased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to the associated increase in shrink-wrap shipments as a result of the launch of our CS5 products during fiscal 2010. Subscription Cost of subscription revenue consists of expenses related to operating our network infrastructure, including depreciation expenses and operating lease payments associated with computer equipment, data center costs, salaries and related expenses of network operations, implementation, account management and technical support personnel, amortization of intangible assets and allocated overhead. We enter into contracts with third-parties for the use of their data center facilities and our data center costs largely consist of the amounts we pay to these third-parties for rack space, power and similar items. Cost of subscription revenue increased in fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 as a result of our acquisition of Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and the addition of its related data center costs. Also included in cost of subscription revenue for fiscal 2010 is $58.4 million of amortization expense related to intangible assets acquired in conjunction with this acquisition. Cost of subscription revenue increased in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 as a result of our acquisition of Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 and the addition of its related data center costs. Services and Support Cost of services and support revenue is primarily comprised of employee-related costs and associated costs incurred to provide consulting services, training and product support. Cost of services and support revenue increased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009, due to increases in compensation and related benefits driven by additional headcount as a result of our acquisition of Omniture. Cost of services and support revenue decreased during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008, due to decreases in compensation and related benefits driven by headcount reductions as well as increased consulting support provided by third- party systems integrators resulting in the downsizing of our consulting organization. Operating Expenses (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Fiscal 2008 % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Research and development $ 680.3 $ 565.1 $ 662.1 20 % (15 )% Percentage of total revenue 18 % 19 % 18 % Sales and marketing $ 1,244.2 $ 981.9 $ 1,089.3 27 % (10 )% Percentage of total revenue 33 % 33 % 30 % General and administrative $ 383.5 $ 298.7 $ 337.3 28 % (11 )% Percentage of total revenue 10 % 10 % 9 % Restructuring charges $ 23.3 $ 41.3 $ 32.1 (44 )% 29 % Percentage of total revenue 1 % 1 % 1 % Amortization of purchased intangibles and incomplete technology $ 72.1 $ 71.6 $ 68.2 1 % 5 % Percentage of total revenue 2 % 2 % 2 % Total operating expenses $ 2,403.4 $ 1,958.6 $ 2,189.0 23 % (11 )% 67 TABLE OF CONTENTS Research and Development, Sales and Marketing and General and Administrative Expenses The increase in research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 was primarily driven by increases in compensation expense due to additional headcount as a result of our acquisition of Omniture and to higher employee compensation including bonuses based on company performance to date when compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease in research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 was primarily driven by decreases in compensation expense and a decrease in the costs associated with acquired rights to use technology. The decrease in compensation costs during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 wa primarily due to lower profit sharing and employee bonuses based on company performance. Research and Development Research and development expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses for software developers, contracted development efforts, related facilities costs and expenses associated with computer equipment used in software development. Research and development expenses increased (decreased) due to the following: % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 16 % (13 )% Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 2 1 Various individually insignificant items 2 (3 ) Total change 20 % (15 )% We believe that investments in research and development, including the recruiting and hiring of software developers, are critical to remain competitive in the marketplace and are directly related to continued timely development of new and enhanced products. We will continue to focus on long-term opportunities available in our end markets and make significant investments in the development of our application, tool and service offerings. Sales and Marketing Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salary and benefit expenses, sales commissions, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our sales, marketing, order management and global supply chain management personnel. Sales and marketing expenses also include the costs of programs aimed at increasing revenue, such as advertising, trade shows, public relations and other market development programs. Given the strength of our business during the first half of fiscal 2010, we made additional investments in sales and marketing which is reflected in the table below under marketing spending related to product launches and marketing efforts. Sales and marketing expenses increased (decreased) due to the following: % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 16 % (8 )% Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 3 2 Marketing spending related to product launches and overall marketing efforts to further increase revenue 3 (4 ) Various individually insignificant items 5 Total change 27 % (10 )% General and Administrative General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefit expenses, travel expenses and related facilities costs for our finance, facilities, human resources, legal, information services and executive personnel. General and administrative expenses also include outside legal and accounting fees, provision for bad debts, expenses associated with computer equipment and software used in the administration of the business, charitable contributions and various forms of insurance. 68 TABLE OF CONTENTS General and administrative expenses increased (decreased) due to the following: % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Compensation associated with incentive compensation and stock-based compensation 15 % (8 )% Allocation of costs associated with acquired rights to use technology (5 ) Compensation and related benefits associated with headcount growth 5 2 Charitable contributions (3 ) Professional and consulting fees 4 1 Depreciation and amortization 3 1 Various individually insignificant items 1 1 Total change 28 % (11 )% The decrease in allocation of costs associated with acquired rights to use technology in fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 primarily relates to the historical use of licensing rights associated with certain technology licensing arrangements entered into in fiscal 2008 that did not recur in fiscal 2009. Allocation of costs associated with acquired rights to use technology increased in fiscal 2008 primarily due to the fact that we entered into certain technology licensing arrangements totaling $100.4 million. Of this cost, an estimated $56.4 million was related to future licensing rights and has been capitalized and will be amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives up to fifteen years. Of the remaining costs, we estimated that approximately $27.2 million was related to historical use of licensing rights whi ch was expensed as cost of sales and the residual of $16.8 million for fiscal 2008 was expensed as general and administrative costs. In connection with these licensing arrangements, we have the ability to acquire additional rights to use technology in the future. Charitable contributions represent funding of the Adobe Foundation which is a private foundation created to leverage human, technological and financial resources to drive social change and improve the communities in which we live and work. The decrease in charitable contributions during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 reflects a change in the timing of contributions to the Adobe Foundation. Professional and consulting fees increased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to increase in information technology services to support our business. Restructuring Charges Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan On November 10, 2009, in order to appropriately align our costs in connection with our fiscal 2010 operating plan, we initiated a restructuring plan consisting of reductions of up to approximately 630 full-time positions worldwide. In connection with this restructuring plan, in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009, we recorded restructuring charges of approximately $25.5 million related to ongoing termination benefits for the elimination of approximately 340 of these full-time positions worldwide. The restructuring activities related to this program affect only those employees and facilities that were associated with Adobe prior to the acquisition of Omniture on October 23, 2009. During fiscal 2010, we continued to implement restructuring activities under this plan. We vacated approximately 50,000 square feet of sales and or research and development facilities in Australia, Canada, Denmark and the U.S. We accrued $7.0 million for the fair value of our future contractual obligations under these operating leases using our credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate, estimated at approximately 7% as of the date we ceased to use the leased properties. This amount is net of the fair value of future estimated sublease income of approximately $7.1 million. We also recorded charges of $18.4 million in termination benefits for the elimination of substantially all of the remaining full-time positions expected to be terminated worldwide. We also recorded net adjustments of approximately $2.2 million to reflect net decreases in previously recorded estimates for termination benefits and facilities-related liabilities in addition to minor adjustments for fluctuations related to foreign currency translation. Fiscal 2008 Restructuring Plan In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, we initiated a restructuring program, consisting of reductions in workforce of approximately 560 full-time positions globally and the consolidation of facilities, in order to reduce our operating costs and focus our resources on key strategic priorities. In connection with this restructuring program, we recorded restructuring charges totaling $29.2 million related to ongoing termination benefits for the elimination of approximately 460 of the 560 full-time positions globally. 69 TABLE OF CONTENTS During fiscal 2009, we continued to implement restructuring activities under this program. We vacated approximately 89,000 square feet of research and development and sales facilities in the U.S., the United Kingdom and Canada. We accrued $8.5 million for the fair value of our future contractual obligations under these operating leases using our credit-adjusted risk-free interest rate, estimated at approximately 6% as of the date we ceased to use the leased properties. This amount is net of the fair value of future estimated sublease income of approximately $4.4 million. We also recorded additional charges of $6.7 million for termination benefits for the elimination of substantially all of the remaining 100 full-time positions expected to be terminated. We also recorded minor adjustments for fluctuations related to foreign currency tr anslation. Macromedia Restructuring Plan We completed our acquisition of Macromedia on December 3, 2005. In connection with this acquisition, we initiated plans to restructure both the pre-merger operations of Adobe and Macromedia to eliminate certain duplicative activities, focus our resources on future growth opportunities and reduce our cost structure. In connection with the worldwide restructuring plan, we recognized costs related to termination benefits for employee positions that were eliminated and for the closure of duplicative facilities. During fiscal 2008, we recorded charges of $2.9 million related to changes in estimates related to Macromedia facilities restructuring charges due to changes in sub-lease income estimates. See Note 11 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding our restructuring charges. Amortization of Purchased Intangibles and Incomplete Technology As a result of our acquisition of Omniture in fiscal 2009, we acquired purchased intangibles which are amortized over their estimated useful lives of one to twelve years. In addition, as a result of our acquisition of Macromedia in fiscal 2006, we acquired purchased intangibles which are amortized over their estimated useful lives of two to four years. During fiscal 2009, we completed one business combination, in addition to Omniture. In addition, during fiscal 2008 we completed one business combination. We acquired purchased intangibles through these acquisitions which are amortized over their estimated useful lives. Amortization expense increased 1% during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009, as a result of intangible assets purchased through our acquisition of Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 offset by a decrease in amortization expense associated with the intangible assets purchased through our Macromedia acquisition which were fully amortized at the end of fiscal 2009. Amortization expense increased 5% during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008, primarily due to amortization expense associated with intangibles assets purchased through the acquisition of Omniture in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009. Non-Operating Income (Expense), Net (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Fiscal 2008 % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Interest and other income (expense), net $ 13.1 $ 31.4 $ 43.8 (58 )% (28 )% Percentage of total revenue * 1 % 1 % Interest expense (56.9 ) (3.4 ) (10.0 ) * (66 )% Percentage of total revenue (2 )% * * Investment gains (losses), net (6.1 ) (17.0 ) 16.4 (64 )% (204 )% Percentage of total revenue * (1 )% * Total non-operating income (expense), net $ (49.9 ) $ 11.0 $ 50.2 (554 )% (78 )% _________________________________________ * Percentage is not meaningful. Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term fixed income investments. Interest and other income (expense), net also includes foreign exchange gains and losses, including those from hedging revenue transactions primarily denominated in Euro and Yen currencies, and gains and losses on fixed income investments. Interest and other income (expense), net, decreased during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009 primarily due to a reduction in interest earned of $12.8 million resulting from lower average interest rates on our investments and $5.8 million lower realized gains on our investments. During fiscal 2010, we also recorded a $20.8 million gain associated with a forward 70 TABLE OF CONTENTS contract purchased to hedge our economic exposure related to our acquisition of Day, which was primarily offset by foreign exchange losses and increased cash flow hedging costs. Interest and other income (expense), net, decreased during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008 primarily due to lower interest rates, partially offset by higher average invested balances, realized gains on sales of fixed income securities and lower foreign exchange losses. Interest Expense In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 (the 2015 Notes ) and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020 (the 2020 Notes and, together with the 2015 Notes, the Notes ). As of November 27, 2009, we had an outstanding credit facility of $1.0 billion, which we repaid on February 1, 2010 with a portion of the proceeds from our Notes. The increase in interest expense for fiscal 2010 is primarily due to interest associated with higher borrowings resulting from the issuance of the Notes as well as an increase in our average borrowing rate due to the Notes. Interest expense for fiscal 2009 and 2008, primarily represents interest associated with our credit facility. Interest due under the credit facility is paid upon expiration of the London interbank offered rate ( LIBOR ) contract or at a minimum, quarterly. The decline in interest expense was primarily due to lower interest rates. Investment Gains (Losses), Net Investment gains (losses), net consists principally of realized gains and losses from the sale of marketable equity investments, other-than-temporary declines in the value of marketable and non-marketable equity securities, unrealized holding gains and losses associated with our deferred compensation plan assets (classified as trading securities), and gains and losses of Adobe Ventures. Investment gains and (losses), net fluctuated due to the following (in millions): 2010 2009 2008 Net (losses) gains related to our investments in Adobe Ventures and cost method investments $ (11.3 ) $ (18.7 ) $ 15.9 Gains from sale of marketable equity securities 4.0 5.4 Write-downs due to other-than-temporary declines in value of our marketable equity securities (0.3 ) (4.9 ) Net gains related to our trading securities 1.2 2.0 Total investment gains (losses), net $ (6.1 ) $ (17.0 ) $ 16.4 During fiscal 2010, net losses on our investments improved primarily due to a decrease in net unrealized losses incurred on certain of our cost method investments during fiscal 2009 offset in part by an increase in net realized losses from our Adobe Ventures portfolio of companies in fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2009, net losses on our investments increased as compared to fiscal 2008 primarily due to an increase on net unrealized losses related to our Adobe Ventures and cost method investments. Provision for Income Tax es (dollars in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Fiscal 2008 % Change 2010-2009 % Change 2009-2008 Provision $ 168.5 $ 315.0 $ 206.7 (47 )% 52 % Percentage of total revenue 4 % 11 % 6 % Effective tax rate 18 % 45 % 19 % Our effective tax rate decreased approximately 27 percentage points during fiscal 2010 as compared to fiscal 2009. The decrease was primarily due to tax benefits recognized as a result of the completion in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 of a U.S. income tax examination covering fiscal years 2005 through 2007 and stronger international profits, partially offset by the expiration of the research and development credit on December 31, 2009. Our effective tax rate increased approximately 26 percentage points during fiscal 2009 as compared to fiscal 2008. The increase was primarily due to a one-time charge related to our acquisition of Omniture. The charge represented the tax cost of inter-company transactions necessary to license certain Omniture assets to Adobe trading companies so that Omniture services can be offered to customers from Adobe companies. 71 TABLE OF CONTENTS In December 2010, the United States Congress passed an extension of the federal research and development tax credit through December 31, 2011. As a result, we expect that our income tax provision for the first quarter of fiscal 2011 will include a discrete tax benefit which will reduce our effective tax rate for the quarter and to a lesser extent the effective annual tax rate. Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at December 3, 2010 was $156.9 million, exclusive of $15.4 million of interest and penalties. In October 2010, a U.S. income tax examination covering our fiscal years 2005 through 2007 was completed. Our accrued tax and interest related to these years was $59 million and was previously reported in long-term income taxes. We paid $20 million in conjunction with the aforementioned resolution. A net income statement tax benefit in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 of $39 million resulted. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that before the end of fiscal 2011, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $5 million. LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES This data should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. (in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Cash and cash equivalents $ 749.9 $ 999.5 Short-term investments $ 1,718.1 $ 905.0 Working capital $ 2,148.0 $ 1,629.1 Stockholders equity $ 5,192.4 $ 4,890.6 A summary of our cash flows is as follows: (in millions) Fiscal 2010 Fiscal 2009 Fiscal 2008 Net cash provided by operating activities $ 1,113.0 $ 1,117.8 $ 1,280.7 Net cash used for investing activities (1,159.3 ) (1,497.1 ) (304.7 ) Net cash (used for) provided by financing activities (215.3 ) 477.6 (1,021.6 ) Effect of foreign currency exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents 12.0 14.7 (14.4 ) Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents $ (249.6 ) $ 113.0 $ (60.0 ) Our primary source of cash is receipts from revenue. The primary uses of cash are payroll related expenses; general operating expenses including marketing, travel and office rent; and cost of product revenue. Other sources of cash are proceeds from the exercise of employee options and participation in ESPP. Another use of cash is our stock repurchase program, which is described below. Cash flows from operating activities For fiscal 2010, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.1 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash items. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with increases in accrued expenses and deferred revenue. Accrued expenses increased primarily due to amounts due under our fiscal 2010 annual incentive plan and interest on our Notes both of which will be paid in the first quarter of fiscal 2011. During fiscal 2010, we made our first semi-annual interest payment associated with our Notes totaling $31.1 million. Increases in deferred revenue related primarily to activity from our acquisition of Omniture, the related renewal of calendar-year based contracts in addition to increases in maintenance and support orders and royalty revenue deferrals related to changes in cust omer billing terms. The primary working capital uses of cash were increases in trade receivables, prepaid expenses and other current assets as well as decreases in taxes payable, accrued restructuring and trade payables. Trade receivables increased as a result of products shipped and billed during the latter half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010 as a result of the launch of Acrobat X and slower receivable payments pertaining to Omniture services. Increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets 72 TABLE OF CONTENTS related primarily to higher valuations on our cash flow and balance sheet hedges due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar. Income taxes payable decreased primarily due to payments of approximately $200.0 million for tax liabilities associated with the repatriation of undistributed foreign earnings as well as a $20.0 million settlement of an IRS exam in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. Accrued restructuring decreased primarily due to payments made related to the fiscal 2009 restructuring plan that was initiated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2009 in addition to adjustments made to previously recorded estimates, offset in part by new charges. For fiscal 2009, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.1 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash expenses. The primary working capital sources of cash were net income coupled with decreases in trade receivables, prepaid expenses and other current assets and increases in income taxes payable. Trade receivables decreased primarily from CS4 revenue that was shipped in the latter half of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 and collected during the first quarter of fiscal 2009, in addition to lower overall gross revenue and improved collections. The primary working capital uses of cash were decreases in accrued expenses, deferred revenue, trade payables and accrued restructuring. Accrued expenses decreased primarily due to payments for employee bonuses and commissions related to fiscal 2008. Decreases in deferred revenue related primarily to deferred revenue that was recognized in the first quarter of fiscal 2009 associated with our free of charge upgrades for CS4 and Adobe Photoshop Lightroom products, as well as declines in maintenance and support orders. Accrued restructuring decreased primarily due to payments related to the 2008 restructuring program that was initiated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008, offset in part by new charges related to our 2009 restructuring program and acquisition of Omniture. For fiscal 2008, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.3 billion was primarily comprised of net income plus the net effect of non-cash expenses. The primary working capital sources of cash were increases in net income, deferred revenue, accrued restructuring and trade payables. Increases in deferred revenue related to maintenance and support and free of charge upgrade plan purchases which offset in part, decreases in deferred revenue related to royalties. Accrued restructuring costs increased due to the restructuring program initiated in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2008 offset in part by payments of facility costs during fiscal 2008 associated with the Macromedia acquisition. See Note 11 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our restruct uring charges. The primary working capital uses of cash were increases in trade receivables and prepaid expenses and other current assets coupled with decreases in income taxes payable and accrued expenses. Trade receivables increased primarily as a result of high sales of our CS4 family of products at the end of fiscal 2008. Income taxes payable decreased primarily due to payments made as the result of the completion of a U.S. income tax examination covering our fiscal years 2001 through 2004. Accrued expenses decreased primarily due to payments for employee bonuses and profit sharing offset in part by increases in royalty accruals and charitable contributions. Cash flows from investing activities For fiscal 2010, net cash used for investing activities of $1.2 billion was primarily due to purchases of short-term investments, offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2010 represented purchases of property and equipment and long-term investments and other assets and the acquisition of Day. These uses of cash were offset in part by proceeds from the sale of equipment under our sale lease-back transaction and the sale of long-term investments and other assets. See Note 16 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our sale lease-back transaction. For fiscal 2009, net cash used for investing activities of $1.5 billion was primarily due to the acquisition of Omniture, purchases of short-term investments and property and equipment, offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Purchases of long-term investments and other assets during fiscal 2009 were less than fiscal 2008 primarily due to $56.0 million paid in the third quarter of fiscal 2008 for future licensing rights acquired through certain technology licensing arrangements which did not recur in fiscal 2009. For fiscal 2008, net cash used for investing activities of $304.7 million was primarily due to purchases of short-term investments offset in part by maturities and sales of short-term investments. Other uses of cash during fiscal 2008 represented purchases of property and equipment, long-term investments and other assets and one business combination offset in part by proceeds from the sale of other investments in equity securities. The uses associated with the purchase of long-term investments and other assets related primarily to cash paid for future licensing rights acquired through certain technology licensing arrangements totaling $56.0 million in fiscal 2008. 73 TABLE OF CONTENTS Cash flows from financing activities In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020. Our proceeds were approximately $1.5 billion and were net of an issuance discount of $6.6 million. The Notes rank equally with our other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. In addition, we incurred issuance costs of approximately $10.7 million. Both the discount and issuance costs are being amortized to interest expense over the respective terms of the Notes using the effective interest method. Interest is payable semi-annually, in arrears, on February 1 and August 1, commencing on August 1, 2010. The proceeds from this offering are available for general corporate purposes. As of December 3, 2010, the amount outstanding under the Notes was $1.5 billion, which is included in lo ng-term liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 17 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more detailed information. On February 1, 2010, we used $1.0 billion of the proceeds from the Notes offering to pay the outstanding balance on our credit facility, and as of December 3, 2010, this facility has no outstanding balance. We are in compliance with all of our covenants under our credit facility and the entire $1.0 billion credit line remains available for borrowing. Net cash from financing activities changed from cash provided for in fiscal 2009 of $477.6 million to cash used in fiscal 2010 of $215.3 million, primarily due to payment of the outstanding balance on our credit facility and treasury stock repurchases offset in part by proceeds from our Notes and treasury stock issuances. See sections entitled Stock Repurchase Program I and Stock Repurchase Program II discussed below. Net cash from financing activities changed from cash used in fiscal 2008 of $1.0 billion to cash provided for in fiscal 2009 of $477.6 million, primarily due to additional borrowing under our credit agreement of $650.0 million and lower purchases of treasury stock, offset in part by proceeds related to the issuance of treasury stock . See sections entitled Stock Repurchase Program I and Stock Repurchase Program II discussed below. We expect to continue our investing activities, including short-term and long-term investments, venture capital, facilities expansion and purchases of computer systems for research and development, sales and marketing, product support and administrative staff. Furthermore, cash reserves may be used to repurchase stock under our stock repurchase program and to strategically acquire companies, products or technologies that are complementary to our business. Acquisition of Day On October 28, 2010, we completed our acquisition of Day, a provider of WCM solutions that leading global enterprises rely on for Web 2.0 content application and content infrastructure, based in Basel, Switzerland and Boston, Massachusetts. Under the terms of the agreement, we completed our public tender offer to acquire all of the publicly held registered shares of Day for 139 Swiss Francs per share in cash in a transaction valued at approximately $248.3 million on a fully diluted equity-value basis. In order to hedge the economic exposure related to this acquisition, we entered into a forward contract to purchase 254.7 million Swiss Francs for $242.5 million U.S. dollars that matured near the closing date of the acquisition. Upon maturity of the forward contract, we recorded a $20.8 million gain to interest and other incom e (expense), net. This forward contract is accounted for as a separate transaction apart from the acquisition. Following the closing, we integrated Day as a product line within our Enterprise segment for financial reporting purposes. Restructuring During the past several years, we have initiated various restructuring plans. Currently, we have the following four active restructuring plans, two of which were the result of large acquisitions: Fiscal 2009 Restructuring Plan Fiscal 2008 Restructuring Plan Omniture Restructuring Plan Macromedia Restructuring Plan During fiscal 2010, we have accrued total restructuring charges of approximately $16.4 million of which approximately $2.6 million related to ongoing termination benefits and contract terminations which are expected to be paid during the first quarter of fiscal 2011. The remaining $13.8 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities and are expected to be paid under contract through fiscal 2021 of which over 70% will be paid through 2013. During fiscal 2010, we made payments related to the above restructuring plans totaling approximately $49.9 million which consisted of approximately $42.3 million related to termination benefits and contract terminations and approximately $7.6 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities. 74 TABLE OF CONTENTS During fiscal 2009, we accrued total restructuring charges of approximately $44.7 million of which approximately $31.0 million related to ongoing termination benefits and contract terminations which were substantially paid during fiscal 2010. The remaining $13.7 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities that are expected to be paid through 2013. During fiscal 2009, we made payments related to the above restructuring plans totaling approximately $49.7 million which consisted of approximately $37.6 million related to termination benefits and contract terminations and approximately $12.1 million related to the cost of closing redundant facilities. Other Liquidity and Capital Resources Considerations Our existing cash, cash equivalents and investment balances may fluctuate during fiscal 2011 due to changes in our planned cash outlay, including changes in incremental costs such as direct and integration costs related to our acquisitions. Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to the risks detailed in Part I, Item 1A titled Risk Factors. However, based on our current business plan and revenue prospects, we believe that our existing balances, our anticipated cash flows from operations and our available credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and operating resource expenditure requirements for the next twelve months. As of December 3, 2010, the amount outstanding under the Notes was $1.5 billion. On February 1, 2010, we used $1.0 billion of the proceeds from this offering to pay the outstanding balance on our credit facility. The remainder of the proceeds from the Notes are available for general corporate purposes. There is no outstanding balance under our credit facility and the entire $1.0 billion credit line remains available for borrowing. We use professional investment management firms to manage a large portion of our invested cash. External investment firms managed, on average, 79% of our consolidated invested balances during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2010. The fixed income portfolio is primarily invested in U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. agency securities, municipal securities, corporate bonds and foreign government securities. Stock Repurchase Program I To facilitate our stock repurchase program, designed to return value to our stockholders and minimize dilution from stock issuances, we repurchase shares in the open market and also enter into structured repurchases with third-parties. Authorization to repurchase shares to cover on-going dilution was not subject to expiration. However, this repurchase program was limited to covering net dilution from stock issuances and was subject to business conditions and cash flow requirements as determined by our Board of Directors from time to time. During the third quarter of fiscal 2010, our Board of Directors approved an amendment to our stock repurchase program authorized in April 2007 from a non-expiring share-based authority to a time-constrained dollar-based authority. As part of this amendment, the Board of Directors granted authority to repurchase up to $1.6 billion in common stock through the end of fiscal 2012. This amended program did not affect the $250.0 million structured stock repurchase agreement entered into during March 2010. As of December 3, 2010, no prepayments remain under that agreement. During fiscal 2010, 2009 and 2008 we entered into several structured repurchase agreements with large financial institutions, whereupon we provided the financial institutions with prepayments of $850.0 million, $350.0 million and $525.0 million, respectively. Of the $850.0 million of prepayments during fiscal 2010, $250.0 million was under the stock repurchase program prior to the program amendment and the remaining $600.0 million was under the amended $1.6 billion time-constrained dollar-based authority. We entered into these agreements in order to take advantage of repurchasing shares at a guaranteed discount to the Volume Weighted Average Price ( VWAP ) of our common stock over a specified period of time. We only enter into such transactions when the discount that we receive is higher than the foregone return on our cas h prepayments to the financial institutions. There were no explicit commissions or fees on these structured repurchases. Under the terms of the agreements, there is no requirement for the financial institutions to return any portion of the prepayment to us. The financial institutions agree to deliver shares to us at monthly intervals during the contract term. The parameters used to calculate the number of shares deliverable are: the total notional amount of the contract, the number of trading days in the contract, the number of trading days in the interval, and the average VWAP of our stock during the interval less the agreed upon discount. During fiscal 2010, we repurchased approximately 31.2 million shares at an average price of $29.19 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2009 and fiscal 2010. During fiscal 2009, we repurchased approximately 15.2 million shares at an average price per share of $27.89 through structured repurchase agreements entered into during fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2009. During fiscal 2008, we repurchased 22.4 million shares at an a verage price of $36.26 through structured repurchase agreements which included prepayments from fiscal 2007. 75 TABLE OF CONTENTS During fiscal 2008, we also repurchased 3.6 million shares at an average price of $36.41 in open market transactions. For fiscal 2010, 2009 and 2008, the prepayments were classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at the payment date, though only shares physically delivered to us by December 3, 2010, November 27, 2009 and November 28, 2008 were excluded from the computation of earnings per share. As of December 3, 2010, no prepayments remained under the agreements. As of November 27, 2009, approximately $59.9 million of prepayments remained under the agreements. Subsequent to December 3, 2010, as part of our $1.6 billion stock repurchase program, we entered into a structured stock repurchase agreement with a large financial institution whereupon we provided them with a prepayment of $125.0 million. This amount will be classified as treasury stock on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Upon completion of the $125.0 million stock repurchase agreement, $875.0 million remains under our time-constrained dollar-based authority. See Note 14 and 21 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our stock repurchase programs. See Item 5, Market for Registrant Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities for share repurchases during the quarter ended December 3, 2010. Stock Repurchase Program II Under this stock repurchase program, we had authorization to repurchase an aggregate of 50.0 million shares of our common stock. From the inception of the 50.0 million share authorization under this program, we provided prepayments of $1.9 billion under structured share repurchase agreements to large financial institutions. During the third quarter of fiscal 2008, the remaining authorized number of shares were repurchased. During fiscal 2008, we provided prepayments of $1.0 billion and repurchased 31.9 million shares under these structured agreements at an average price of $37.15. During fiscal 2008, we also repurchased 0.5 million shares at an average price of $39.79 in open market transactions. Summary of Stock Repurchases for fiscal 2010, 2009 and 2008 (in thousands, except average amounts) Board Approval Repurchases 2010 2009 2008 Date Under the Plan Shares Average Shares Average Shares Average December 1997 From employees (1) 1 $ 35.66 1 $ 24.00 5 $ 34.89 Open market $ $ 3,554 $ 36.41 Structured repurchases (2) 9,358 $ 33.11 15,231 $ 27.89 22,418 $ 36.26 April 2007 Structured repurchases (2) $ $ 31,859 $ 37.15 Open market $ $ 456 $ 39.79 June 2010 Structured repurchases (2) 21,807 $ 27.51 $ $ Total shares 31,166 $ 29.19 15,232 $ 27.89 58,292 $ 36.79 Total cost $ 909,900 $ 424,851 $ 2,144,400 _________________________________________ (1) The repurchases from employees represent shares cancelled when surrendered in lieu of cash payments for the option exercise price or withholding taxes due. (2) Stock repurchase agreements executed with large financial institutions. See Stock Repurchase Program I and Stock Repurchase Program II above. Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations Our principal commitments as of December 3, 2010 consist of obligations under operating leases, capital leases, royalty agreements and various service agreements. See Note 16 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our contractual commitments . 76 TABLE OF CONTENTS Contractual Obligations The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 3, 2010 (in millions): Payment Due by Period Total Less than 1 year 1-3 years 3-5 years More than 5 years Notes $ 1,993.9 $ 62.3 $ 124.5 $ 714.8 $ 1,092.3 Operating leases 273.8 61.7 85.6 45.5 81.0 Capital lease obligations 30.6 9.9 19.9 0.8 Purchase obligations 214.5 175.1 16.0 8.3 15.1 Total $ 2,512.8 $ 309.0 $ 246.0 $ 769.4 $ 1,188.4 In February 2010, we issued $600.0 million of 3.25% senior notes due February 1, 2015 and $900.0 million of 4.75% senior notes due February 1, 2020. As of November 27, 2009, we had an outstanding credit facility of $1.0 billion which we repaid on February 1, 2010 using the proceeds from the Notes. Interest on the Notes is payable semi-annually, in arrears on February 1 and August 1, commencing on August 1, 2010. In August 2010, we made our first semi-annual interest of $31.1 million. In June 2010, we entered into a sale-leaseback agreement to sell equipment totaling $32.2 million and leaseback the same equipment over a period of 43 months. This transaction was classified as a capital lease obligation and recorded at fair value. Our credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us not to exceed a certain maximum leverage ratio. Our leases for the East and West Towers and the Almaden Tower are both subject to standard covenants including certain financial ratios as defined in the lease agreements that are reported to the lessors quarterly. As of December 3, 2010, we were in compliance with all of our covenants. Our Notes do not contain any financial covenants. We believe these covenants will not impact our credit or cash in the coming fiscal year or restrict our ability to execute our business plan. Under the terms of our credit agreement and lease agreements, we are not prohibited from paying cash dividends unless payment would trigger an event of default or one currently exists. The gross liability for unrecognized tax benefits at December 3, 2010 was $156.9 million, exclusive of interest and penalties. The timing of the resolution of income tax examinations is highly uncertain as are the amounts and timing of tax payments that are part of any audit settlement process. These events could cause large fluctuations in the balance sheet classification of current and non-current assets and liabilities. We believe that before the end of fiscal 2011, it is reasonably possible that either certain audits will conclude or statutes of limitations on certain income tax examination periods will expire, or both. Given the uncertainties described above, we can only determine a range of estimated potential decreases in underlying unrecognized tax benefits ranging from $0 to approximately $5 million. Royalties We have certain royalty commitments associated with the shipment and licensing of certain products. Royalty expense is generally based on a dollar amount per unit shipped or a percentage of the underlying revenue. Guarantees The lease agreements for our corporate headquarters provide for residual value guarantees. The fair value of a residual value guarantee in lease agreements entered into after December 31, 2002, must be recognized as a liability on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. As such, we recognized $5.2 million and $3.0 million in liabilities, related to the extended East and West Towers and Almaden Tower leases, respectively. These liabilities are recorded in other long-term liabilities with the offsetting entry recorded as prepaid rent in other assets. The balance will be amortized to our Consolidated Statements of Income over the life of the leases. As of December 3, 2010 and November 27, 2009, the unamortized portion of the fair value of the residual value guarantees remaining in other long-term liabilities and prepaid rent was $0.7 milli on and $1.3 million, respectively. Indemnifications In the normal course of business, we provide indemnifications of varying scope to customers against claims of intellectual property infringement made by third parties arising from the use of our products. Historically, costs related to 77 TABLE OF CONTENTS these indemnification provisions have not been significant and we are unable to estimate the maximum potential impact of these indemnification provisions on our future results of operations. To the extent permitted under Delaware law, we have agreements whereby we indemnify our directors and officers for certain events or occurrences while the director or officer is, or was serving, at our request in such capacity. The indemnification period covers all pertinent events and occurrences during the director or officer lifetime. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these indemnification agreements is unlimited; however, we have director and officer insurance coverage that limits our exposure and enables us to recover a portion of any future amounts paid. We believe the estimated fair value of these indemnification agreements in excess of applicable insurance coverage is minimal. During fiscal 2010, our limited partnership interest in Adobe Ventures was dissolved and all remaining assets were distributed to the partners. As part of this limited partnership interest, we provided a general indemnification to Granite Ventures, an independent venture capital firm and sole general partner of Adobe Ventures, for certain events or occurrences while Granite Ventures was serving at our request in such capacity provided that Granite Ventures acted in good faith on behalf of the partnership. 
